Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P17.SGM ( 9-Feb-2007) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17
Your Federal Catalog Number 10311G
Income Tax
Department For use inFor Individualsof the
Treasury preparing
Internal
2006Revenue
Service
Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet • www.irs.gov

Page 2 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Federal
Income Tax
Department For Individualsof the
Treasury
Internal
ContentsRevenue
Service
What’s New for 2006.................... 1 Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized
Deductions
What’s New for 2007.................... 2 20 Standard Deduction ................ 130
21 Medical and Dental Expenses ......... 133
Reminders ........................... 2 22 Taxes ......................... 138
23 Interest Expense .................. 142Introduction .......................... 4 24 Contributions .................... 149
25 Nonbusiness Casualty and TheftPart One. The Income Tax Return Losses ........................ 1581 Filing Information .................. 5 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee2 Filing Status ..................... 20 Business Expenses ............... 1643 Personal Exemptions and Dependents . . . 25 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ..... 35 Education ...................... 182
28 Miscellaneous Deductions ........... 186Part Two. Income
29 Limit on Itemized Deductions ......... 1935 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings .... 43
6 Tip Income ...................... 50 Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and Credits7 Interest Income ................... 52 30 How To Figure Your Tax ............ 1958 Dividends and Other Corporate 31 Tax on Investment Income of CertainDistributions .................... 60 Minor Children ................... 1979 Rental Income and Expenses ......... 64 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit ....... 20510 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled .... 214Annuities ...................... 70 34 Child Tax Credit .................. 21811 Social Security and Equivalent 35 Education Credits ................. 222Railroad Retirement Benefits ......... 76 36 Earned Income Credit .............. 22912 Other Income .................... 80 37 Other Credits .................... 243
Part Three. Gains and Losses 2006 Tax Table ........................ 24913 Basis of Property ................. 89
14 Sale of Property .................. 93 2006 Tax Computation Worksheet .......... 26115 Selling Your Home ................ 99
16 Reporting Gains and Losses .......... 105 2006 Tax Rate Schedules ................ 262
Part Four. Adjustments to Income Your Rights as a Taxpayer ............... 263
17 Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) ........................ 113 How To Get Tax Help ................... 264
18 Alimony ........................ 124
19 Education-Related Adjustments ........ 127 Index ............................... 265
Order Blank
(Inside back cover)
All material in this The explanations and examples in this publication reflect This publication covers some subjects on which a
publication may be the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) court may have made a decision more favorable to tax-
reprinted freely. A of: payers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until thesecitation to Your Federal differing interpretations are resolved by higher court deci-Income Tax (2006) • Tax laws enacted by Congress, sions or in some other way, this publication will continuewould be appropriate. • Treasury regulations, and to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with• Court decisions. the IRS. These rights are described in Your Rights as a
Taxpayer in the back of this publication.However, the information given does not cover every
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change
its meaning.

Page 3 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What’s New for 2006
This section summarizes important qualified Roth contribution pro- The amount of income you can credit bond during the year. See
gram. Under the program, desig- chapter 37 for more information.tax changes that took effect in have and still receive a Hope or
nated Roth contributions are2006. Most of these changes are lifetime learning credit has in- Credit for federal telephone ex-treated as elective deferrals, ex-discussed in more detail through- creased. The Hope credit is in- cise tax paid. If you paid the fed-cept that the contributions are in-out this publication. creased. See chapter 37. eral excise tax on your longcluded in income. A qualifiedChanges are also discussed in Social security and Medicare distance or bundled telephonedistribution from a Roth account isPublication 553, Highlights of 2006 taxes. The maximum wages sub- service, you may be able to claim anot included in income. For moreTax Changes. ject to social security tax (6.2%) credit. See chapter 37 for more in-information on contributions, see increased to $94,200. All wages formation.Standard mileage rates. The Publication 525, and for distribu- are subject to Medicare taxstandard mileage rate for the cost tions, see Publication 575. (1.45%). Split refunds. If you choose di-of operating your car is 44.5 cents a Qualified reservist distribu- rect deposit of your refund, youmile for all business miles driven in tions. If you were a qualified re- Clothing and household items. may be able to split the refund into2006. See chapter 26. servist called to active duty for If you donate clothing and house- two or three accounts. See chaptermore than 179 days, the additionalThe standard mileage rate al- hold items to a qualified organiza- 1.10% tax on early distributions doeslowed for use of your car for medi- tion, the items must be in good
not apply to distributions to you af-cal reasons is 18 cents a mile for used condition or better for you to Expired tax provisions. The fol-
ter September 11, 2001. See chap-2006. See chapter 21. lowing tax provisions have expired.claim a charitable contribution de-ter 10 for more information.The standard mileage rate al- duction. See Clothing and House- • The deduction from adjustedPublic safety employees.  Iflowed for use of your car for deter- hold Items under Contributions You gross income (AGI) for edu-you were a public safety employeemining moving expenses is 18 Can Deduct in chapter 24. cator expenses. However,who separated from service aftercents a mile for 2006. See Publica- you may be able to deductyou reached age 50, the additional Child under age 18. You musttion 521. these expenses if you itemize10% tax on early distributions does use Form 8615 to figure the tax of a your deductions.Retirement savings plans.  The not apply to distributions to you child under age 18 (increased from
following paragraphs highlight from qualified governmental plans age 14) with investment income of • The deduction for qualified tu-changes that affect individual re- after August 17, 2006. See Publi- more than $1,700. The election to ition and fees. However, youtirement arrangements (IRAs) and cation 575 for more information. report a child’s investment income may be able to take a creditpension plans. on a parent’s return and the special for these expenses.Certain amounts increased.Traditional IRA income limits. rule for when a child must file Form • The District of ColumbiaSome tax items that are indexed forYou may be able to take an IRA 6251 also now apply to children first-time homebuyer creditinflation increased for 2006.deduction if you were covered by a under age 18. (for homes purchased afterEarned income credit (EIC).retirement plan, your modified ad- December 31, 2005).The maximum amount of income Alternative minimum tax (AMT).justed gross income is less than you can earn and still get EIC in- The AMT exemption amount is in-$85,000, and you are married filing • The itemized deduction forcreased. The amount depends on creased to $42,500 ($62,550 ifjointly or a qualifying widow(er). state and local general salesyour filing status and number ofSee chapter 17. married filing jointly or qualifying taxes.children. The maximum amount of widow(er); $31,275 if married filingIRA contribution.  If you are investment income you can have separately).age 50 or older at the end of 2006, At the time this publicationand still be eligible for the credit hasthe amount you may be able to went to print, Congressincreased to $2,800. See chapter Energy credits. You may bededuct as an IRA contribution is was considering legisla-36. able to claim a new tax credit for
CAUTION
!
increased to $5,000. See chapter tion that would reinstate these ex-Standard deduction.  The the purchase of qualified energy ef-17. pired tax provisions. To find out ifstandard deduction for taxpayers ficiency improvements to your ex-Combat pay.  For purposes of this legislation was enacted, andwho do not itemize deductions on isting home. You may be able totaking an IRA deduction, earned for more details, go to www.irs.gov,Schedule A (Form 1040) has in- claim a tax credit for the purchaseincome includes any nontaxable click on “More Forms and Publica-creased. The amount depends on of residential solar water heating,combat pay received by a member tions,” and then on “What’s Hot inyour filing status. See chapter 20. photovoltaic equipment, or fuel cellof the U.S. Armed Forces. forms and publications,” or seeExemption amount.  You are property. See chapter 37.Qualified charitable distribu- Publication 553.allowed a $3,300 deduction fortions. If you have reached age Alternative motor vehicles.each exemption to which you are701/2, you can make a qualified Mailing your return. If you areYou may be able to take a credit ifentitled. However, your exemptioncharitable distribution directly from filing a paper return, you may beamount could be phased out if you you place an alternative motor ve-your IRA to a qualified organiza- mailing your return to a differenthave high income. See chapter 3. hicle in service during the year. Seetion. You do not include the distri- address because the IRS hasLimit on itemized deductions. chapter 37. You no longer can takebution in your income. See changed the filing location for sev-Some of your itemized deductions a deduction for clean-fuel vehicles.Publication 590 for more informa- eral areas. If you received an en-may be limited if your adjustedtion. Phaseouts reduced. velope with your tax package,gross income is more than
Limit on elective deferrals. please use it. Otherwise, seePersonal exemptions.  The$150,500 ($75,250 if you are mar-
Generally, the maximum amount of Where to File  near the end of thisphaseout of the limit on personalried filing separately). See chapter
elective deferrals under a salary re- publication for a list of IRS ad-exemptions is reduced by 1/3.29.
duction agreement that could be dresses.Tax benefits for adoption. Itemized deductions.  Thecontributed to a qualified plan in- The adoption credit and the maxi- phaseout of the limit on itemizedcreased to $15,000 ($20,000 if you mum exclusion from income of deductions is reduced by 1/3.were age 50 or older). However, for benefits under an employer’s adop-
SIMPLE plans, the amount is Credit for clean renewable en-tion assistance program are in-
$10,000 ($12,500 if you were age ergy bonds or Gulf tax creditcreased to $10,960. See Adoption
50 or older). bonds. You may be able to claimCredit in chapter 37.
a credit if you held any clean re-Designated Roth accounts. A Hope or lifetime learning
401(k) or 403(b) plan can include a newable energy bond or Gulf taxcredit income limits increased.
■

Page 4 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What’s New for 2007
This section summarizes the im- At the time this publication $103,000, and you are married fil- treated as an inherited IRA. See
portant changes that take effect in went to print, Congress ing jointly or a qualifying widow(er). Publication 575 for more informa-
2007 that could affect your esti- was considering legisla- Limit on elective deferrals. tion.
CAUTION
!
mated tax payments for 2007. tion that would extend the provision Generally, the maximum amount of
Retired public safety officer.More information on these and elective deferrals under a salary re-related to the earned income credit.
For distributions after 2006, an eli-other changes can be found in Pub- duction agreement that can be con-To find out if this legislation was
lication 553. tributed to a qualified plan gible retired public safety officerenacted, and for more details, go to
increases to $15,500 ($20,500 if can elect to exclude from incomewww.irs.gov, click on “More FormsExpiring tax provisions. The you are age 50 or older). However, distributions of up to $3,000 madeand Publications,”  and then onfollowing tax provisions are sched- for SIMPLE plans, the amount is“What’s Hot in forms and publica- directly from a governmental retire-uled to expire at the end of 2006: $10,500 ($13,000 if you are age 50tions,” or see Publication 553. ment plan to the providers of acci-or older).• The election to include non- dent, health, or long-term careRollovers by nonspouse ben-taxable combat pay in earned Retirement savings plans.  The insurance. See Publication 575 foreficiaries. For distributions afterincome for figuring the earned following paragraphs highlight more information.2006, a nonspouse designatedincome credit. changes that affect individual re- beneficiary may have a distribution Alternative minimum tax (AMT).tirement arrangements (IRAs) and• The additional exemption from an eligible retirement plan of apension plans. The AMT exemption amount isamount for housing a person deceased employee directly trans-displaced by Hurricane Ka- scheduled to decrease. TheIRA income limits.  You may fered (trustee-to-trustee) to his ortrina. be able to take an IRA deduction if amount depends on your filing sta-her own IRA set up to receive the
you were covered by a retirement tus.distribution. The transfer will be
plan, your 2007 modified adjusted treated as an eligible rollover distri-
gross income is less than bution and the receiving IRA will be
■
Reminders
Listed below are important remind- The IRS does not send out un- Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. and you expect to qualify for the
Citizens and Resident Alienssolicited emails requesting per- earned income credit in 2007, youers and other items that may help
Abroad.sonal taxpayer information. If you may be able to get part of the credityou file your 2006 tax return. Many
receive this type of request, it may paid to you in advance throughoutof these items are explained in Automatic six month extensionbe an attempt by identity thieves to the year (by your employer) insteadmore detail later in this publication. to file tax return. You can useget your private tax information. of waiting until you file your tax re-
Form 4868, Application for Auto-Write in your social security Send a copy of the fraudulent email turn. See chapter 36.matic Extension of Time To Fileto phishing@irs.gov. For more in-number. To protect your privacy, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, Hurricane relief. Taxpayers af-formation on how to forward one ofsocial security numbers (SSNs) are to obtain an automatic 6-month ex- fected by Hurricane Katrina, Rita,these emails, go to www.irs.govnot printed on the peel-off label that tension of time to file your tax re- or Wilma may be eligible for taxand enter keyword “phishing.”comes in the mail with your tax in- turn. See chapter 1. relief. See Publication 4492, Infor-Once there, see the article titledstruction booklet. This means you mation for Taxpayers Affected by“How To Protect Yourself Frommust enter your SSN in the space Qualifying child. A definition of a Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, andSuspicious E-Mails or Phishingprovided on your tax form. If you “qualifying child” applies for each of Wilma.Schemes.” the following tax benefits.filed a joint return for 2005 and are
filing a joint return for 2006 with the Tax Computation Worksheet. IfTaxpayer identification num- • Head of household filing sta- your taxable income is $100,000 orsame spouse, enter your names bers. You must provide the tax- tus. See chapter 2. more, figure your tax using the Taxand SSNs in the same order as on payer identification number for • Dependency exemption. See Computation Worksheet. The Taxyour 2005 return. See chapter 1. each person for whom you claim chapter 3. Computation Worksheet is foundcertain tax benefits. This appliesVictim of identity theft.  If you near the end of this publication im-even if the person was born in • Child and dependent carebelieve someone has assumed mediately following the Tax Tables.2006. Generally, this number is the credit. See chapter 32.
your identity to file federal income person’s social security number Joint return responsibility.• Child tax credit. See chaptertax returns, or to commit other tax (SSN). See chapter 1. Generally, both spouses are re-34.fraud, complete Form 3949-A, In- sponsible for the tax and any inter-Foreign source income. If youformation Referral, and mail it to • Earned income credit (EIC). est or penalties on a joint tax return.are a U.S. citizen with income fromInternal Revenue Service, Fresno, See chapter 36. In some cases, one spouse may besources outside the United StatesCA 93888. Victims of identity theft relieved of that responsibility for(foreign income), you must reportwho are suffering economic harm, Earned income credit. For items of the other spouse that wereall such income on your tax returnexperiencing a systemic problem, 2006, you can choose to include incorrectly reported on the joint re-unless it is exempt by U.S. law.or seeking help in resolving tax combat pay in your earned income turn. See chapter 2.This is true whether you reside in- for purposes of computing thisproblems that have not been re- side or outside the United States credit. If you are married, each of Include your phone number onsolved through normal channels and whether or not you receive a you can make this election sepa- your return. To promptly resolvemay be eligible for Taxpayer Advo- Form W-2 or 1099 from the foreign rately. any questions we have in process-cate Service (TAS) assistance. payer. This applies to earned in- Form 8836.  If you received ing your tax return, we would like toYou can reach TAS by calling come (such as wages and tips) as Form 8836, Qualifying Children be able to call you. Please entertoll-free 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/ well as unearned income (such as Residency Statement, you have your daytime telephone number onTDD 1-800-829-4059. For addi- interest, dividends, capital gains, been selected to participate in the your tax form next to your signa-tional information about identity pensions, rents and royalties). EIC certification program. See ture.theft prevention and victim assis- If you reside outside the United chapter 36.tance, you can access the IRS States, you may be able to exclude Third party designee. You can
Identity Theft page at www.irs.gov part or all of your foreign source Advance earned income credit. check the “Yes” box in the “Third
by entering keyword “identity theft.” earned income. For details, see If a qualifying child lives with you Party Designee” area of  your return
Page 2 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 5 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to authorize the IRS to discuss your Free electronic filing.  You may 1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, and to confidentially report misconduct,
the Paperwork Reduction Act of waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRSbe able to file your 2006 taxes on-return with a friend, family member,
1980 require that when we ask you employee, you can callline for free thanks to an electronicor any other person you choose.
for information we must first tell you 1-800-366-4484 (1-800-877-8339filing agreement. See chapter 1.This allows the IRS to call the per-
what our legal right is to ask for the for TTY/TDD users). You can re-son you identified as your designee Change of address. If you information, why we are asking for main anonymous.to answer any questions that may change your address, you should it, how it will be used, what couldarise during the processing of your Photographs of missing chil-notify the IRS. See Change of Ad- happen if we do not receive it, andreturn. It also allows your designee dren. The Internal Revenuedress, under What Happens After I whether your response is volun-
Service is a proud partner with theto perform certain actions. See File, in chapter 1. tary, required to obtain a benefit, or
National Center for Missing andchapter 1. mandatory under the law. A com-
Private delivery services. You Exploited Children. Photographs ofplete statement on this subject canPayment of taxes. Make your may be able to use a designated missing children selected by thebe found in your tax form instruc-
check or money order payable to Center may appear in this publica-private delivery service to mail your tion booklet.
tion on pages that would otherwise“United States Treasury.” You can tax returns and payments. See
Customer service for taxpayers be blank. You can help bring thesechapter 1.pay your taxes by credit card, using
expanded.  The Internal Reve- children home by looking at thethe Electronic Federal Tax Pay- Refund on a late filed return. If nue Service has expanded cus- photographs and callingment System (EFTPS), or, if you you were due a refund but you did tomer service for taxpayers. You 1-800-THE-LOSTfile electronically, by electronic not file a return, you generally must can set up a personal appointment (1-800-843-5678) if you recognizefunds withdrawal. See chapter 1. file your return within 3 years from at the most convenient Taxpayer a child.
the date the return was due (includ- Assistance Center, on the mostFaster ways to file your return. ing extensions) to get that refund. convenient business day. See HowThe IRS offers fast, accurate ways See chapter 1. To Get Tax Help in the back of thisto file your tax return information publication.without filing a paper tax return. Privacy Act and paperwork re-
You can use IRS e-file (electronic duction information. The IRS Treasury Inspector General for
filing). See chapter 1. Restructuring and Reform Act of Tax Administration. If you want ■
Publication 17 (2006) Page 3

Page 6 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Introduction
This publication covers the general It will help you identify which filing • Recorded tax information top- We respond to many letters by
rules for filing a federal income tax telephone. Therefore, it would bestatus you qualify for, whether you ics (TeleTax).
return. It supplements the informa- helpful if you would include yourcan claim any dependents, and
tion contained in your tax form in- daytime phone number, includingIf you operate your own businesswhether the income you receive is
struction booklet. It explains the tax the area code, in your correspond-taxable. The publication goes on to or have other self-employment in-
law to make sure you pay only the ence.explain the standard deduction, the come, such as from babysitting or
tax you owe and no more. kinds of expenses you may be able You can email us atselling crafts, see the following
to deduct, and the various kinds of *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asteriskHow this publication is ar- publications for more information.
credits you may be able to take to must be included in the address.)ranged. This publication closely • Publication 334, Tax Guide Please put “Publications Com-reduce your tax.follows Form 1040, U.S. Individual for Small Business (For Indi- ment” on the subject line. AlthoughIncome Tax Return. It is divided Throughout the publication are viduals Who Use Schedule C we cannot respond individually tointo six parts which cover different examples showing how the tax law or C-EZ). each email, we do appreciate yoursections of Form 1040. Each part is applies in typical situations. Sam- feedback and will consider yourfurther divided into chapters which ple forms and schedules show you • Publication 535, Business Ex- comments as we revise our taxgenerally discuss one line of the how to report certain items on your penses. products.form. Do not worry if you file Form return. Also throughout the publica- • Publication 587, Business1040A or Form 1040EZ. Anything Ordering forms and publica-tion are flowcharts and tables thatincluded on a line of either of these Use of Your Home (Including tions. Visitpresent tax information in anforms is also included on Form Use by Daycare Providers). www.irs.gov/formspubs  toeasy-to-understand manner.1040. download forms and publications,Many of the subjects discussedThe table of contents inside the call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theHelp from the IRS. There arein this publication are discussed infront cover and the index in the address below and receive a re-many ways you can get help fromgreater detail in other IRS publica-back of the publication are useful sponse within 10 business days af-the IRS. These are explainedtions. References to those othertools to help you find the informa- ter your request is received.publications are provided for your under How To Get Tax Help in thetion you need.
information. back of this publication.What is in this publication. The National Distribution CenterIcons. Small graphic symbols,publication begins with the rules for P.O. Box 8903filing a tax return. It explains: or icons, are used to draw your Comments and suggestions. Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
attention to special information. We welcome your comments about1. Who must file a return, See Table 1, Legend of Icons, be- this publication and your sugges- Tax questions. If you have alow, for an explanation of each icon2. Which tax form to use, tions for future editions. tax question, visit www.irs.gov orused in this publication.3. When the return is due, call 1-800-829-1040. We cannotYou can write to us at the fol-
answer tax questions sent to eitherlowing address:4. How to e-file your return, and What is not covered in this publi- of the above addresses.
cation. Some material that you5. Other general information.
may find helpful is not included in Internal Revenue Service IRS mission. Provide America’s
this publication but can be found in Individual Forms and taxpayers top quality service by
your tax form instruction booklet. Publications Branch helping them understand and meet
This includes lists of: their tax responsibilities and by ap-SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
plying the tax law with integrity and1111 Constitution Ave. NW,• Where to report certain items
fairness to all.IR-6406shown on information docu-
ments, and Washington, DC 20224
Table 1. Legend of Icons
Icon Explanation
Items that may cause you particular problems, or an alert about pending legislation that may be enacted after
CAUTION
! this publication goes to print.
An Internet site or an email address.
An address you may need.
Items you should keep in your personal records.
RECORDS
Items you may need to figure or a worksheet you may need to complete.
An important phone number.
Helpful information you may need.TIP
■
Page 4 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 7 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part One.
The four chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system. TheyThe Income Tax take you through the first steps of filling out a tax return— such as deciding what
your filing status is, how many exemptions you can take, and what form to file.Return They also discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file (electronic filing),
certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax during the year: withhold-
ing and estimated tax.
Installment agreement. If you cannot pay the
full amount due with your return, you may ask toReminders make monthly installment payments. See In-
1. stallment Agreement, later, under Amount YouAlternative filing methods. Rather than filing Owe.a return on paper, you may be able to file elec-
tronically using IRS e-file. Create your own per- Automatic 6-month extension. You can getFiling sonal identification number (PIN) and file a an automatic 6-month extension to file your tax
completely paperless tax return. For more infor- return if, no later than the date your return is due,
mation, see Does My Return Have To Be on you file Form 4868, Application for AutomaticInformation Paper, later. Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual In-
come Tax Return.Change of address. If you change your ad-
dress, you should notify the IRS. See Change of Service in combat zone. You are allowed ex-What’s New
Address, later, under What Happens After I File. tra time to take care of your tax matters if you are
a member of the Armed Forces who served in aWho must file. Generally, the amount of in- Enter your social security number.  You combat zone, or if you served in the combatcome you can receive before you must file a must enter your social security number (SSN) in zone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi-return has been increased. See Table 1-1, Table the spaces provided on your tax return. If you file viduals Serving in Combat Zone , later, under1-2, and Table 1-3 for the specific amounts. a joint return, enter the SSNs in the same order When Do I Have To File.as the names.Split refunds. If you choose direct deposit of Adoption taxpayer identification number. Ifyour refund, you may be able to split the refund Direct deposit of refund. Instead of getting a a child has been placed in your home for pur-among two or three accounts. See Refunds, paper check, you may be able to have your poses of legal adoption and you will not be ablelater, for more information. refund deposited directly into your account at a to get a social security number for the child inbank or other financial institution. See Direct time to file your return, you may be able to get anCredit for federal telephone excise tax paid. Deposit under Refunds, later. adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN).If you were billed after February 28, 2003, and
For more information, see Social Security Num-before August 1, 2006, for the federal excise tax Alternative payment methods. If you owe ber, later.on long distance or bundled service, you may be additional tax, you may be able to pay electroni-
able to claim a credit for the tax paid. For more cally. See How To Pay, later. Taxpayer identification number for aliens.information, see the instructions for your tax If you or your dependent is a nonresident orreturn. If you are not otherwise required to file a resident alien who does not have and is nottax return for 2006, use Form 1040EZ-T, Re-
quest for Refund of Federal Telephone Excise
Table 1-1. 2006 Filing Requirements for Most TaxpayersTax.
THEN file a return if Child’s age. The age at which a child’s invest-
AND at the end of 2006 you your gross incomement income may be reported on the parent’s
IF your filing status is... were...* was at least...**return has been increased from age 14 to age
18. See Children Under Age 18, later. single under 65 $ 8,450
Online payment agreement application. 65 or older $ 9,700
You may now be able to apply online for a
married filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $16,900payment agreement if you owe federal tax, inter-
est, and penalties. See the discussion under 65 or older (one spouse) $17,900Installment Agreement, later, for more informa-
tion. 65 or older (both spouses) $18,900
married filing separately any age $ 3,300Mailing your return. You may be mailing your
return to a different address this year because head of household under 65 $10,850the IRS has changed the filing location for sev-
eral areas. If you received an envelope with your 65 or older $12,100
tax package, please use it. Otherwise, see qualifying widow(er) with under 65 $13,600Where Do I File, later in this chapter.
dependent child 65 or older $14,600
* If you were born on January 1, 1942, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2006.
** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that is not
exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States (even if you may exclude part
or all of it). Do not include social security benefits unless you are married filing a separate return and you
lived with your spouse at any time during 2006.
*** If you did not live with your spouse at the end of 2006 (or on the date your spouse died) and your gross
income was at least $3,300, you must file a return regardless of your age.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 5

Page 8 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The filing requirements for each category areTable 1-2. 2006 Filing Requirements for Dependents
explained in this chapter.See chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent. The filing requirements apply even if you do
not owe tax.If your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, and any of the situations
below apply to you, you must file a return. (See Table 1-3 for other situations when you must Even if you do not have to file a return,
file.) it may be to your advantage to do so.
In this table, earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, and professional fees. It also See Who Should File, later.
TIP
includes taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See Scholarships and fellowships in
chapter 12.) Unearned income includes investment-type income such as taxable interest, File only one federal income tax returnordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation, for the year regardless of how manytaxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income from jobs you had, how many Forms W-2CAUTION
!
a trust. Gross income is the total of your earned and unearned income. you received, or how many states you lived in
during the year.
Single dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. Individuals—In General
• Your unearned income was more than $850.
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you• Your earned income was more than $5,150.
must file a return depends on three factors:• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
• $850, or 1. Your gross income,• Your earned income (up to $4,850) plus $300.
2. Your filing status, and❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your unearned income was more than $2,100 ($3,350 if 65 or older and blind). 3. Your age.
• Your earned income was more than $6,400 ($7,650 if 65 or older and blind). To find out whether you must file, see Table• Your gross income was more than $1,250 ($2,500 if 65 or older and blind) 1-1, Table 1-2, and Table 1-3. Even if no tableplus the larger of: shows that you must file, you may need to file to• $850, or get money back. (See Who Should File, later.)• Your earned income (up to $4,850) plus $300.
Married dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind? Gross income. This includes all income you
receive in the form of money, goods, property,❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. and services that is not exempt from tax. It also• Your unearned income was more than $850. includes income from sources outside the• Your earned income was more than $5,150. United States (even if you can exclude all or part• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and of it). Common types of income are discussed initemizes deductions. Part Two of this publication.• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
• $850, or Community income. If you are married and
• Your earned income (up to $4,850) plus $300. your permanent home is in a community prop-
erty state, half of any income described by state❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. law as community income may be considered• Your unearned income was more than $1,850 ($2,850 if 65 or older and blind). yours. This affects your federal taxes, including• Your earned income was more than $6,150 ($7,150 if 65 or older and blind). whether you must file if you do not file a joint• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and return with your spouse. See Publication 555,itemizes deductions. Community Property, for more information.• Your gross income was more than $1,000 ($2,000 if 65 or older and blind)
plus the larger of: Self-employed individuals. If you are
• $850, or self-employed, your gross income includes the
amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040),• Your earned income (up to $4,850) plus $300.
Profit or Loss From Business; line 1 of Schedule
C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Business;
and line 11 of Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit oreligible to get a social security number, file Form
Loss From Farming. See Self-Employed Per-W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer Do I Have To sons, later, for more information about your filingIdentification Number, with the IRS. For more
requirements.information, see Social Security Number, later. File a Return?
If you do not report all of your
You must file a federal income tax return if you self-employment income, your social
are a citizen or resident of the United States or a security benefits may be lower whenCAUTION
!
resident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filing you retire.Introduction requirements for any of the following categories
that apply to you.This chapter discusses the following topics. Filing status. Your filing status depends on
whether you are single or married and on your• Whether you have to file a return. 1. Individuals in general. (There are special
family situation. Your filing status is determinedrules for surviving spouses, executors, ad-• Which form to use. on the last day of your tax year, which is Decem-ministrators, legal representatives, U.S. cit-
ber 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 for an• How to file electronically. izens and residents living outside the
explanation of each filing status.United States, residents of Puerto Rico,• When, how, and where to file your return.
and individuals with income from U.S. pos-
• What happens if you pay too little or too Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of thesessions.)
much tax. year, you generally can have a higher amount of2. Dependents. gross income than other taxpayers before you• What records you should keep and how must file. See Table 1-1. You are considered 653. Children under age 18.long you should keep them. on the day before your 65th birthday. For exam-4. Self-employed persons.• How you can change a return you have ple, if your 65th birthday is on January 1, 2007,
you are considered 65 for 2006.already filed. 5. Aliens.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 9 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Responsibility of parent. Generally, a child foreign government, and your employer is notSurviving Spouses,
required to withhold social security and Medi-is responsible for filing his or her own tax returnExecutors, Administrators,
care taxes from your wages, you must includeand for paying any tax on the return. But if aand Legal Representatives your earnings from services performed in thedependent child who must file an income tax
United States when figuring your net earningsreturn cannot file it for any reason, such as age,You must file a final return for a decedent (a
from self-employment.then a parent, guardian, or other legally respon-person who died) if both of the following are true.
sible person must file it for the child. If the child Ministers. You must include income from• You are the surviving spouse, executor, cannot sign the return, the parent or guardian services you performed as a minister when fig-administrator, or legal representative. must sign the child’s name followed by the uring your net earnings from self-employment,• The decedent met the filing requirements words “By (your signature), parent for minor unless you have an exemption fromat the date of death. child.” self-employment tax. This also applies to Chris-
tian Science practitioners and members of aChild’s earnings. Amounts a child earns byFor more information on rules for filing a dece- religious order who have not taken a vow ofperforming services are his or her gross income.dent’s final return, see Publication 559, Survi- poverty. For more information, see PublicationThis is true even if under local law the child’svors, Executors, and Administrators. 517, Social Security and Other Information forparents have the right to the earnings and may
Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers.actually have received them. If the child does not
pay the tax due on this income, the parent isU.S. Citizens and Residents Living
liable for the tax. AliensOutside the United States
Your status as an alien—resident, nonresident,If you are a U.S. citizen or resident living outside Children Under Age 18 or dual-status—determines whether and howthe United States, you must file a return if you
you must file an income tax return.meet the filing requirements. For information on If a child’s only income is interest and dividends
special tax rules that may apply to you, see The rules used to determine your alien status(including capital gain distributions and AlaskaPublication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and are discussed in Publication 519, U.S. TaxPermanent Fund dividends) and certain otherResident Aliens Abroad. It is available at most Guide for Aliens.conditions are met, a parent can elect to includeU.S. embassies and consulates. Also see How the child’s income on the parent’s return. If thisTo Get Tax Help in the back of this publication. election is made, the child does not have to file a Resident alien. If you are a resident alien for
return. See Parent’s Election To Report Child’s the entire year, you must file a tax return follow-
Interest and Dividends in chapter 31. ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens.Residents of Puerto Rico
Use the forms discussed in this publication.
Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi- Self-Employed Persons
dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. income Nonresident alien. If you are a nonresidenttax return if you meet the filing requirements. You are self-employed if you: alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to youThis is in addition to any legal requirement you • Carry on a trade or business as a sole are different from those that apply to U.S. citi-may have to file an income tax return for Puerto proprietor, zens and resident aliens. See Publication 519 toRico.
find out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you andIf you are a resident of Puerto Rico for the • Are an independent contractor, which forms you should file.entire year, gross income does not include in- • Are a member of a partnership, orcome from sources within Puerto Rico, except
for amounts received as an employee of the • Are in business for yourself in any other Dual-status taxpayer. If you are a resident
United States or a U.S. agency. If you receive way. alien for part of the tax year and a nonresident
income from Puerto Rican sources that is not alien for the rest of the year, you are asubject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your stan- Self-employment can include work in addition dual-status taxpayer. Different rules apply fordard deduction. As a result, the amount of in- to your regular full-time business activities, such each part of the year. For information oncome you must have before you are required to as certain part-time work you do at home or in dual-status taxpayers, see Publication 519.file a U.S. income tax return is lower than the addition to your regular job.
applicable amount in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2. For  You must file a return if your gross income is Who Should Filemore information, see Publication 570, Tax at least as much as the filing requirementGuide for Individuals With Income From U.S. amount for your filing status and age (shown in Even if you do not have to file, you should file aPossessions. Table 1-1). Also, you must file Form 1040 and federal income tax return to get money back if
Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Employment any of the following conditions apply.
Tax, if:Individuals With Income From 1. You had federal income tax withheld from
U.S. Possessions 1. Your net earnings from self-employment your pay. 
(excluding church employee income) wereIf you had income from Guam, the Common- 2. You qualify for the earned income credit.$400 or more, orwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri- See chapter 36 for more information. 
2. You had church employee income ofcan Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special 3. You qualify for the additional child taxrules may apply when determining whether you $108.28 or more. (See Table 1-3.) credit. See chapter 34 for more informa-must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure your tion.addition, you may have to file a return with the self-employment tax. Self-employment tax isindividual island government. See Publication 4. You qualify for the health coverage taxcomparable to the social security and Medicare570 for more information. credit. See chapter 37 for more informa-tax withheld from an employee’s wages. For
tion.more information about this tax, see Publication
Dependents 334, Tax Guide for Small Business. 5. You qualify for the credit for federal tele-
Employees of foreign governments or in- phone excise tax paid. If none of the previ-If you are a dependent (one who meets the
ternational organizations. If you are a U.S. ous four items apply and you are notdependency tests in chapter 3), see Table 1-2 to
citizen who works in the United States for an otherwise required to file a tax return forfind whether you must file a return. You also
2006, use Form 1040EZ-T to claim thisinternational organization, a foreign govern-must file if your situation is described in Table
credit.ment, or a wholly owned instrumentality of a1-3.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

Page 10 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2006 Return
If any of the four conditions listed below apply, you must file a return, even if your income is less than the amount shown in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2.
1. You owe any special taxes, such as:
• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on your group-term life insurance. This amount should be shown in box 12
of your Form W-2.
• Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter 30.)
• Additional tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA). (See chapter 17.)
• Additional tax on an Archer MSA or health savings account. (See Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored Health
Plans.)
• Additional tax on a Coverdell ESA or qualified tuition program. (See Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.)
• Recapture of an investment credit or a low-income housing credit. (See the Instructions for Form 4255, Recapture of Investment Credit, or
Form 8611, Recapture of Low-Income Housing Credit.)
• Recapture tax on the disposition of a home purchased with a federally-subsidized mortgage. (See chapter 15.)
• Recapture of the qualified electric vehicle credit. (See chapter 37.)
• Recapture of an education credit. (See chapter 35.)
• Recapture of the Indian employment credit. (See the Instructions for Form 8845, Indian Employment Credit.)
• Recapture of the new markets credit. (See Form 8874, New Markets Credit.)
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your employer. This amount should be shown in box 9 of your  Form
W-2. (See chapter 36.)
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Self-Employed Persons earlier in this chapter.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer socia l security and
Medicare taxes. (See Publication 334.)
deduction for educator expenses and tuition9. You do not owe any household employ-
and fees that expired at the end of 2005. Toment taxes on wages you paid to a house-Which Form find out if this legislation was enacted, and forhold employee.
more details, go to www.irs.gov, click on MoreShould I Use? You must meet all of these requirements to Forms and Publications, and then on What’s
use Form 1040EZ. If you do not, you must use Hot in forms and publications, or seeYou must use one of three forms to file your Form 1040A or Form 1040. Publication 553, Highlights of 2006 Tax
return: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form Changes.Figuring tax. On Form 1040EZ, you can use1040. (But also see Does My Return Have To Be If these deductions are reinstated, you willonly the tax table to figure your tax. You cannoton Paper, later.) have to use Form 1040 to claim them.use Form 1040EZ to report any other tax.
4. You do not itemize your deductions. 
Form 1040EZ 5. Your taxes are from only the followingForm 1040A
items.Form 1040EZ is the simplest form to use. If you do not qualify to use Form 1040EZ, you a. Tax Table.may be able to use Form 1040A.You can use Form 1040EZ if all of the follow-
b. Alternative minimum tax. (See chaptering apply. You can use Form 1040A if all of the follow- 30.) 
ing apply.1. Your filing status is single or married filing c. Advance earned income credit (EIC)jointly. If you were a nonresident alien at payments, if you received any. (See1. Your income is only from wages, salaries,any time in 2006, your filing status must be chapter 36.) tips, IRA distributions, pensions andmarried filing jointly. annuities, taxable social security and d. Recapture of an education credit. (See
railroad retirement benefits, taxable2. You (and your spouse if married filing a chapter 35.) 
scholarship and fellowship grants,joint return) were under age 65 and not e. Form 8615, Tax for Children Underinterest, ordinary dividends (includingblind at the end of 2006. If you were born Age 18 With Investment Income ofAlaska Permanent Fund dividends),on January 1, 1942, you are considered to More Than $1,700. capital gain distributions, jury duty pay,be age 65 at the end of 2006. and unemployment compensation. f. Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain3. You do not claim any dependents. Tax Worksheet. 2. Your taxable income is less than
4. Your taxable income is less than $100,000. 6. You claim only the following tax credits.
$100,000. 3. Your adjustments to income are for only a. The credit for child and dependent
the following items.5. Your income is only from wages, salaries, care expenses. (See chapter 32.) 
tips, unemployment compensation, Alaska a. Penalty on early withdrawal of savings. b. The credit for the elderly or thePermanent Fund dividends, taxable schol- disabled. (See chapter 33.) b. IRA deduction. arship and fellowship grants, and taxable
c. The child tax credit. (See chapter 34.) interest of $1,500 or less. c. Student loan interest deduction. 
d. The additional child tax credit. (See6. You did not receive any advance earned d. Jury duty pay you gave to your
chapter 34.)income credit (EIC) payments. employer.
e. The education credits. (See chapter7. You do not claim any adjustments to in- At the time this publication went to
35.) print, Congress was consideringcome, such as a deduction for IRA contri-
legislation that would extend thebutions or student loan interest. CAUTION
!
f. The retirement savings contributions
credit. (See chapter 37.)8. You do not claim any credits other than the
earned income credit and the credit for g. The earned income credit. (See
chapter 36.) federal telephone excise tax paid.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 11 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To verify your identity, you will be asked toh. The credit for the federal telephone enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) fromDoes My Return Haveexcise tax paid. your originally filed 2005 income tax return, if
7. You did not have an alternative minimum applicable. Do not use your AGI from anTo Be on Paper?tax adjustment on stock you acquired amended return (Form 1040X), math error no-
from the exercise of an incentive stock tice, or other changed amount from the IRS. AGIYou may be able to file a paperless return usingoption. (See Publication 525, Taxable is the amount shown on your 2005 Form 1040,IRS e-file (electronic filing). It’s so easy, over 72and Nontaxable Income.) line 37; Form 1040A, line 21; and Form 1040EZ,million taxpayers preferred e-file over filing a line 4. If you do not have your 2005 income taxYou must meet all of the above requirements paper tax return last year. return, call the IRS at 1-800-829-1040 to get ato use Form 1040A. If you do not, you must use This section explains how to e-file: free transcript of your account. You will also beForm 1040. • Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider, or asked to enter your date of birth (DOB). MakeIf you meet the above requirements, you can sure your DOB is accurate and matches the• Using your personal computer.use Form 1040A even if you received em- information on record with the Social Securityployer-provided dependent care benefits. Administration by checking your annual Social
If you receive a capital gain distribution Security Statement.IRS e-file
that includes unrecaptured section You cannot sign your return electroni-1250 gain, section 1202 gain, or col-CAUTION
!
cally if you are a first-time filer underlectibles (28%) gain, you cannot use Form age 16 at the end of 2006, or if you areCAUTION
!
1040A. You must use Form 1040. filing certain forms, such as Form 1098-C, 3115,
3468 (if attachments are required), 4136 (if cer-
tificate or statement required), 5713, 8283 (if aTable 1-4 lists the benefits of IRS e-file. IRSForm 1040
statement is required for Section A or if complet-e-file uses automation to replace most of the
ing Section B), 8332, 8858, 8885, 8864 (if certifi-If you cannot use Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, manual steps needed to process paper returns.
cation or statement required), or Schedule D-1you must use Form 1040. You can use Form As a result, the processing of e-file returns is
(Form 1040) (if you elect not to include your1040 to report all types of income, deductions, faster and more accurate than the processing of
transactions on the electronic STCGL or LTCGLand credits. paper returns. However, as with a paper return,
records).you are responsible for making sure your returnYou may have received Form 1040A or Form
contains accurate information and is filed on For more details on the PIN method, visit1040EZ in the mail because of the return you
time. www.irs.gov/efile and click on “e-file for Individ-filed last year. If your situation has changed this
Using e-file does not affect your chances of ual Taxpayers.”year, it may be to your advantage to file Form
an IRS examination of your return.1040 instead. You may pay less tax by filing An Authorized IRS e-file Provider can,Form 1040 because you can take itemized de- with your authorization, generate a PINElectronic signatures. Create your own per-ductions, some adjustments to income, and for you.sonal identification number (PIN) and use a tax
TIP
credits you cannot take on Form 1040A or Form professional or file your own paperless return1040EZ. electronically. If you are married filing jointly, you Forms 8453 and 8453-OL. Your return is not
and your spouse will each need to create a PIN complete without your signature. If you are notYou must use Form 1040 if any of the follow-
and enter these PINs as your electronic signa- eligible or choose not to sign your return elec-ing apply.
tures. tronically, you must complete, sign, and file
1. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more. A PIN is any combination of five numbers, Form 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declar a-
except five zeros. If you use a PIN, there is tion for an IRS e-file Return, or Form 8453-OL,
2. You itemize your deductions. nothing to sign and nothing to mail—not even U.S. Individual Income Tax Declaration for an
your Forms W-2. IRS e-file Online Return, whichever applies.3. You had income that cannot be reported
on Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, including
Table 1-4. Benefits of IRS e-filetax-exempt interest from private activity
bonds issued after August 7, 1986. Eligible for • Free File allows qualified taxpayers to prepare and e-file their own tax
Free File returns for free using commercially available online tax preparation software.4. You claim any adjustments to gross in-
come other than the adjustments listed • Review online tax software provider offerings and determine if you areearlier under Form 1040A. eligible by visiting the Free File page at www.irs.gov.
5. Your Form W-2, box 12, shows uncol- Fast! Easy! • Get your refund in half the time as paper filers do, even faster and safer with
lected employee tax (social security and Convenient! direct deposit.
Medicare tax) on tips (see chapter 6) or • Sign electronically and file a completely paperless return.group-term life insurance (see chapter 5).
• Receive an electronic proof of receipt within 48 hours that the IRS received6. You received $20 or more in tips in any your return.
one month and did not report all of them to
• If you owe, you can e-file and authorize an electronic funds withdrawal oryour employer. (See chapter 6.)
pay by credit card. If you e-file before April 16, 2007*, you can schedule an
7. You claim any credits other than the cred- electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savings account as late
as April 16, 2007*.its listed earlier under Form 1040A.
• Prepare and file your federal and state returns together and save time.8. You owe the excise tax on insider stock
compensation from an expatriated corpo- *April 17, 2007, if you live in Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New
ration. Hampshire, New York, Vermont, or the District of Columbia.
9. Your Form W-2 shows an amount in box Accurate! • IRS computers quickly and automatically check for errors or other missing
12 with a code Z. Secure! information.
10. You have to file other forms with your re- • The chance of being audited does not differ whether you e-file or file a
turn to report certain exclusions, taxes, or paper tax return.
transactions. • Your bank account information is safeguarded along with other tax return
information. The IRS does not have access to credit card numbers.11. You are a debtor in a chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy case filed after October 16, 2005.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

Page 12 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
State returns. In most states, you can file an For information, visit our website at If you file your return at the Internal
electronic state return simultaneously with your Revenue Service Center in Massachu-www.irs.gov/efile.
federal return. For more information, check with setts, your due date is April 17, 2007,
TIP
your local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro- because of the Patriot’s Day holiday in that
fessional, or the IRS website at state.Through Employers and Financial
www.irs.gov/efile. Institutions Filing on time. Your paper return is filed on
Refunds. You can have a refund check mailed time if it is mailed in an envelope that is properlySome businesses offer free e-file to their em-
to you, or you can have your refund deposited addressed, has enough postage, and is post-ployees, members, or customers. Others offer itdirectly to your checking or savings account or marked by the due date. If you send your returnfor a fee. Ask your employer or financial institu-split among two or three accounts. With e-file, by registered mail, the date of the registration istion if they offer IRS e-file as an employee,your refund will be issued in half the time as the postmark date. The registration is evidencemember, or customer benefit.when filing on paper. that the return was delivered. If you send a
return by certified mail and have your receiptAs with a paper return, you may not get all of
postmarked by a postal employee, the date onyour refund if you owe certain past-due Free Help With Your Return the receipt is the postmark date. The post-amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a stu-
marked certified mail receipt is evidence that thedent loan, or child support. See Offset against Free help in preparing your return is available return was delivered.debts under Refunds, later. nationwide from IRS-trained volunteers. The
Private delivery services. If you use a pri-Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro-Refund inquiries. If you do not receive your vate delivery service designated by the IRS togram is designed to help low-income taxpayersrefund within 3 weeks after your electronically send your return, the postmark date generally isand the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)filed return was accepted by IRS, see Past-Due the date the private delivery service records inprogram is designed to assist taxpayers age 60Refund, later. its database or marks on the mailing label. Theor older with their tax returns. Many VITA sites private delivery service can tell you how to getAmount you owe. To avoid late-payment offer free electronic filing and all volunteers will written proof of this date.penalties and interest, pay your taxes in full by let you know about the credits and deductions The following are designated private deliveryApril 16, 2007, (April 17, 2006, if you live in you may be entitled to claim. To find a site near services.Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hamp- you, call 1-800-829-1040. Or to find the nearestshire, New York, Vermont, or the District of Co- • DHL Express (DHL): DHL Same DayAARP TaxAide site, visit AARP’s website atlumbia). You can make your payment Service, DHL Next Day 10:30 am, DHLwww.aarp.org/taxaide or call 1-888-227-7669.electronically by credit card or by scheduling an Next Day 12:00 pm, DHL Next Day 3:00For more information on these programs, go toelectronic funds withdrawal from your checking pm, and DHL 2nd Day Service.
www.irs.gov and enter keyword “VITA” in theor savings account. • Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx Priorityupper right-hand corner.See How To Pay , later, for information on Overnight, FedEx Standard Overnight,how to pay the amount you owe. FedEx 2Day, FedEx International Priority,
and FedEx International First.
• United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS NextUsing an Authorized IRS e-file When Do I Day Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPSProvider
2nd Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M., UPSHave To File? Worldwide Express Plus, and UPS World-Many tax professionals electronically wide Express.file tax returns for their clients. As a April 16, 2007, is the due date for filing your
taxpayer, you have two options. 2006 income tax return if you use the calendar
Private delivery services cannot deliveryear. If you live in Maine, Maryland, Massachu-
items to P.O. boxes. You must use the1) You can prepare your return, take it to an setts, New Hampshire, New York, Vermont, or U.S. Postal Service to mail any item toCAUTION
!
Authorized IRS e-file Provider, and have the District of Columbia, you have until April 17, an IRS P.O. box address.the provider transmit it electronically to the 2007. For a quick view of due dates for filing aIRS. return with or without an extension of time to file Electronically filed returns. If you use IRS2) You can have a tax professional prepare (discussed later), see Table 1-5. e-file, your return is considered filed on time ifyour return and transmit it for you the authorized electronic return transmitter post-If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on theelectronically. marks the transmission by the due date. Anlast day of any month except December, or a
authorized electronic return transmitter is a par-You may personally enter your PIN or com- 52-53-week year), your income tax return is due
ticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmitsplete Form 8879, IRS e-file Signature Authoriza- by the 15th day of the 4th month after the close electronic tax return information directly to thetion, to authorize the provider to enter your PIN of your fiscal year. IRS.on your return. When the due date for doing any act for tax The electronic postmark is a record of when
purposes—filing a return, paying taxes, etc.— the authorized electronic return transmitter re-Note. Tax professionals may charge a fee
falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the ceived the transmission of your electronicallyfor IRS e-file. Fees can vary depending on the
due date is delayed until the next business day. filed return on its host system. The date and timeprofessional and the specific services rendered.
Table 1-5.  When To File Your 2006 Return
Using Your Personal Computer For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns on a calendar year.
You can file your tax return in a fast, For Certain Taxpayers
For Most Taxpayers Outside the U.S.easy, and convenient way using your
personal computer. A computer with a No extension requested April 16, 2007* June 15, 2007modem or Internet access and tax preparation
software are all you need. Best of all, you can Automatic extension October 15, 2007 October 15, 2007
Form 4868 filed, or credite-file from the comfort of your home 24 hours a
card payment madeday, 7 days a week.
IRS approved tax preparation software is *April 17, 2007, if you live in Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Vermont, or the
District of Columbiaavailable for online use on the Internet, for
download from the Internet, and in retail stores.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 13 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in your time zone controls whether your elec- Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual In- Serving in Combat Zone, later, for special rules
tronically filed return is timely. come Tax Return, to use as a worksheet. If you that apply to you.
think you may owe tax when you file your return,
Filing late. If you do not file your return by the Married taxpayers. If you file a joint return,use Part II of the form to estimate your balance
due date, you may have to pay a failure-to-file only one spouse has to qualify for this automaticdue. If you e-file Form 4868 to the IRS, do not
penalty and interest. For more information, see extension. If you and your spouse file separatealso send a paper Form 4868.
Penalties, later. Also see Interest under Amount returns, this automatic extension applies only toE-file using your personal computer or aYou Owe. the spouse who qualifies.tax professional.  You can use a tax softwareIf you were due a refund but you did not file a package with your personal computer or a tax How to get the extension. To use this auto-return, you generally must file within 3 years professional to file Form 4868 electronically. matic extension, you must attach a statement tofrom the date the return was due (including ex- You will need to provide certain information from your return explaining what situation qualifiedtensions) to get that refund. your tax return for 2005. If you wish to make a you for the extension. (See the situations listed
payment by electronic funds withdrawal, seeNonresident alien.  If you are a nonresident under (2), earlier.)
Electronic payment options, under How To Pay,alien and earn wages subject to U.S. income tax
later in this chapter. Extensions beyond 2 months. If you cannotwithholding, your 2006 U.S. income tax return
file your return within the automatic 2-month(Form 1040NR or Form 1040NR-EZ) is due by: E-file and pay by credit card. You can get
extension period, you may be able to get anan extension by paying part or all of your esti-• April 16, 2007, if you use a calendar year, additional 4-month extension, for a total of 6mate of tax due by using a credit card. You canor months. File Form 4868 and check the box ondo this by phone or over the Internet. You do not
• The 15th day of the 4th month after the line 8. file Form 4868. See Credit card, under How To
end of your fiscal year if you use a fiscal This additional 4-month extension of time toPay, later in this chapter.
year. file is not a further extension of time to pay. You
can use a credit card to pay your estimate of taxFiling a paper Form 4868. You can get an
If you do not earn wages subject to U.S. in- due. See How To Pay, later in this chapter.extension of time to file by filing a paper Form
come tax withholding, your return is due by: 4868. Mail it to the address shown in the form
No further extension. An extension of moreinstructions.• June 15, 2007, if you use a calendar year, than 6 months will generally not be granted.If you want to make a payment with the form,or However, if you are outside the United Statesmake your check or money order payable to the
and meet certain tests, you may be granted a• The 15th day of the 6th month after the “United States Treasury.” Write your SSN, day-
longer extension. For more information, see Fur-end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal time phone number, and “2006 Form 4868” on
ther extensions under When To File and Pay inyear. your check or money order.
Publication 54.See Publication 519 for more filing information. When to file. You must request the automatic
extension by the due date for your return. You
Filing for a decedent. If you must file a final can file your return any time before the 6-month Individuals Serving inincome tax return for a taxpayer who died during extension period ends. Combat Zonethe year (a decedent), the return is due by the
When you file your return. Enter any pay-15th day of the 4th month after the end of the The deadline for filing your tax return, payingment you made related to the extension of timedecedent’s normal tax year. See Publication any tax you may owe, and filing a claim forto file on Form 1040, line 69. If you file Form559. refund is automatically extended if you serve in a1040EZ or Form 1040A, include that payment in combat zone. This applies to members of theyour total payments on Form 1040EZ, line 10, or Armed Forces, as well as merchant marinesExtensions of Time To File Form 1040A, line 43. Also enter “Form 4868” serving aboard vessels under the operationaland the amount paid in the space to the left ofYou may be able to get an extension of time to control of the Department of Defense, Redline 10 or line 43.file your return. Special rules apply for those who Cross personnel, accredited correspondents,
were: and civilians under the direction of the Armed
Forces in support of the Armed Forces.• Outside the United States, or Individuals Outside the
Combat zone. For purposes of the automatic• Serving in a combat zone. United States extension, the term “combat zone” includes the
following areas.You are allowed an automatic 2-month exten-Automatic Extension sion (until June 15, 2007, if you use the calendar 1. The Persian Gulf area, effective Januaryyear) to file your 2006 return and pay any federalIf you cannot file your 2006 return by the due 17, 1991.income tax due if:date, you may be able to get an automatic
2. The qualified hazardous duty area of Bos-6-month extension of time to file. 1. You are a U.S. citizen or resident, and nia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Mace-
donia, effective November 21, 1995.2. On the due date of your return:Example. If your return is due on April 16,
2007, you will have until October 15, 2007, to 3. The qualified hazardous duty area of thea. You are living outside the United Statesfile. Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/and Puerto Rico, and your main place Montenegro), Albania, the Adriatic Sea,If you do not pay the tax due by the of business or post of duty is outside and the Ionian Sea north of the 39th paral-regular due date (generally, April 15), the United States and lel, effective March 24, 1999.you will owe interest. You may also be Puerto Rico, or
CAUTION
!
charged penalties, discussed later. 4. Afghanistan, effective September 19,b. You are in military or naval service on 2001.duty outside the United States andHow to get the automatic extension. You Puerto Rico. See Publication 3, Armed Forces’ Taxcan get the automatic extension by:
Guide, for information about other tax benefits
However, if you pay the tax due after the available to military personnel serving in a com-1. Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), or
regular due date (generally, April 15), interest bat zone.2. Filing a paper form. will be charged from that date until the date the
tax is paid. Extension period. The deadline for filing your
E-file options. There are two ways you can If you served in a combat zone or qualified return, paying any tax due, and filing a claim for
use e-file to get an extension of time to file. hazardous duty area, you may be eligible for a refund is extended for at least 180 days aft er the
Complete Form 4868, Application for Automatic longer extension of time to file. See Individuals later of:
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

Page 14 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. The last day you are in a combat zone or Form W-2. If you are an employee, you should change your accounting method after that, you
receive Form W-2 from your employer. You will generally must get IRS approval.the last day the area qualifies as a combat
need the information from this form to preparezone, or
Cash method. If you use this method, reportyour return. See Form W-2  under Credit for2. The last day of any continuous qualified all items of income in the year in which youWithholding and Estimated Tax in chapter 4.hospitalization for injury from service in the actually or constructively receive them. Gener-Your employer is required to provide or sendcombat zone. ally, you deduct all expenses in the year youForm W-2 to you no later than January 31, 2007.
actually pay them. This is the method most indi-If it is mailed, you should allow adequate time toIn addition to the 180 days, your deadline is
vidual taxpayers use.receive it before contacting your employer. Ifalso extended by the number of days you had
you still do not get the form by February 15, theleft to take action with the IRS when you entered Constructive receipt. Generally, you con-
IRS can help you by requesting the form fromthe combat zone. For example, you have 3 1/2 structively receive income when it is credited to
your employer. When you request IRS help, bemonths (January 1–April 15) to file your tax your account or set apart in any way that makes
prepared to provide the following information.return. Any days left in this period when you it available to you. You do not need to have
physical possession of it. For example, interestentered the combat zone (or the entire 3 1/2 • Your name, address (including zip code),
credited to your bank account on December 31,months if you entered it before the beginning of and phone number.
2006, is taxable income to you in 2006 if youthe year) are added to the 180 days. See Exten-
• Your SSN. could have withdrawn it in 2006 (even if thesion of Deadline in Publication 3 for more infor-
amount is not entered in your passbook or with-mation. • Your dates of employment.
drawn until 2007).The above rules on the extension for filing • Your employer’s name, address (includingyour return also apply when you are deployed Garnisheed wages. If your employer useszip code), and phone number.outside the United States (away from your per- your wages to pay your debts, or if your wages
manent duty station) while participating in a des- are attached or garnisheed, the full amount is
Form 1099. If you received certain types ofignated contingency operation. constructively received by you. You must in-
income, you may receive a Form 1099. For clude these wages in income for the year you
example, if you received taxable interest of $10 would have received them.
or more, the payer is required to provide or send
Debts paid for you. If another personForm 1099 to you no later than January 31,
How Do I Prepare cancels or pays your debts (but not as a gift or2007. If it is mailed, you should allow adequate
loan), you have constructively received thetime to receive it before contacting the payer. If
My Return? amount and generally must include it in youryou still do not get the form by February 15, call
gross income for the year. See Canceled Debtsthe IRS for help.
This section explains how to get ready to fill in in chapter 12 for more information.
your tax return and when to report your income Payment to third party. If a third party isWhen Do I Report Myand expenses. It also explains how to complete paid income from property you own, you havecertain sections of the form. You may find Table Income and Expenses? constructively received the income. It is the1-6 helpful when you prepare your return. same as if you had actually received the incomeYou must figure your taxable income on theIn most cases, based on the paper return you and paid it to the third party.basis of a tax year. A “tax year” is an annualfiled last year, the IRS will mail you Form 1040,
Payment to an agent. Income an agent re-accounting period used for keeping records andForm 1040A, or Form 1040EZ with related in-
ceives for you is income you constructively re-reporting income and expenses. You must ac-structions. Before you fill in the form, look at the
ceived in the year the agent receives it. If youcount for your income and expenses in a wayform instructions to see if you need, or would indicate in a contract that your income is to bethat clearly shows your taxable income. The waybenefit from filing, a different form this year. Also paid to another person, you must include theyou do this is called an accounting method. Thissee if you need any additional forms or sched- amount in your gross income when the othersection explains which accounting periods andules. You may also want to read Does My Re- person receives it.methods you can use.turn Have To Be on Paper, earlier.
Check received or available. A valid checkIf you do not receive a tax return package in
that was made available to you before the end ofthe mail, or if you need other forms, you can Accounting Periods the tax year is constructively received by you inorder them or print them from the Internet. See
that year. A check that was “made available toHow To Get Tax Help in the back of this publica- Most individual tax returns cover a calendar you” includes a check you have already re-tion. year—the 12 months from January 1 through ceived, but not cashed or deposited. It also in-December 31. If you do not use a calendar year,Table 1-6. Six Steps for Preparing cludes, for example, your last paycheck of theyour accounting period is a fiscal year. A regularYour Return year that your employer made available for youfiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on the to pick up at the office before the end of the year.last day of any month except December. A It is constructively received by you in that year52-53-week fiscal year varies from 52 to 531 — Get your records together for income whether or not you pick it up before the end ofweeks and always ends on the same day of theand expenses. the year or wait to receive it by mail after the endweek. of the year.2 — Get the forms, schedules, and You choose your accounting period (taxpublications you need. No constructive receipt. There may beyear) when you file your first income tax return. It
facts to show that you did not constructively3 — Fill in your return. cannot be longer than 12 months.
receive income.4 — Check your return to make sure it is More information. For more information oncorrect. accounting periods, including how to change Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher, agreed
your accounting period, see Publication 538,5 — Sign and date your return. to her school board’s condition that, in her ab-
Accounting Periods and Methods. sence, she would receive only the difference6 — Attach all required forms and between her regular salary and the salary of aschedules. substitute teacher hired by the school board.
Therefore, Alice did not constructively receiveAccounting Methods
the amount by which her salary was reduced to
Substitute tax forms. You cannot use your Your accounting method is the way you account pay the substitute teacher.
own version of a tax form unless it meets the for your income and expenses. Most taxpayers
requirements explained in Publication 1167, use either the cash method or an accrual Accrual method. If you use an accrual
General Rules and Specifications for Substitute method. You choose a method when you file method, you generally report income when you
Forms and Schedules. your first income tax return. If you want to earn it, rather than when you receive it. You
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 15 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
generally deduct your expenses when you incur If you do not provide a required SSN or if you Presidential Electionthem, rather than when you pay them. provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in-
Campaign Fundcreased and any refund may be reduced.Income paid in advance. An advance pay-
ment of income is generally included in gross Adoption taxpayer identification number This fund helps pay for Presidential election
income in the year you receive it. Your method (ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting a campaigns. The fund reduces candidates’ de-
of accounting does not matter as long as the child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and cannot pendence on large contributions from individu-
income is available to you. An advance payment get an SSN for the child until the adoption is als and groups and places candidates on an
may include rent or interest you receive in ad- final, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead of equal financial footing in the general election. If
vance and pay for services you will perform an SSN. you want $3 to go to this fund, check the box. If
later. File Form W-7A, Application for Taxpayer you are filing a joint return, your spouse can also
A limited deferral until the next tax year may Identification Number for Pending U.S. Adop- have $3 go to the fund. If you check a box, your
be allowed for certain advance payments. See tions, with the IRS to get an ATIN if all of the tax or refund will not change.
Publication 538 for specific information. following are true.
• You have a child living with you who was ComputationsAdditional information. For more information
placed in your home for legal adoption.on accounting methods, including how to
The following information on entering numberschange your accounting method, see Publica- • You cannot get the child’s existing SSN on your tax return may be useful in making thetion 538. even though you have made a reasonable return easier to complete.attempt to get it from the birth parents, the
placement agency, and other persons. Rounding off dollars. You may round offSocial Security Number
cents to whole dollars on your return and sched-• You cannot get an SSN for the child fromYou must enter your social security number ules. If you do round to whole dollars, you mustthe SSA because, for example, the adop-(SSN) in the space provided on your return. Be round all amounts. To round, drop amountstion is not final.sure the SSN on your return is the same as the under 50 cents and increase amounts from 50 to
• You cannot get an individual taxpayerSSN on your social security card. If you are 99 cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39
identification number (ITIN) (discussedmarried, enter the SSNs for both you and your becomes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3.
later) for the child.spouse, whether you file jointly or separately. If you have to add two or more amounts to
If you are filing a joint return, write the SSNs figure the amount to enter on a line, include• You are eligible to claim the child as ain the same order as the names. Use this same cents when adding the amounts and round offdependent on your tax return.order in submitting other forms and documents only the total.
After the adoption is final, you must apply for anto the IRS.
SSN for the child. You cannot continue using the Example. You receive two Forms W-2: one
ATIN.Name change. If you changed your name be- showing wages of $5,000.55 and one showing
cause of marriage, divorce, etc., be sure to re- wages of $18,500.73. On Form 1040, line 7, youSee Form W-7A for more information.port the change to your local Social Security would enter $23,501 ($5,000.55 + $18,500.73 =
Administration (SSA) office before filing your Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse is $23,501.28), not $23,502 ($5,001 + $18,501).
return. This prevents delays in processing your a nonresident alien and you file a joint or sepa-
Equal amounts. If you are asked to enter thereturn and issuing refunds. It also safeguards rate return, your spouse must have either an
smaller or larger of two equal amounts, enteryour future social security benefits. SSN or an ITIN. If your spouse is not eligible for
that amount.an SSN, see the next discussion.
Dependent’s social security number. You
Individual taxpayer identification number Example. Line 1 is $500. Line 3 is $500.must provide the SSN of each dependent you
(ITIN). The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are Line 5 asks you to enter the smaller of line 1 or 3.claim, regardless of the dependent’s age. This
a nonresident or resident alien and you do not Enter $500 on line 5.requirement applies to all dependents (not just
have and are not eligible to get an SSN. Thisyour children) claimed on your tax return. Negative amounts. If you need to enter aalso applies to an alien spouse or dependent. To
Exception. If your child was born and died negative amount, put the amount in parenthesesapply for an ITIN, file Form W-7 with the IRS. It
in 2006 and you do not have an SSN for the rather than using a minus sign. To combineusually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to get an ITIN.
child, you may attach a copy of the child’s birth positive and negative amounts, add all the posi-Enter the ITIN on your tax return wherever an
certificate instead. If you do, enter “DIED” in tive amounts together and then subtract theSSN is requested.
column (2) of line 6c (Form 1040 or 1040A). negative amounts.If you are applying for an ITIN for your-
self, your spouse, or a dependent inNo social security number. File Form SS-5,
Attachmentsorder to file your tax return, attach yourApplication for a Social Security Card, with your
TIP
completed tax return to your Form W-7. See thelocal SSA office to get an SSN for yourself or Depending on the form you file and the itemsForm W-7 instructions for how and where to file.your dependent. It usually takes about 2 weeks reported on your return, you may have to com-to get an SSN. If you or your dependent is not An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not plete additional schedules and forms and attacheligible for an SSN, see Individual taxpayer entitle you or your dependent to social them to your return.identification number (ITIN), later. security benefits or change the em-CAUTION
!
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, you You may be able to file a paperlessployment or immigration status of either of youmust show proof of age, identity, and citizenship return using IRS e-file. There’s nothingunder U.S. law.or alien status with your Form SS-5. If you are 12 to sign, attach, or mail, not even your
TIP
or older and have never been assigned an SSN, Forms W-2.Penalty for not providing social securityyou must appear in person with this proof at an number. If you do not include your SSN or theSSA office. Form W-2. Form W-2 is a statement from yourSSN of your spouse or dependent as required,Form SS-5 is available at any SSA office, on employer of wages and other compensationyou may have to pay a penalty. See the discus-the Internet at www.socialsecurity.gov, or by paid to you and taxes withheld from your pay.sion on Penalties, later, for more information.calling 1-800-772-1213. If you have any ques- You should have a Form W-2 from each em-
tions about which documents you can use as SSN on correspondence. If you write to the ployer. Be sure to attach a copy of Form W-2 in
proof of age, identity, or citizenship, contact your IRS about your tax account, be sure to include the place indicated on the front page of your
SSA office. your SSN (and the name and SSN of your return. Attach it only to the front page of your
If your dependent does not have an SSN by spouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre- return, not to any attachments. For  more infor-
the time your return is due, you may want to ask spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden- mation, see Form W-2 in chapter 4.
for an extension of time to file, as explained tify your account, this helps the IRS respond to If you received a Form 1099-R, Di stributions
earlier under When Do I Have To File. your correspondence promptly. From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

Page 16 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con- If you e-file your return, you can use an The preparer must give you a copy of your
electronic signature to sign your return. return in addition to the copy filed with the IRS.tracts, etc., showing federal income tax with-
See Does My Return Have To Be on If you prepare your own return, leave thisheld, attach a copy of that form in the place
TIP
Paper, earlier. area blank. If another person prepares your re-indicated on the front page of your return.
turn and does not charge you, that personIf you are due a refund, it cannot be issued
should not sign your return.unless you have signed your return.Form 1040EZ. There are no additional sched- If you have questions about whether aEnter your occupation in the space providedules to file with Form 1040EZ. preparer must sign your return, contact any IRSin the signature section. If you file a joint return, office.enter both your occupation and your spouse’s
Form 1040A. Attach the additional schedules occupation. Entering your daytime phone num-
and forms that you had to complete behind the ber may help speed the processing of your re- Refunds
Form 1040A in order by number. If you are filing turn.
Schedule EIC, put it last. Do not attach items When you complete your return, you will deter-
unless required to do so. When someone can sign for you. You can mine if you paid more income tax than you
appoint an agent to sign your return if you are: owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amount
you overpaid or, if you file Form 1040 or FormForm 1040. Attach any forms and schedules 1. Unable to sign the return because of dis- 1040A, you can choose to apply all or part of thebehind Form 1040 in order of the “Attachment ease or injury, overpayment to your next year’s (2007) esti-Sequence Number” shown in the upper right mated tax. You cannot have your overpayment2. Absent from the United States for a contin-corner of the form or schedule. Then arrange all applied to your 2007 estimated tax if you fileuous period of at least 60 days before theother statements or attachments in the same Form 1040EZ.due date for filing your return, ororder as the forms and schedules they relate to
If you choose to have a 2006 overpay-and attach them last. Do not attach items unless 3. Given permission to do so by the IRS of-
ment applied to your 2007 estimatedrequired to do so. fice in your area.
tax, you cannot change your mind andCAUTION
!
have any of it refunded to you after the due datePower of attorney. A return signed by anThird Party Designee (without extensions) of your 2006 return.agent in any of these cases must have a power
of attorney (POA) attached that authorizes the Follow the form instructions to complete theYou can authorize the IRS to discuss your return
agent to sign for you. You can use a POA that entries to claim your refund and/or to apply yourwith a friend, family member, or any other per-
states that the agent is granted authority to sign overpayment to your 2007 estimated tax.son you choose. If you check the “Yes” box in the return, or you can use Form 2848, Power ofthe Third party designee area of your 2006 tax If your refund for 2006 is large, youAttorney and Declaration of Representative.return and provide the information required, you may want to decrease the amount ofPart I of Form 2848 must state that the agent isare authorizing: income tax withheld from your pay in
TIP
granted authority to sign the return. 2007. See chapter 4 for more information.1. The IRS to call the designee to answer any Unable to sign. If the taxpayer is mentallyquestions that arise during the processing Instead of getting a pa-incompetent and cannot sign the return, it must
of your return, and Simple. Safe. Secure.
DIRECT DEPOSIT
per check, you may bebe signed by a court-appointed representative
able to have your refund deposited directly intowho can act for the taxpayer.2. The designee to: your account at a bank or other financial institu-If the taxpayer is mentally competent but tion. Follow the form instructions to request di-a. Give information that is missing from physically unable to sign the return or POA, a rect deposit.your return to the IRS, valid “signature” is defined under state law. It If the direct deposit cannot be done, the IRScan be anything that clearly indicates the tax-b. Call the IRS for information about the will send a check instead.payer’s intent to sign. For example, the tax-processing of your return or the status payer’s “X” with the signatures of two witnessesof your refund or payments, Split refunds. If you choose direct deposit,might be considered a valid signature under a you may be able to split the refund and have itc. Receive copies of notices or transcripts state’s law. deposited among two or three accounts. If yourelated to your return, upon request, want to split your refund, check the box on theand Spouse unable to sign. If your spouse is una- line for the amount you want refunded to you.ble to sign for any reason, see Signing a joint Then, complete Form 8888, Direct Deposit ofd. Respond to certain IRS notices about return in chapter 2. Refund to More Than One Account, and attach itmath errors, offsets (see Refunds,
to your return.later), and return preparation. Child’s return. If a child has to file a tax return
but cannot sign the return, the child’s parent, Overpayment less than one dollar. If yourThe authorization will automatically end no guardian, or another legally responsible person overpayment is less than one dollar, you will notlater than the due date (without any extensions) must sign the child’s name, followed by the get a refund unless you ask for it in writing.for filing your 2007 tax return. This is April 15, words “By (your signature), parent for minor2008, for most people. Cashing your refund check. Cash your taxchild.”
refund check soon after you receive it. ChecksSee your form instructions for more informa-
not cashed within 12 months of the date they aretion. Paid Preparer issued will be canceled and the proceeds re-If you want to allow the paid preparer turned to the IRS.Generally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist inwho signed your return to discuss it If your check has been canceled, you canpreparing, or review your tax return must sign itwith the IRS, just enter “Preparer” in
TIP
apply to the IRS to have it reissued.and fill in the other blanks in the paid preparer’sthe space for the designee’s name.
area of your return. Refund more or less than expected. If you
A paid preparer can sign the return manually receive a check for a refund you are not entitledSignatures or use a rubber stamp, mechanical device, or to, or for an overpayment that should have been
computer software program. The preparer is credited to estimated tax, do not cash the check.You must sign and date your return. If you file a personally responsible for affixing his or her sig- Call the IRS.joint return, both you and your spouse must sign nature to the return. If you receive a check for more than thethe return, even if only one of you had income. If the preparer is self-employed (that is, not refund you claimed, do not cash the check until
If you file a joint return, both spouses employed by any person or business to prepare you receive a notice explaining the difference.
are generally liable for the tax, and the the return), he or she should check the If your refund check is for less than you
entire tax liability may be assessed self-employed box in the Paid Preparer’s Use claimed, it should be accompanied by a noticeCAUTION
!
against either spouse. See chapter 2. Only  space on the return. explaining the difference. Cashing the check
Page 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 17 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
does not stop you from claiming an additional of the other spouse (or former spouse) that were Electronic payment options. Electronic pay-
amount of refund. incorrectly reported on the joint return. For infor- ment options are convenient, safe, and secure
mation on innocent spouses, see Relief fromIf you did not receive a notice and you have methods for paying individual income taxes.
joint liability under Filing a Joint Return in chap-any questions about the amount of your refund, There’s no check to write, money order to buy,
ter 2.you should wait 2 weeks. If you still have not or voucher to mail. Payments can be made 24
received a notice, call the IRS. hours a day, 7 days a week.
Amount You Owe Credit card. You can use your AmericanOffset against debts. If you are due a refund
Express® Card, Discover® Card, MasterCard®but have not paid certain amounts you owe, all When you complete your return, you will deter- card, or Visa® card.or part of your refund may be used to pay all or mine if you have paid the full amount of tax thatpart of the past-due amount. This includes To pay by credit card, call a service provideryou owe. If you owe additional tax, you shouldpast-due federal income tax, other federal debts and follow the recorded instructions. You canpay it with your return.(such as student loans), state income tax, and also pay by credit card over the Internet using aIf the IRS figures your tax for you, you willchild and spousal support payments. You will be service provider’s website.receive a bill for any tax that is due. You shouldnotified if the refund you claimed has been offset pay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of The service providers charge a convenienceagainst your debts. your return, if later). See Tax Figured by IRS in fee based on the amount you are paying. Fees
Joint return and injured spouse. When a chapter 30. may vary between the providers. You will be told
joint return is filed and only one spouse owes a what the fee is during the transaction and willIf you do not pay your tax when due,past-due amount, the other spouse can be con- have the option to continue or end the transac-you may have to pay a failure-to-paysidered an injured spouse. An injured spouse tion. You may also obtain the convenience feepenalty. See Penalties, later. For moreCAUTION
!
can get a refund for his or her share of the by calling the service provider’s automated cus-information about your balance due, see Publi-overpayment that would otherwise be used to tomer service telephone number or visiting theircation 594, The IRS Collection Process.pay the past-due amount. respective website.To be considered an injured spouse, you If the amount you owe for 2006 is large, Do not add the convenience fee to yourmust: you may want to increase the amount tax payment.of income tax withheld from your pay or
TIP
1. File a joint return, and CAUTION
!
make estimated tax payments for 2007. See
2. Have reported income (such as wages, in- chapter 4 for more information.
terest, etc.), or If you pay by credit card, write the confirma-
tion number you were given at the end of the3. Have made and reported tax payments
transaction and the tax payment amount in theHow To Pay(such as federal income tax withheld from
upper left corner of page 1 of your tax return.wages or estimated tax payments), or If you have an amount due on your tax return,claimed the earned income credit or other you can pay by check, money order, or credit Service Providersrefundable credit, and card. If you filed electronically, you also may be
4. Not be legally obligated to pay the able to make your payment electronically. Official Payments Corporation
past-due amount. You do not have to pay if the amount To make a
payment, call .... 1-800-2PAY-TAXSMyou owe is less than $1.
Note. If the injured spouse’s permanent o r ........... 1-800-272-9829
TIP
home is in a community property state, then the For Customer
injured spouse must only meet (1) and (4) Service ........ 1-877-754-4413
above. For more information, see Publication Check or money order. If you pay by check or Web Address .... www.officialpayments.com555, Community Property. money order, make it out to the “United States
If you are an injured spouse, you must file Treasury.” Show your correct name, address, Link2Gov CorporationForm 8379, Injured Spouse Allocation, to have SSN, daytime phone number, and the tax year
your portion of the overpayment refunded to To make aand form number on the front of your check or
you. Follow the instructions for the form. payment, call .... 1-888-PAY-1040SMmoney order. If you are filing a joint return, enter
o r ........... 1-888-729-1040If you have not filed your joint return and you the SSN shown first on your tax return.
know that your joint refund will be offset, file For example, if you file Form 1040 for 2006 For CustomerForm 8379 with your return. You should receive and you owe additional tax, show your name, Service ........ 1-888-658-5465
your refund within 14 weeks from the date the address, SSN, daytime phone number, and Web Address .... www.PAY1040.compaper return is filed or within 11 weeks from the “2006 Form 1040” on the front of your check or
date the return is filed electronically. money order. If you file an amended return
If you filed your joint return and your joint You can e-file and pay in a single step by(Form 1040X) for 2005 and you owe tax, show
refund was offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When your name, address, SSN, daytime phone num- authorizing a credit card payment. This option is
filed after offset, it can take up to 8 weeks to ber, and “2005 Form 1040X” on the front of your available through some tax software packages
receive your refund. Do not attach the previously check or money order. and tax professionals. You can also pay by
filed tax return, but do include copies of all Enclose your payment with your return, but credit card using the telephone or the Internet.
Forms W-2 and W-2G for both spouses and any do not attach it to the form. If you filed Form Electronic funds withdrawal. You canForms 1099 that show income tax withheld. The 1040, complete Form 1040-V, Payment e-file and pay in a single step by authorizing anprocessing of Form 8379 may be delayed if Voucher, and enclose it with your payment and
electronic funds withdrawal from your checkingthese forms are not attached, or if the form is return. Form 1040-V will help us process your
or savings account. If you select this paymentincomplete when filed. payment more accurately and efficiently. Follow
option, you will need to have your account num-A separate Form 8379 must be filed for each the instructions that come with the form.
ber, your financial institution’s routing transittax year to be considered. Do not mail cash with your return. If you pay
number, and account type (checking or sav-cash at an IRS office, keep the receipt as part ofAn injured spouse claim is different ings). You can schedule the payment for anyyour records.from an innocent spouse relief request. future date up to and including the return dueAn injured spouse uses Form 8379 to Payment not honored. If your check orCAUTION
!
date.request the division of the tax overpayment at- money order is not honored by your bank (or
tributed to each spouse. An innocent spouse other financial institution) and the IRS does not Be sure to check with your financial
uses Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse receive the funds, you still owe the tax. In addi- institution to make sure that an elec-
Relief, to request relief from joint liability for tax, tion, you may be subject to a dishonored check tronic funds withdrawal is allowed andCAUTION
!
interest, and penalties on a joint return for items penalty. to get the correct routing and account numbers.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Page 18 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Electronic Federal Tax Payment System of Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Re- pay in full, you may request a payment agree-
(EFTPS). EFTPS is a free tax payment system fund. ment. The OPA application allows you, or your
that all individual and business taxpayers can authorized representative, to self-qualify for andInterest and certain penalties may also be
use. You can make payments online or by apply for a payment agreement, receive notifica-suspended for a limited period if you filed your
phone. tion of approval, and arrange a payment sched-return by the due date (including extensions)
ule.Here are just a few of the benefits of this and the IRS does not provide you with a notice
To use the OPA application, you must haveeasy-to-use system. specifically stating your liability and the basis for
filed all required tax returns. You should alsoit before the close of the 18-month period begin-• Convenient and flexible. You can use it to have the following information available:ning on the later of:schedule payments in advance. For exam-
• Balance due notice from the IRS.ple, you can schedule estimated tax pay- • The date the return is filed, or
ments (Form 1040-ES) or installment • Social security number or individual tax-• The due date of the return without regardagreement payments weekly, monthly, or payer identification number.to extensions.quarterly.
• Personal identification number, which canFor more information, see Publication 556.• Fast and accurate. You can make a tax be established online using the caller iden-payment in minutes. Because there are tification number from the balance due no-Installment Agreementverification steps along the way, you can tice.check and review your information before If you cannot pay the full amount due with yoursending it.  For more information and to access the OPAreturn, you can ask to make monthly installment
application, go to www.irs.gov , use thepayments for the full or a partial amount. How-• Safe and secure. It offers the highest
pull-down menu under “I need to...” and selectever, you will be charged interest and may beavailable levels of security. Every transac-
“Set Up a Payment Plan.”charged a late payment penalty on the tax nottion receives an immediate confirmation.
paid by the date your return is due, even if your
request to pay in installments is granted. If yourFor more information or details on enrolling, Gift To Reduce Debtrequest is granted, you must also pay a fee. Tovisit www.eftps.gov or call EFTPS Customer
Held by the Publiclimit the interest and penalty charges, pay asService at 1-800-316-6541 (individual) or
much of the tax as possible with your return. But1-800-555-4477 (business). TTY/TDD help is
before requesting an installment agreement,available by calling 1-800-733-4829. You can make a contribution (gift) to
you should consider other less costly alterna- reduce debt held by the public. If you
Estimated tax payments. Do not include any tives, such as a bank loan. wish to do so, make a separate check
2007 estimated tax payment in the payment for To ask for an installment agreement, use payable to “Bureau of the Public Debt.”
your 2006 income tax return. See chapter 4 for Form 9465, Installment Agreement Request. Send your check to:
information on how to pay estimated tax. You should receive a response to your request
within 30 days. But if you file your return after
March 31, it may take longer for a reply. Bureau of the Public Debt
Interest In addition to paying by check or money Department G
order, you can use a credit card or EFTPS to P.O. Box 2188Interest is charged on tax you do not pay by the make installment agreement payments. See Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188.due date of your return. Interest is charged even Credit card and Electronic Federal Tax Paymentif you get an extension of time for filing. System (EFTPS), under How To Pay, earlier. Or, enclose your separate check in the
If the IRS figures your tax for you, inter- envelope with your income tax return. Do not
Guaranteed availability of installment agree-est cannot start earlier than the 31st add this gift to any tax you owe.
ment. The IRS must agree to accept the fullday after the IRS sends you a bill. For
TIP
You can deduct this gift as a charitable con-payment of your tax liability in installments if, asinformation, see Tax Figured by IRS in chapter tribution on next year’s tax return if you itemizeof the date you offer to enter into the agreement:30. your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
1. Your total taxes (not counting interest,Interest on penalties. Interest is charged on penalties, additions to the tax, or additional Peel-Off Address Labelthe failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-related amounts) do not exceed $10,000,penalty, and the fraud penalty from the due date After you have completed your return, peel off2. In the last 5 years, you (and your spouse ifof the return (including extensions) to the date of the label with your name and address from thethe liability relates to a joint return) havepayment. Interest on other penalties starts on back of your tax return package and place it innot:the date of notice and demand, but is not the appropriate area of the Form 1040, Formcharged on penalties paid within 21 calendar 1040A, or Form 1040EZ you send to the IRS. Ifa. Failed to file any required income taxdays from the date of the notice (or within 10 you have someone prepare your return, givereturn,business days if the notice is for $100,000 or that person your label to use on your tax return.more). b. Failed to pay any tax shown on any If you file electronically and you are not eligi-
such return, or ble or choose not to sign your return using yourInterest due to IRS error or delay. All or part PIN, use your label on Form 8453 or 8453-OL.c. Entered into an installment agreementof any interest you were charged can be forgiven (More information on electronic filing is foundfor the payment of any income tax,if the interest is due to an unreasonable error or earlier in this chapter.)delay by an officer or employee of the IRS in The label helps the IRS to correctly identify3. You show you cannot pay your income taxperforming a ministerial or managerial act. your account. It also saves processing costs andin full when due,A ministerial act is a procedural or mechani- speeds up processing so that refunds can becal act that occurs during the processing of your 4. The tax will be paid in full in 3 years or issued sooner.case. A managerial act includes personnel less, and
transfers and extended personnel training. A You must write your SSN in the spaces5. You agree to comply with the tax lawsdecision concerning the proper application of provided on your tax return.while your agreement is in effect.federal tax law is not a ministerial or managerial CAUTION
!
act.
The interest can be forgiven only if you are Online payment agreement (OPA) applica-
not responsible in any important way for the tion. You may now be able to apply online for Correcting the label. Make necessary name
error or delay and the IRS has notified you in a payment agreement if you owe federal tax, and address changes on the label. If y ou have
writing of the deficiency or payment. For more interest, and penalties. If you have received a an apartment number that is not sh own on the
information, see Publication 556, Examination balance due notice from the IRS and you cannot label, please write it in. If you ch anged your
Page 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 19 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
name, see the discussion under Social Security If you file a claim for refund, you must be able Account transcript. This contains informa-
Number, earlier. tion on the financial status of the account, suchto prove by your records that you have overpaid
as payments made on the account, penalty as-your tax.
No label. If you did not receive a tax return sessments, and adjustments made by you or the
package with a label, print or type your name How long to keep records. You must keep IRS after the return was filed. Return information
and address in the spaces provided at the top of your records for as long as they are important for is limited to items such as tax liability and esti-
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you are married the federal tax law. mated tax payments. Account transcripts are
filing a separate return, do not enter your available for most returns. Most requests will beKeep records that support an item of income
spouse’s name in the space at the top. Instead, processed within 20 business days.or a deduction appearing on a return until the
enter his or her name in the space provided on period of limitations for the return runs out. (A Record of account. This is a combinationline 3. period of limitations is the period of time after of line item information and later adjustments toIf you file Form 1040EZ and you do not have which no legal action can be brought.) For as- the account. This information is available for thea label, print or type this information in the sessment of tax you owe, this generally is 3 current year and 3 prior tax years. Most requestsspaces provided. years from the date you filed the return. For filing will be processed within 20 business days.a claim for credit or refund, this generally is 3
P.O. box. If your post office does not deliver years from the date you filed the original return, More information. For more information onmail to your street address and you have a P.O. or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, which- recordkeeping, see Publication 552, Record-box, print your P.O. box number on the line for ever is later. Returns filed before the due date keeping for Individuals.your present home address instead of your are treated as filed on the due date.
street address. If you did not report income that you should Interest on Refundshave reported on your return, and it is more thanForeign address. If your address is outside 25% of the income shown on the return, the If you are due a refund, you may get interest onthe United States or its possessions or territo- period of limitations does not run out until 6 it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly.ries, enter the information on the line for “City, years after you filed the return. If a return is falsetown or post office, state, and ZIP code” in the If the refund is made within 45 days after theor fraudulent with intent to evade tax, or if nofollowing order: due date of your return, no interest will be paid. Ifreturn is filed, an action can generally be brought you file your return after the due date (includingat any time.1. City, extensions), no interest will be paid if the refundYou may need to keep records relating to the is made within 45 days after the date you filed. If2. Province or state, and basis of property longer than the period of limita- the refund is not made within this 45-day period,tions. Keep those records as long as they are3. Name of foreign country. (Do not abbrevi- interest will be paid from the due date of theimportant in figuring the basis of the original orate the name of the country.) return or from the date you filed, whichever isreplacement property. Generally, this means for later.Follow the country’s practice for entering the as long as you own the property and, after youpostal code. Accepting a refund check does not changedispose of it, for the period of limitations that your right to claim an additional refund and inter-applies to you. See chapter 13 for information on est. File your claim within the period of time thatbasis. applies. See Amended Returns and Claims for
Refund, later. If you do not accept a refundWhere Do I File? Note.  If you receive a Form W-2, keep Copy check, no more interest will be paid on the over-C until you begin receiving social security bene- payment included in the check.After you complete your return, you must send it fits. This will help protect your benefits in case
to the IRS. You can mail it or you may be able to there is a question about your work record or Interest on erroneous refund. All or part offile it electronically. See Does My Return Have earnings in a particular year. Review the infor- any interest you were charged on an erroneousTo Be on Paper, earlier. mation shown on your annual (for workers over refund generally will be forgiven. Any interestage 25) Social Security Statement. charged for the period before demand for repay-Mailing your return. If an addressed envel-
ment was made will be forgiven unless:ope came with your tax forms package, you Copies of returns. You should keep copies of
should mail your return in that envelope. tax returns you have filed and the tax forms 1. You, or a person related to you, causedIf you do not have an addressed envelope or package as part of your records. They may be the erroneous refund in any way, orif you moved during the year, mail your return to helpful in amending filed returns or preparing
2. The refund is more than $50,000.the address shown at the end of this publication future ones.
for the area where you now live. If you need a copy of a prior year tax return, For example, if you claimed a refund of $100
you can get it from the IRS. Use Form 4506, on your return, but the IRS made an error and
Request for Copy of Tax Return. There is a sent you $1,000, you would not be charged
charge for a copy of a return, which you must interest for the time you held the $900 differ-
pay with Form 4506. It may take up to 60 days to ence. You must, however, repay the $900 whenWhat Happens After
process your request. the IRS asks.
I File? If your main home, principal place of
Past-Due Refundbusiness, or tax records are located inAfter you send your return to the IRS, you may a Presidentially declared disaster area,
TIP
have some questions. This section discusses You can check on the status of your 2006 refundthe charge will be waived.concerns you may have about recordkeeping, if it has been at least 6 weeks from the date you
your refund, and what to do if you move. filed your return (3 weeks if you filed electroni-Transcript of tax return. If you just need in-
cally). Be sure to have a copy of your 2006 taxformation from your return, you can order a
return available because you will need to knowWhat Records Should transcript by calling 1-800-829-1040, or using
the filing status, the first SSN shown on theForm 4506-T, Request for Transcript of Tax Re-I Keep? return, and the exact whole-dollar amount of theturn. There is no fee for a transcript.
refund. To check on your refund, do one of theYou can request the following items.You must keep records so that you can following.
Return transcript. This includes most ofprepare a complete and accurate in- • Go to www.irs.gov, and click on “Where’sthe line items of a tax return as filed with the IRS.come tax return. The law does not re-RECORDS
My Refund.”Return transcripts are available for the currentquire any special form of records. However, you
year and returns processed during the prior 3should keep all receipts, canceled checks or • Call 1-800-829-4477 24 hours a day, 7
processing years. Most requests will beother proof of payment, and any other records to days a week for automated refund infor-
processed within 10 business days.support any deductions or credits you claim. mation.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

Page 20 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours If you cannot pay the full amount due with your claim within 3 years after you filed your
shown in your form instructions. your return, you can ask to make monthly install- original return, you can get a refund of up to
ment payments. See Installment Agreement , $700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus the
earlier. 4-month extension period immediately before
Change of Address If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part of you filed the claim.
the overpayment refunded to you, or you can
If you have moved, file your return using your apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If you Example 2. The situation is the same as in
new address. choose to get a refund, it will be sent separately Example 1, except you filed your return on Octo-
If you move after you filed your return, you from any refund shown on your original return. ber 27, 2004, 2 1/2 months after the extension
should give the IRS clear and concise written period ended. You paid an additional $200 onFiling Form 1040X. After you finish yournotification of your change of address. Send the that date. On October 29, 2007, you filed anForm 1040X, check it to be sure that it is com-notification to the Internal Revenue Service amended return and claimed a refund of $700.plete. Do not forget to show the year of yourCenter serving your old address. You can use Although you filed your claim within 3 years fromoriginal return and explain all changes youForm 8822, Change of Address. If you are ex- the date you filed your original return, the refundmade. Be sure to attach any forms or schedulespecting a refund, also notify the post office serv- was limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3needed to explain your changes. Mail your Forming your old address. This will help in forwarding years plus the 4-month extension period imme-1040X to the Internal Revenue Service Centeryour check to your new address (unless you diately before you filed the claim. The estimatedserving the area where you now live (as shownchose direct deposit of your refund). If you are tax of $500 paid before that period cannot bein the instructions to the form). However, if youaffected by a Presidentially declared disaster, refunded or credited.are filing Form 1040X in response to a noticeyou may be able to change your address with you received from the IRS, mail it to the addressthe IRS orally. If you file a claim more than 3 years aftershown on the notice. Do not use the addressesBe sure to include your SSN (and the name you file your return, the credit or refund cannotlisted at the end of this publication.and SSN of your spouse, if you filed a joint be more than the tax you paid within the 2 yearsFile a separate form for each tax year in-return) in any correspondence with the IRS. immediately before you file the claim.volved.
Time for filing a claim for refund. Generally, Example. You filed your 2003 tax return on
you must file your claim for a credit or refund April 15, 2004. You paid taxes of $500. On
What If I Made within 3 years after the date you filed your origi- November 3, 2005, after an examination of your
nal return or within 2 years after the date you 2003 return, you had to pay an additional tax of
a Mistake? paid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filed $200. On May 10, 2007, you file a claim for a
before the due date (without regard to exten- refund of $300. However, because you filed your
Errors may delay your refund or result in notices sions) are considered filed on the due date claim more than 3 years after you filed your
being sent to you. If you discover an error, you (even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, or return, your refund will be limited to the $200 you
can file an amended return or claim for refund. legal holiday). These time periods are sus- paid during the 2 years immediately before you
pended while you are financially disabled, dis- filed your claim.
cussed later.Amended Returns and If the last day for claiming a credit or refund is Financially disabled. The time periods for
Claims for Refund a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you can claiming a refund are suspended for the period
file the claim on the next business day. in which you are financially disabled. For a jointYou should correct your return if, after you have If you do not file a claim within this period, income tax return, only one spouse has to befiled it, you find that: you may not be entitled to a credit or a refund. financially disabled for the time period to be
suspended. You are financially disabled if you1. You did not report some income, Late-filed return. If you were due a refund are unable to manage your financial affairs be-but you did not file a return, you generally must2. You claimed deductions or credits you cause of a medically determinable physical orfile your return within 3 years from the date theshould not have claimed, mental impairment which can be expected toreturn was due (including extensions) to get that result in death or which has lasted or can be3. You did not claim deductions or credits you refund. Generally, your return must be post- expected to last for a continuous period of notcould have claimed, or marked no later than 3 years from the date the less than 12 months. However, you are notreturn was due (including extensions). For infor-4. You should have claimed a different filing treated as financially disabled during any periodmation on postmarks, see Filing on time, understatus. (Once you file a joint return, you your spouse or any other person is authorized toWhen Do I Have To File, earlier.cannot choose to file separate returns for act on your behalf in financial matters.
that year after the due date of the return. Limit on amount of refund. If you file your To claim that you are financially disabled,However, an executor may be able to claim within 3 years after the date you filed your you must send in the following written state-make this change for a deceased spouse.) return, the credit or refund cannot be more than ments with your claim for refund.
the part of the tax paid within the 3-year periodIf you need a copy of your return, see Copies of 1. A statement from your qualified physician(plus any extension of time for filing your return)returns under What Records Should I Keep , that includes:immediately before you filed the claim. This timeearlier in this chapter.
period is suspended while you are financially a. The name and a description of yourForm 1040X. Use Form 1040X, Amended disabled, discussed later. physical or mental impairment,U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to correct a Tax paid. Payments, including estimated b. The physician’s medical opinion that thereturn you have already filed. An amended tax tax payments, made before the due date (with- impairment prevented you from manag-return cannot be filed electronically under the out regard to extensions) of the original return ing your financial affairs,e-file system. are considered paid on the due date. For exam-
c. The physician’s medical opinion that theCompleting Form 1040X. On Form 1040X, ple, income tax withheld during the year is con-
impairment was or can be expected towrite your income, deductions, and credits as sidered paid on the due date of the return, April
result in death, or that its duration hasyou originally reported them on your return, the 15 for most taxpayers.
lasted, or can be expected to last, atchanges you are making, and the corrected
least 12 months,amounts. Then figure the tax on the corrected Example 1. You made estimated tax pay-
amount of taxable income and the amount you ments of $500 and got an automatic extension of d. The specific time period (to the best ofowe or your refund. time to August 16, 2004, to file your 2003 in- the physician’s knowledge), andIf you owe tax, pay the full amount with Form come tax return. When you filed your return on
e. The following certification signed by the1040X. The tax owed will not be subtracted from that date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On
physician: “I hereby certify that, to theany amount you had credited to your estimated August 15, 2007, you filed an amended return
best of my knowledge and belief, thetax. and claimed a refund of $700. Because you filed
Page 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 21 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
above representations are true, correct, return or the date you filed your original return, (including extensions) to qualify for  this reduced
and complete.” whichever is later, to the date you filed the penalty.
amended return. However, if the refund is not If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rate
2. A statement made by the person signing made within 45 days after you file the amended will increase to 1% at the start of the first month
the claim for credit or refund that no per- return, interest will be paid up to the date the beginning at least 10 days after the day that the
son, including your spouse, was author- refund is paid. notice is issued. If a notice and demand for
ized to act on your behalf in financial immediate payment is issued, the rate will in-Reduced refund. Your refund may be re-matters during the period of disability (or crease to 1% at the start of the first monthduced by an additional tax liability that has beenthe exact dates that a person was author- beginning after the day that the notice and de-assessed against you.ized to act for you). mand is issued.Also, your refund may be reduced by This penalty cannot be more than 25% ofamounts you owe for past-due child support, your unpaid tax. You will not have to pay theExceptions for special types of refunds. If debts to another federal agency, or for state tax. penalty if you can show that you had a goodyou file a claim for one of the items listed below, If your spouse owes these debts, see Offset reason for not paying your tax on time.the dates and limits discussed earlier may not against debts , under Refunds, earlier, for theapply. These items, and where to get more infor- Combined penalties. If both the failure-to-filecorrect refund procedures to follow.mation, are as follows. penalty and the failure-to-pay penalty (dis-Effect on state tax liability. If your return is cussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (or• Bad debt. (See Nonbusiness Bad Debts in changed for any reason, it may affect your state 15%) failure-to-file penalty is reduced by thechapter 14.) income tax liability. This includes changes made failure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file your• Worthless security. (See Worthless securi- as a result of an examination of your return by return more than 60 days after the due date orties in chapter 14.) the IRS. Contact your state tax agency for more extended due date, the minimum penalty is theinformation. smaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax.• Foreign tax paid or accrued. (See Publica-
tion 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Individu- Accuracy-related penalty. You may have toPenaltiesals.) pay an accuracy-related penalty if you underpay
your tax because:• Net operating loss carryback. (See Publi- The law provides penalties for failure to file re-cation 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs) turns or pay taxes as required. 1. You show negligence or disregard of thefor Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.) rules or regulations, or
• Carryback of certain business tax credits. 2. You substantially understate your incomeCivil Penalties(See Form 3800, General Business tax.Credit.)
If you do not file your return and pay your tax by The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay-• Claim based on an agreement with the the due date, you may have to pay a penalty. ment. The penalty will not be figured on any partIRS extending the period for assessment You may also have to pay a penalty if you of an underpayment on which the fraud penaltyof tax. substantially understate your tax, understate a (discussed later) is charged.reportable transaction, file a frivolous return, or
Negligence or disregard. The term “negli-fail to supply your SSN or individual taxpayerProcessing claims for refund. Claims are gence” includes a failure to make a reasonableidentification number. If you provide fraudulentusually processed shortly after they are filed. attempt to comply with the tax law or to exerciseinformation on your return, you may have to payYour claim may be accepted as filed, disal- ordinary and reasonable care in preparing aa civil fraud penalty.lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is return. Negligence also includes failure to keepexamined, the procedures are the same as in Filing late. If you do not file your return by the adequate books and records. You will not havethe examination of a tax return. due date (including extensions), you may have to pay a negligence penalty if you have a rea-If your claim is disallowed, you will receive an to pay a failure-to-file penalty. The penalty is sonable basis for a position you took.explanation of why it was disallowed. usually 5% for each month or part of a month The term “disregard” includes any careless,that a return is late, but not more than 25%. The reckless, or intentional disregard.Taking your claim to court. You can sue for a penalty is based on the tax not paid by the duerefund in court, but you must first file a timely Adequate disclosure. You can avoid thedate (without regard to extensions).claim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your penalty for disregard of rules or regulations ifclaim or does not act on your claim within 6 Fraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud, you adequately disclose on your return a posi-months after you file it, you can then take your the penalty is 15% for each month or part of a tion that has at least a reasonable basis. Seeclaim to court. For information on the burden of month that your return is late, up to a maximum Disclosure statement, later.proof in a court proceeding, see Publication 556. of 75%. This exception will not apply to an item that isThe IRS provides a fast method to move your attributable to a tax shelter. In addition, it will notReturn over 60 days late. If you file yourclaim to court if: apply if you fail to keep adequate books andreturn more than 60 days after the due date or
records, or substantiate items properly.• You are filing a claim for a credit or refund extended due date, the minimum penalty is the
based solely on contested income tax or smaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax. Substantial understatement of income tax.on estate tax or gift tax issues considered You understate your tax if the tax shown on yourException. You will not have to pay thein your previously examined returns, and return is less than the correct tax. The under-penalty if you show that you failed to file on time
statement is substantial if it is more than the• You want to take your case to court in- because of reasonable cause and not because
larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How-stead of appealing it within the IRS. of willful neglect.
ever, the amount of the understatement may be
Paying tax late. You will have to pay a fail- reduced to the extent the understatement is dueWhen you file your claim with the IRS, you get
ure-to-pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (.50%) of your to:the fast method by requesting in writing that your
unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month,claim be immediately rejected. A notice of claim
after the due date that the tax is not paid. This 1. Substantial authority, ordisallowance will then be promptly sent to you.
penalty does not apply during the automaticYou have 2 years from the date of mailing of 2. Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba-6-month extension of time to file period if youthe notice of claim disallowance to file a refund sis.paid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on orsuit in the United States District Court having
before the due date of your return and pay the If an item on your return is attributable to a taxjurisdiction or in the United States Court of Fed-
balance when you file the return. shelter, there is no reduction for an adequateeral Claims.
The monthly rate of the failure-to-pay penalty disclosure. However, there is a reduction for a
Interest on refund. If you receive a refund is half the usual rate (.25% instead of .50%) if an position with substantial authority, but only if you
because of your amended return, interest will be installment agreement is in effect for that month. reasonably believed that your  tax treatment was
paid on it from the due date of your original You must have filed your return by the due date more likely than not the proper tre atment.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 19

Page 22 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Substantial authority. Whether there is or You will not have to pay the penalty if you are
was substantial authority for the tax treatment of able to show that the failure was due to reasona- Marital Statusan item depends on the facts and circum- ble cause and not willful neglect.
stances. Some of the items that may be consid- In general, your filing status depends onered are court opinions, Treasury regulations, whether you are considered unmarried or mar-Report tax shelter registration number. Ifrevenue rulings, revenue procedures, and no- ried. For federal tax purposes, a marriageyou claim any deduction, credit, or other taxtices and announcements issued by the IRS and means only a legal union between a man and abenefit because of a tax shelter, you must attachpublished in the Internal Revenue Bulletin that woman as husband and wife.Form 8271, Investor Reporting of Tax Shelterinvolve the same or similar circumstances as
Registration Number, to your return to reportyours.
Unmarried persons. You are considered un-your tax shelter registration number.Disclosure statement. To adequately dis- married for the whole year if, on the last day of
close the relevant facts about your tax treatment your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-of an item, use Form 8275, Disclosure State- rated from your spouse under a divorce or sepa-Criminal Penaltiesment. You must also have a reasonable basis rate maintenance decree. State law governsfor treating the item the way you did. You may be subject to criminal prosecution whether you are married or legally separatedIn cases of substantial understatement only, under a divorce or separate maintenance de-(brought to trial) for actions such as:items that meet the requirements of Revenue cree.Procedure 2005-75 (or later update) are consid- 1. Tax evasion,
Divorced persons. If you are divorcedered adequately disclosed on your return with-
out filing Form 8275. under a final decree by the last day of the year,2. Willful failure to file a return, supply infor-
Use Form 8275-R, Regulation Disclosure you are considered unmarried for the wholemation, or pay any tax due,
Statement, to disclose items or positions con- year.
3. Fraud and false statements, ortrary to regulations. Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a
Reasonable cause. You will not have to divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing4. Preparing and filing a fraudulent return.
pay a penalty if you show a good reason (rea- tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the
sonable cause) for the way you treated an item. time of divorce you intended to and did remarry
You must also show that you acted in good faith. each other in the next tax year, you and your
spouse must file as married individuals.
Frivolous return. You may have to pay a pen- Annulled marriages. If you obtain a courtalty of $500 if you file a frivolous return. A frivo- decree of annulment, which holds that no validlous return is one that does not include enough marriage ever existed, you are considered un-2.information to figure the correct tax or that con- married even if you filed joint returns for earliertains information clearly showing that the tax years. You must file Form 1040X, Amendedyou reported is substantially incorrect.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, claiming sin-You will have to pay the penalty if you filed
gle or head of household status for each tax yearthis kind of return because of a frivolous position Filing Status affected by the annulment that is not closed byon your part or a desire to delay or interfere with
the statute of limitations for filing a tax return.the administration of federal income tax laws.
The statute of limitations generally does not ex-This includes altering or striking out the
pire until 3 years after your original return waspreprinted language above the space provided Introduction
filed.for your signature.
This chapter helps you determine which filingThis penalty is added to any other penalty Head of household or qualifying widow(er)status to use. There are five filing statuses.provided by law. with dependent child. If you are consideredThe penalty must be paid in full upon notice • Single. unmarried, you may be able to file as a head ofand demand from IRS even if you protest the household or as a qualifying widow(er) with a• Married Filing Jointly.penalty. dependent child. See Head of Household and
• Married Filing Separately. Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child to
Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on see if you qualify.• Head of Household.your return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the
underpayment due to fraud will be added to your • Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Married persons. If you are considered mar-tax. Child. ried for the whole year, you and your spouse can
Joint return. The fraud penalty on a joint file a joint return, or you can file separate re-
return does not apply to a spouse unless some turns.If more than one filing status applies to
part of the underpayment is due to the fraud of you, choose the one that will give you Considered married. You are consideredthat spouse. the lowest tax.
TIP
married for the whole year if on the last day of
your tax year you and your spouse meet any oneYou must determine your filing status beforeFailure to supply social security number. If of the following tests.you can determine your filing requirementsyou do not include your SSN or the SSN of (chapter 1), standard deduction (chapter 20),another person where required on a return, 1. You are married and living together asand correct tax (chapter 30). You also use yourstatement, or other document, you will be sub- husband and wife.filing status in determining whether you are eligi-ject to a penalty of $50 for each failure. You will 2. You are living together in a common lawble to claim certain deductions and credits.also be subject to a penalty of $50 if you do not marriage that is recognized in the stategive your SSN to another person when it is
where you now live or in the state whererequired on a return, statement, or other docu- Useful Items the common law marriage began.ment. You may want to see:For example, if you have a bank account that 3. You are married and living apart, but notearns interest, you must give your SSN to the legally separated under a decree of di-Publicationbank. The number must be shown on the Form vorce or separate maintenance.❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,1099-INT or other statement the bank sends
4. You are separated under an interlocutoryyou. If you do not give the bank your SSN, you and Filing Information
(not final) decree of divorce. For purposeswill be subject to the $50 penalty. (You also may ❏ 519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens of filing a joint return, you are not consid-be subject to “backup” withholding of income
ered divorced.❏ 555 Community Propertytax. See chapter 4.)
Page 20 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 23 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Spouse died. If your spouse died during the If you and your spouse each have in-  You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-
come, you may want to figure your tax cent Spouse Relief, to request any of theseyear, you are considered married for the whole
both on a joint return and on separate kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spouseyear for filing status purposes.
TIP
returns (using the filing status of married filing Relief, explains these kinds of relief and whoIf you did not remarry before the end of the
separately). Choose the method that gives the may qualify for them.tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself
two of you the lower combined tax.    and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 Signing a joint return. For a return to be
years, you may be entitled to the special benefits considered a joint return, both husband and wifeHow to file. If you file as married filing jointly,described later under Qualifying Widow(er) With generally must sign the return.you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youDependent Child. Spouse died before signing. If yourhave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,If you remarried before the end of the tax spouse died before signing the return, the exec-and meet other requirements, you can file Formyear, you can file a joint return with your new utor or administrator must sign the return for1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A,spouse. Your deceased spouse’s filing status is your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else hasshow this filing status by checking the box onmarried filing separately for that year. yet been appointed as executor or administrator,line 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of the
you can sign the return for your spouse andTax Table or Section B of the Tax ComputationMarried persons living apart. If you live
enter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the areaWorksheet to figure your tax.apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,
where you sign the return.you may be considered unmarried. If this applies
Spouse died during the year. If your spouseto you, you can file as head of household even Spouse away from home. If your spouse isdied during the year, you are considered mar-though you are not divorced or legally sepa- away from home, you should prepare the return,ried for the whole year and can choose marriedrated. If you qualify to file as head of household sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so thatfiling jointly as your filing status. See Spouseinstead of as married filing separately, your it can be filed on time.died, earlier, for more information.standard deduction will be higher. Also, your tax Injury or disease prevents signing. If yourmay be lower, and you may be able to claim the Divorced persons. If you are divorced under spouse cannot sign because of disease or injuryearned income credit. See Head of Household, a final decree by the last day of the year, you are and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse’slater. considered unmarried for the whole year and name in the proper space on the return followed
you cannot choose married filing jointly as your by the words “By (your name), Husband (or
filing status. Wife).” Be sure to also sign in the space pro-
vided for your signature. Attach a dated state-
ment, signed by you, to the return. The
Single Filing a Joint Return statement should include the form number of the
return you are filing, the tax year, the reasonYour filing status is single if, on the last day of Both you and your spouse must include all of
your spouse cannot sign, and that your spousethe year, you are unmarried or legally separated your income, exemptions, and deductions on
has agreed to your signing for him or her.from your spouse under a divorce or separate your joint return.
maintenance decree, and you do not qualify for Signing as guardian of spouse. If you are
another filing status. To determine your marital Accounting period. Both of you must use the the guardian of your spouse who is mentally
same accounting period, but you can use differ-status on the last day of the year, see Marital incompetent, you can sign the return for your
ent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri-Status, earlier. spouse as guardian.
ods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1.
Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse isWidow(er). Your filing status may be single if unable to sign the return because he or she isJoint responsibility. Both of you may be heldyou were widowed before January 1, 2006, and serving in a combat zone (such as the Persianresponsible, jointly and individually, for the taxdid not remarry before the end of 2006. How- Gulf Area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or aand any interest or penalty due on your jointever, you might be able to use another filing qualified hazardous duty area (Bosnia and Her-return. One spouse may be held responsible forstatus that will give you a lower tax. See Head of zegovina, Croatia, and Macedonia), and you doall the tax due even if all the income was earnedHousehold and Qualifying Widow(er) With De- not have a power of attorney or other statement,by the other spouse.pendent Child, later, to see if you qualify.       you can sign for your spouse. Attach a signedDivorced taxpayer. You may be held jointly statement to your return that explains that yourand individually responsible for any tax, interest,How to file. You can file Form 1040EZ (if you spouse is serving in a combat zone. For moreand penalties due on a joint return filed beforehave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind, information on special tax rules for persons whoyour divorce. This responsibility may apply evenand meet other requirements), Form 1040A, or are serving in a combat zone, or who are inif your divorce decree states that your formerForm 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form missing status as a result of serving in a combatspouse will be responsible for any amounts due1040, show your filing status as single by check- zone, get Publication 3, Armed Forces’ Taxon previously filed joint returns.ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of Guide.
the Tax Table or Section A of the Tax Computa- Relief from joint liability. In some cases, Other reasons spouse cannot sign.  Iftion Worksheet to figure your tax. one spouse may be relieved of joint liability for your spouse cannot sign the joint return for anytax, interest, and penalties on a joint return for other reason, you can sign for your spouse onlyitems of the other spouse that were incorrectly
if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legalreported on the joint return. You can ask for document giving you permission to act for yourrelief no matter how small the liability.Married Filing Jointly spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copy
There are three types of relief available. of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848,
You can choose married filing jointly as your Power of Attorney and Declaration of Represen-1. Innocent spouse relief, which applies to all tative.filing status if you are married and both you and joint filers.your spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. A2. Separation of liability, which applies to jointreturn, you report your combined income and joint return generally cannot be filed if eitherfilers who are divorced, widowed, legallydeduct your combined allowable expenses. You spouse is a nonresident alien at any time duringseparated, or have not lived together forcan file a joint return even if one of you had no the tax year. However, if one spouse was athe 12 months ending on the date electionincome or deductions. nonresident alien or dual-status alien who wasof this relief is filed.If you and your spouse decide to file a joint married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the
return, your tax may be lower than your com- 3. Equitable relief, which applies to all joint end of the year, the spouses can choose to file a
bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your filers who do not qualify for innocent joint return. If you do file a joint return, you and
standard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc- spouse relief or separation of liability and your spouse are both treated as U.S. residents
tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax to married couples filing separate returns for the entire tax year. For information on this
benefits that do not apply to other filing statuses. in community property states. choice, see chapter 1 of Publication 519.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

Page 24 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. You cannot take the credit for child and year cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-
ried persons filing separate returns who liveddependent care expenses in most cases,Married Filing apart at all times during the year are each al-and the amount that you can exclude from
lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowanceincome under an employer’s dependentSeparately for losses from passive real estate activities.care assistance program is limited to
See Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 9.$2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a jointYou can choose married filing separately as return). For more information about theseyour filing status if you are married. This filing Community property states. If you live in Ari-expenses, the credit, and the exclusion,status may benefit you if you want to be respon- zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,see chapter 32.sible only for your own tax or if it results in less New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin
tax than filing a joint return. 4. You cannot take the earned income credit. and file separately, your income may be consid-
If you and your spouse do not agree to file a ered separate income or community income for5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit forjoint return, you may have to use this filing status income tax purposes. See Publication 555.adoption expenses in most cases.unless you qualify for head of household status,
discussed next. 6. You cannot take the education credits (the
Hope credit and the lifetime learningYou may be able to choose head of house- Joint Return After
credit), or the deduction for student loanhold filing status if you live apart from your Separate Returns
interest.spouse, meet certain tests, and are considered
You can change your filing status by filing anunmarried (explained later, under Head of 7. You cannot exclude any interest income amended return using Form 1040X.Household). This can apply to you even if you from qualified U.S. savings bonds that you If you or your spouse (or both of you) file aare not divorced or legally separated. If you used for higher education expenses. separate return, you generally can change to aqualify to file as head of household, instead of as
joint return any time within 3 years from the due8. If you lived with your spouse at any timemarried filing separately, your tax may be lower,
date of the separate return or returns. This doesduring the tax year:you may be able to claim the earned income
not include any extensions. A separate returncredit and certain other credits, and your stan-
a. You cannot claim the credit for the eld- includes a return filed by you or your spousedard deduction will be higher. The head of
erly or the disabled. claiming married filing separately, single, orhousehold filing status allows you to choose the
head of household filing status.standard deduction even if your spouse chooses b. You will have to include in income more
to itemize deductions. See Head of Household, (up to 85%) of any social security or
later, for more information. equivalent railroad retirement benefits
Separate Returns Afteryou received, andUnless you are required to file sepa- Joint Returnrately, you should figure your tax both c. You cannot roll over amounts from a
ways (on a joint return and on separate
TIP
traditional IRA into a Roth IRA. Once you file a joint return, you cannot choosereturns). This way you can make sure you are to file separate returns for that year after the dueusing the filing status that results in the lowest 9. The following deductions and credits are date of the return.combined tax. However, you will generally pay reduced at income levels that are half
more combined tax on separate returns than Exception. A personal representative for athose for a joint return:
you would on a joint return for the reasons listed decedent can change from a joint return elected
under Special Rules, later. a. The child tax credit, by the surviving spouse to a separate return for
the decedent. The personal representative hasb. The retirement savings contributions 1 year from the due date of the return (includingHow to file. If you file a separate return, you credit, extensions) to make the change. See Publica-generally report only your own income, exemp-
c. Itemized deductions, and tion 559, Survivors, Executors, and Administra-tions, credits, and deductions on your individual
tors, for more information on filing a return for areturn. You can claim an exemption for your d. The deduction for personal exemptions. decedent.spouse if your spouse had no gross income and
was not the dependent of another person. How- 10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500ever, if your spouse had any gross income or (instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-was the dependent of someone else, you cannot turn).claim an exemption for him or her on your sepa- Head of Household11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, yourate return.
cannot claim the standard deduction. If you If you file as married filing separately, you You may be able to file as head of household ifcan claim the standard deduction, your ba-can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select this you meet all the following requirements.sic standard deduction is half the amountfiling status by checking the box on line 3 of
allowed on a joint return. 1. You are unmarried or “considered unmar-either form. You also must enter your spouse’s
ried” on the last day of the year.social security number and full name in the
spaces provided. Use the Married filing sepa- 2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).rately column of the Tax Table or Section C of ing up a home for the year.You may not be able to deduct all or part of yourthe Tax Computation Worksheet to figure your contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your 3. A “qualifying person” lived with you in thetax. spouse were covered by an employee retire- home for more than half the year (exceptment plan at work during the year. Your deduc- for temporary absences, such as school).Special Rules tion is reduced or eliminated if your income is However, if the “qualifying person” is yourmore than a certain amount. This amount is dependent parent, he or she does notIf you choose married filing separately as your much lower for married individuals who file sep- have to live with you. See Special rule forfiling status, the following special rules apply. arately and lived together at any time during the parent, later, under Qualifying Person.Because of these special rules, you will usually year. For more information, see How Much Can
pay more tax on a separate return than if you You Deduct in chapter 17. If you qualify to file as head of house-used another filing status that you qualify for. hold, your tax rate usually will be lower
Rental activity losses. If you actively partici- than the rates for single or married fil-
TIP
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that ing separately. You will also receive a higher1. Your tax rate generally will be higher than produced a loss, you generally can deduct the standard deduction than if you file as single orit would be on a joint return. loss from your nonpassive income, up to married filing separately.
$25,000. This is called a special allowance.2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al-
However, married persons filing separate re-ternative minimum tax will be half that al- Kidnapped child. A child may qualify you to
turns who lived together at any time during thelowed to a joint return filer. file as head of household even if the child has
Page 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 25 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
been kidnapped. For more information, see even if he or she is temporarily absent due If you were considered married for part
Publication 501. to special circumstances. See Temporary of the year and lived in a community
absences, under Qualifying Person, later. property state (listed earlier under Mar-CAUTION
!
ried Filing Separately), special rules may applyHow to file. If you file as head of household, 4. Your home was the main home of your in determining your income and expenses. Seeyou can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040. child, stepchild, or eligible foster child forIndicate your choice of this filing status by Publication 555 for more information.more than half the year. (See Home ofchecking the box on line 4 of either form. Use the qualifying person, under Qualifying Per-Head of household column of the Tax Table or Nonresident alien spouse. You are consid-son, later, for rules applying to a child’sSection D of the Tax Computation Worksheet to ered unmarried for head of household purposesbirth, death, or temporary absence duringfigure your tax. if your spouse was a nonresident alien at anythe year.)
time during the year and you do not choose to5. You must be able to claim an exemption treat your nonresident spouse as a residentConsidered Unmarried for the child. However, you meet this test if alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifyingyou cannot claim the exemption only be-To qualify for head of household status, you person for head of household purposes. Youcause the noncustodial parent can claimmust be either unmarried or considered unmar- must have another qualifying person and meetthe child using the rules described in Chil-ried on the last day of the year. You are consid- the other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofdren of divorced or separated parentsered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if household.under Qualifying Child in chapter 3, or inyou meet all the following tests. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Earned income credit. Even if you are con-
Separated Parents under Qualifying Rela- sidered unmarried for head of household pur-1. You file a separate return, defined earlier
tive in chapter 3. The general rules for poses because you are married to a nonresidentunder Joint Return After Separate Returns.
claiming an exemption for a dependent are alien, you are still considered married for pur-2. You paid more than half the cost of keep- explained under Exemptions for Depen- poses of the earned income credit (unless youing up your home for the tax year. dents in chapter 3. meet the five tests listed earlier). You are not
entitled to the credit unless you file a joint return3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur-
with your spouse and meet other qualifications.ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your
See chapter 36 for more information.spouse is considered to live in your home
Table 2-1. Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing
status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not youqualifying child (such as a son,
can claim an exemption for the person.daughter, or grandchild who lived
with you more than half the year and he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.meets certain other tests)2
exemption for him or her
he or she is married and you cannot claim not a qualifying person. 3
an exemption for him or her
you can claim an exemption for him or her
5 a qualifying person.6qualifying relative 4 who is your
father or mother you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
he or she lived with you more than half the a qualifying person.qualifying relative 4 other than your
year, and you can claim an exemption forfather or mother (such as a
him or her 5grandparent, brother, or sister who
meets certain tests)
7
he or she did not live with you more than not a qualifying person.
half the year
you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term “qualifying child” is defined in chapter 3. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head of household filing
status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described under Children of divorced
or separated parents under Qualifying Child in chapter 3. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child generally is your qualifying
child for head of household filing status even though the child is not a qualifying child for whom you can claim an exemption.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you cannot claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone
else’s return.
4The term “qualifying relative” is defined in chapter 3.
5If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple
Support Agreement in chapter 3.
6See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
7A person who is your qualifying relative only because he or she lived with you all year as a member of your household is not a qualifying person.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

Page 26 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choice to treat spouse as resident. You Any person not described in Table 2-1 is not died. For example, if your spouse died in 2005,
are considered married if you choose to treat a qualifying person. and you have not remarried, you may be able to
your spouse as a resident alien. use this filing status for 2006 and 2007.
Home of qualifying person. Generally, the This filing status entitles you to use joint
qualifying person must live with you for more return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-Keeping Up a Home
than half of the year. tion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).
To qualify for head of household status, you This status does not entitle you to file a jointSpecial rule for parent. If your qualifyingmust pay more than half of the cost of keeping return.person is your father or mother, you may beup a home for the year. You can determine eligible to file as head of household even if yourwhether you paid more than half of the cost of How to file. If you file as qualifying widow(er)father or mother does not live with you. How-keeping up a home by using the worksheet with dependent child, you can use either Formever, you must be able to claim an exemption forshown on the next page. 1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing statusyour father or mother. Also, you must pay more
by checking the box on line 5 of either form. UseCost of Keeping Up a Home than half the cost of keeping up a home that was
the Married filing jointly column of the Tax Tablethe main home for the entire year for your father
or Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheetor mother. You are keeping up a main home forKeep for Your Records to figure your tax.your father or mother if you pay more than half
the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or
Eligibility rules. You are eligible to file yourhome for the elderly.Amount 2006 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-You Total Temporary absences. You and your quali- pendent child if you meet all of the followingPaid Cost fying person are considered to live together tests.even if one or both of you are temporarily absentProperty taxes $ $
• You were entitled to file a joint return withfrom your home due to special circumstancesMortgage interest expense
your spouse for the year your spousesuch as illness, education, business, vacation,Rent
died. It does not matter whether you actu-or military service. It must be reasonable toUtility charges
ally filed a joint return.Upkeep and repairs assume that the absent person will return to the
Property insurance home after the temporary absence. You must • Your spouse died in 2004 or 2005 and youFood consumed continue to keep up the home during the ab- did not remarry before the end of 2006.on the premises sence.
• You have a child or stepchild for whomOther household expenses Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as you can claim an exemption. (This doesTotals $$ head of household if the individual who qualifies not include a foster child).you for this filing status is born or dies during theMinus total amount you () • This child lived in your home all year, ex-year. You must have provided more than half ofpaid cept for temporary absences. See Tempo-the cost of keeping up a home that was the
rary absences, earlier, under Head ofindividual’s main home for more than half theAmount others paid $ Household. There are also exceptions, de-year or, if less, the period during which the
scribed later, for a child who was born orindividual lived.
died during the year, and for a kidnappedIf the total amount you paid is more than the amount
child.Example. You are unmarried. Your mother,others paid, you meet the requirement of paying more
than half the cost of keeping up the home. for whom you can claim an exemption, lived in • You paid more than half the cost of keep-an apartment by herself. She died on Septem- ing up a home for the year. See Keepingber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartmentCosts you include. Include in the cost of up- Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House-for the year until her death was $6,000. You paidkeep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest, hold.$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Yourreal estate taxes, insurance on the home, re-
brother made no other payments toward yourpairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home. As mentioned earlier, this filing statusmother’s support. Your mother had no income.If you used payments you received under is available for only 2 years followingBecause you paid more than half the cost ofTemporary Assistance for Needy Families the year your spouse died.keeping up your mother’s apartment from Janu-
CAUTION
!
(TANF) or other public assistance programs to
ary 1 until her death, and you can claim anpay part of the cost of keeping up your home,
exemption for her, you can file as a head ofyou cannot count them as money you paid. Example.  John Reed’s wife died in 2004.
household.However, you must include them in the total cost John has not remarried. During 2005 and 2006,
of keeping up your home to figure if you paid he continued to keep up a home for himself and
over half the cost. his child, who lives with him and for whom he
can claim an exemption. For 2004 he was enti-Costs you do not include. Do not include in
tled to file a joint return for himself and hisQualifying Widow(er)the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,
deceased wife. For 2005 and 2006, he can fileeducation, medical treatment, vacations, life in-
as qualifying widower with a dependent child.With Dependent Childsurance, or transportation. Also, do not include
After 2006 he can file as head of household if hethe rental value of a home you own or the value
qualifies.If your spouse died in 2006, you can use marriedof your services or those of a member of your
filing jointly as your filing status for 2006 if youhousehold.
Also do not include any government or chari- otherwise qualify to use that status. The year of Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as a
table assistance you received because of your death is the last year for which you can file jointly qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if the
temporary relocation due to Hurricane Katrina. with your deceased spouse. See Married Filing child who qualifies you for this filing status is
Jointly, earlier. born or dies during the year. You must have
provided more than half of the cost of keeping upYou may be eligible to use qualifyingQualifying Person
a home that was the child’s main home duringwidow(er) with dependent child as your filing
the entire part of the year he or she was alive.status for 2 years following the year your spouseSee Table 2-1 to see who is a qualifying person.
Page 24 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 27 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you file Form 1040EZ, the exemption exemption under the rules just described in Sep-
amount is combined with the standard deduction arate return.
amount and entered on line 5. If you remarried during the year, you cannot3.  If you file Form 1040A or Form 1040, follow take an exemption for your deceased spouse.
the instructions for the form. The total number of If you are a surviving spouse without gross
exemptions you can claim is the total in the box income and you remarry in the year your spouseon line 6d. Also complete line 26 (Form 1040A) died, you can be claimed as an exemption onPersonal or line 42 (Form 1040). both the final separate return of your deceased
spouse and the separate return of your new
Useful ItemsExemptions and spouse for that year. If you file a joint return with
You may want to see: your new spouse, you can be claimed as an
exemption only on that return.Dependents Publication
Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
tained a final decree of divorce or separateand Filing Information
What’s New maintenance by the end of the year, you cannot
Form (and Instructions) take your former spouse’s exemption. This rule
applies even if you provided all of your formerExemption amount. The amount you can de- ❏ 2120 Multiple Support Declaration spouse’s support.duct for each exemption has increased from
❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption for$3,200 in 2005 to $3,300 in 2006.
Child of Divorced or Separated Exemption for IndividualParentsExemption phaseout. You lose part of the
benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted gross Displaced by Hurricane
income is above a certain amount. For 2006, this Katrinaphaseout begins at $112,875 for married per-
sons filing separately; $150,500 for single indi- You may be able to take an exemption amount
Exemptionsviduals; $188,150 for heads of household; and of $500 for providing housing to a person dis-$225,750 for married persons filing jointly or placed by Hurricane Katrina.There are two types of exemptions: personalqualifying widow(er)s. However, beginning in You can claim this exemption for up to fourexemptions and exemptions for dependents.2006, you can lose no more than 2/3 of the individuals. Since the exemption is $500 perWhile each is worth the same amount ($3,300amount of your exemptions. In other words, person, the maximum you can claim is $2,000.for 2006), different rules apply to each type.each exemption cannot be reduced to less than You may be able to take this exemption for 2006$1,100. if all of the following are true.Personal Exemptions
• You provided housing in your main home
You are generally allowed one exemption for for a period of at least 60 consecutive
yourself and, if you are married, one exemption days ending in 2006 to a person displacedIntroduction for your spouse. These are called personal ex- by Hurricane Katrina.emptions.This chapter discusses exemptions. The follow-
• The person lived in the Hurricane Katrinaing topics will be explained. disaster area on August 28, 2005.
• Personal exemptions — You generally Your Own Exemption • You did not receive rent or any othercan take one for yourself and, if you are amount for providing the housing.married, one for your spouse. You can take one exemption for yourself unless
you can be claimed as a dependent by another • The person displaced was not your• Exemptions for dependents — You gener- taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claim spouse or dependent.ally can take an exemption for each of you as a dependent, you cannot take an exemp-your dependents. A dependent is your • You did not claim the maximum additionaltion for yourself even if the other taxpayer doesqualifying child or qualifying relative. If you exemption amount of $2,000 in 2005.not actually claim you as a dependent.are entitled to claim an exemption for a
You cannot claim this exemption in 2006 for adependent, that dependent cannot claim a
person for whom you claimed this type of ex-personal exemption on his or her own tax Your Spouse’s Exemption
emption in 2005.return.
Your spouse is never considered your depen- To claim this amount, file Form 8914. For• Phaseout of exemptions — You get less dent. more information, see Publication 4492.of a deduction when your adjusted gross
income goes above a certain amount. Joint return. On a joint return you can claim
• Social security number (SSN) requirement one exemption for yourself and one for your
spouse.for dependents — You must list the social Exemptions forsecurity number of any dependent for
Separate return. If you file a separate return,whom you claim an exemption. Dependentsyou can claim the exemption for your spouse
only if your spouse had no gross income, is notDeduction. Exemptions reduce your taxable You are allowed one exemption for each personfiling a return, and was not the dependent ofincome. Generally, you can deduct $3,300 for you can claim as a dependent. You can claim ananother taxpayer. This is true even if the othereach exemption you claim in 2006. But, you may exemption for a dependent even if your depen-taxpayer does not actually claim your spouse as
lose part of the dollar amount of your exemp- dent files a return.a dependent. This is also true if your spouse is a
tions if your adjusted gross income is above a The term “dependent” means:nonresident alien.
certain amount. See Phaseout of Exemptions ,
• A qualifying child, orlater. Death of spouse. If your spouse died during
• A qualifying relative.the year, you generally can claim your spouse’s
How to claim exemptions.  How you claim an exemption under the rules just explained under
exemption on your tax return depends on which The terms “qualifying child” and “qualifyingJoint return. If you file a separate return for the
form you file. relative” are defined later.year, you may be able to claim your spouse’s
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 25

Page 28 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3-1. Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this chapter.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund and there
would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns.
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of
Canada or Mexico, for some part of the year. 1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, eligible 1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the qualifying
foster child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, child of anyone else.
stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of any of them. 2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year, (b) ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with you,
under age 24 at the end of the year and a full-time student, or or (b) must live with you all year as a member of your
(c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. household (and your relationship must not violate local law).
2
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of the 3. The person’s gross income for the year must be less than
year.2 $3,300.3
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or her 4. You must provide more than half of the person’s total support
own support for the year. for the year. 4
5. If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more
than one person, you must be the person entitled to claim the
child as a qualifying child.
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents, and
 kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents, and kidnapped children.
You can claim an exemption for a qualifying If you are filing a joint return and your spouse there is an exception for certain ad opted chil-
child or qualifying relative only if these three dren, as explained next.could be claimed as a dependent by someone
tests are met. else, you and your spouse cannot claim any Adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen ordependents on your joint return. U.S. national who has legally adopted a child1. Dependent taxpayer test.
who is not a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, or2. Joint return test. U.S. national, this test is met if the child livedJoint Return Test with you as a member of your household all3. Citizen or resident test.
year. This also applies if the child was lawfullyYou generally cannot claim a married person asThese three tests are explained in detail placed with you for legal adoption.a dependent if he or she files a joint return.later.
Child’s place of residence. Children usuallyAll the requirements for claiming an exemp- Example. You supported your 18-year-old are citizens or residents of the country of theirtion for a dependent are summarized in Table daughter, and she lived with you all year while parents.3-1. her husband was in the Armed Forces. The If you were a U.S. citizen when your childDependent not allowed a personal couple files a joint return. Even though your was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen even ifexemption. If you can claim an ex- daughter is your qualifying child, you cannot the other parent was a nonresident alien and theemption for your dependent, the de- take an exemption for her.
CAUTION
!
child was born in a foreign country. If so, this testpendent cannot claim his or her own exemption is met.on his or her own tax return. This is true even if Exception. The joint return test does not apply
you do not claim the dependent’s exemption on Foreign students’ place of residence. For-if a joint return is filed by the dependent and his
your return or if the exemption will be reduced eign students brought to this country under aor her spouse merely as a claim for refund and
under the phaseout rule described under qualified international education exchange pro-no tax liability would exist for either spouse on
Phaseout of Exemptions, later. gram and placed in American homes for a tem-separate returns.
porary period generally are not U.S. residents
Housekeepers, maids, or servants. If these and do not meet this test. You cannot claim anExample. Your son and his wife each had
people work for you, you cannot claim exemp- exemption for them. However, if you provided aless than $3,000 of wages and no unearned
tions for them. home for a foreign student, you may be able toincome. Neither is required to file a tax return.
take a charitable contribution deduction. SeeTaxes were taken out of their pay, so they filed aChild tax credit. You may be entitled to a child Expenses Paid for Student Living With You injoint return to get a refund. The exception to thetax credit for each qualifying child who was chapter 24.joint return test applies, so you are not disquali-under age 17 at the end of the year. For more fied from claiming their exemptions just because U.S. national. A U.S. national is an individualinformation, see the instructions in your tax they filed a joint return. You can claim their who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or herforms package. exemptions if you meet all the other require- allegiance to the United States. U.S. nationalsments to do so. include American Samoans and Northern Mari-
ana Islanders who chose to become U.S. na-Dependent Taxpayer Test tionals instead of U.S. citizens.Citizen or Resident Test
If you could be claimed as a dependent by an-
You cannot claim a person as a dependent un-other person, you cannot claim anyone else as a Qualifying Child
less that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. residentdependent. Even if you have a qualifying child or
alien, U.S. national, or a resident of Canada orqualifying relative, you cannot claim that person There are five tests that must be met for a child
Mexico, for some part of the year. However,as a dependent. to be your qualifying child. The five tests are:
Page 26 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 29 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Relationship, training course, correspondence school, or the part of the year before the date of the
school offering courses only through the Internet kidnapping.2. Age, does not count as a school. This treatment applies for all years until the3. Residency, Vocational high school students. Stu- child is returned. However, the last year this
4. Support, and dents who work on “co-op” jobs in private indus- treatment can apply is the earlier of:
try as a part of a school’s regular course of5. Special test for qualifying child of more 1. The year there is a determination that theclassroom and practical training are consideredthan one person. child is dead, orfull-time students.
These tests are explained next. 2. The year the child would have reachedPermanently and totally disabled. Your
age 18.child is permanently and totally disabled if both
of the following apply.Relationship Test
Children of divorced or separated parents.• He or she cannot engage in any substan-To meet this test, a child must be: In most cases, because of the residency test, atial gainful activity because of a physical or
child of divorced or separated parents is themental condition.• Your son, daughter, stepchild, eligible fos-
qualifying child of the custodial parent. However,ter child, or a descendant (for example, • A doctor determines the condition has the child will be treated as the qualifying child ofyour grandchild) of any of them, or lasted or can be expected to last continu- the noncustodial parent if all four of the followingously for at least a year or can lead to• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- statements are true.death.ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descen-
dant (for example, your niece or nephew) 1. The parents:
of any of them. Residency Test a. Are divorced or legally separated under
a decree of divorce or separate mainte-To meet this test, your child must have lived withAdopted child. An adopted child is always nance,you for more than half of the year. There aretreated as your own child. The term “adopted
exceptions for temporary absences, children b. Are separated under a written separa-child” includes a child who was lawfully placed
who were born or died during the year, kid- tion agreement, orwith you for legal adoption.
napped children, and children of divorced or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6separated parents.Eligible foster child. An eligible foster child is months of the year.an individual who is placed with you by an au- Temporary absences. Your child is consid-thorized placement agency or by judgment, de- ered to have lived with you during periods of 2. The child received over half of his or hercree, or other order of any court of competent time when one of you, or both, are temporarily support for the year from the parents.jurisdiction. absent due to special circumstances such as: 3. The child is in the custody of one or both
• Illness, parents for more than half of the year.
Age Test • Education, 4. Either of the following statements is true.
To meet this test, a child must be: • Business, a. The custodial parent signs a written
• Under age 19 at the end of the year, declaration, discussed later, that he or• Vacation, or
she will not claim the child as a depen-• A full-time student under age 24 at the end • Military service. dent for the year, and the noncustodialof the year, or
parent attaches this written declaration
• Permanently and totally disabled at any Death or birth of child. A child who was born to his or her return. (If the decree or
time during the year, regardless of age. or died during the year is treated as having lived agreement went into effect after 1984,
with you all year if your home was the child’s see Divorce decree or separation
home the entire time he or she was alive during agreement made after 1984, later.)Example. Your son turned 19 on December
the year. The same is true if the child lived with10. Unless he was disabled or a full-time stu- b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-you all year except for any required hospital staydent, he does not meet the age test because, at rate maintenance or written separationfollowing birth.the end of the year, he was not under age 19. agreement that applies to 2006 states
Child born alive. You may be able to claim that the noncustodial parent can claimFull-time student. A full-time student is a stu- an exemption for a child who was born alive the child as a dependent, the decree ordent who is enrolled for the number of hours or during the year, even if the child lived only for a agreement was not changed after 1984courses the school considers to be full-time at- moment. State or local law must treat the child to say the noncustodial parent cannottendance. as having been born alive. There must be proof claim the child as a dependent, and theof a live birth shown by an official document,Student defined. To qualify as a student, noncustodial parent provides at leastsuch as a birth certificate. The child must beyour child must be, during some part of each of $600 for the child’s support during theyour qualifying child or qualifying relative, and allany 5 calendar months of the year: year.the other tests to claim an exemption for a de-
1. A full-time student at a school that has a pendent must be met.
regular teaching staff, course of study, and Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.Stillborn child. You cannot claim an ex-a regularly enrolled student body at the The custodial parent is the parent with whom theemption for a stillborn child.school, or child lived for the greater part of the year. The
other parent is the noncustodial parent.Kidnapped child. You can treat your child as2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
meeting the residency test even if the child has If the parents divorced or separated duringing course given by a school described in
been kidnapped, but both of the following state- the year and the child lived with both parents(1), or by a state, county, or local govern-
ments must be true. before the separation, the custodial parent is thement agency.
one with whom the child lived for the greater partThe 5 calendar months do not have to be con- 1. The child is presumed by law enforcement of the rest of the year.secutive. authorities to have been kidnapped by
someone who is not a member of your Example. Your child lived with you for 10School defined. A school can be an ele- family or the child’s family. months of the year. The child lived with yourmentary school, junior and senior high school,
former spouse for the other 2 months. You arecollege, university, or technical, trade, or 2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the
considered the custodial parent.mechanical school. However, an on-the-job child lived with you for more than half of
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

Page 30 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent account in determining whether the child pro- If you and the other person(s) cannot agree
vided more than half of his or her own support.may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement on who will claim the child and more than one
(containing the same information required by the person files a return claiming the same child, the
form) to make the written declaration to release IRS will disallow all but one of the claims using
the exemption to the noncustodial parent. The Special Test for Qualifying Child of the tie-breaker rule in Table 3-2.
noncustodial parent must attach the form or More Than One Person
statement to his or her tax return. Example 1—child lived with parent and
grandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh-The exemption can be released for 1 year, If your qualifying child is not a qualify- ter, Jane, lived with your mother all year. Youfor a number of specified years (for example, ing child for anyone else, this test does are 25 years old and earned $9,000 for the year.alternate years), or for all future years, as speci- not apply to you and you do not need to
TIP
Your mother is not your dependent. Jane is afied in the declaration. If the exemption is re- read about it. This is also true if your qualifying
qualifying child of both you and your motherleased for more than 1 year, the original release child is not a qualifying child for anyone else
because she meets the relationship, age, resi-must be attached to the return of the noncus- except your spouse with whom you file a joint
dency, and support tests for both you and yourtodial parent for the first year, and a copy must return.
mother. However, only one of you can claim her.be attached for each later year.
If a child is treated as the qualifying You agree to let your mother claim Jane. ThisDivorce decree or separation agreement child of the noncustodial parent under means your mother can claim Jane as a depen-made after 1984. If the divorce decree or sep- the rules for children of divorced or dent and can claim her as a qualifying child forCAUTION
!
aration agreement went into effect after 1984, separated parents described earlier, see Apply- the child tax credit, head of household filingthe noncustodial parent can attach certain ing this special test to divorced or separated status, credit for child and dependent care ex-pages from the decree or agreement instead of parents, later. penses, exclusion for dependent care benefits,Form 8332. To be able to do this, the decree or and the earned income credit, if she qualifies forSometimes, a child meets the relationship,agreement must state all three of the following. each of those tax benefits (and if you do notage, residency, and support tests to be a qualify-
claim Jane as a dependent or as a qualifyinging child of more than one person. Although the1. The noncustodial parent can claim the
child for any of those tax benefits).child is a qualifying child of each of these per-child as a dependent without regard to any
sons, only one person can actually treat the childcondition, such as payment of support.
Example 2—two persons claim sameas a qualifying child. To meet this special test,2. The custodial parent will not claim the child child. The facts are the same as in Example 1you must be the person who can treat the childas a dependent for the year. except that you and your mother both claim Janeas a qualifying child.
as a dependent and claim her as a qualifying3. The years for which the noncustodial par- If you and another person have the same
child for the child tax credit and earned incomeent, rather than the custodial parent, can qualifying child, you and the other person(s) can
credit. In this case, you as the child’s parent willclaim the child as a dependent. decide which of you will treat the child as a
be the only one allowed to claim Jane as aqualifying child. That person can take all of theThe noncustodial parent must attach all of dependent and claim her as a qualifying child forfollowing tax benefits (provided the person isthe following pages of the decree or agreement the child tax credit and earned income credit.eligible for each benefit) based on the qualifyingto his or her tax return. The IRS will disallow your mother’s claim tochild.
these tax benefits unless she has another quali-• The cover page (write the other parent’s • The exemption for the child. fying child.social security number on this page).
• The child tax credit.• The pages that include all of the informa- Example 3—qualifying children split be-• Head of household filing status.tion identified in items (1) through (3) tween two persons. The facts are the sameabove. as in Example 1 except that you also have two• The credit for child and dependent care
other young children who are qualifying childrenexpenses.• The signature page with the other parent’s
of both you and your mother. Only one of yousignature and the date of the agreement. • The exclusion from income for dependent can claim each child as a dependent. However,care benefits. you and your mother can split the three qualify-The noncustodial parent must attach ing children between you. For example, you can• The earned income credit.the required information even if it was claim one child as a dependent and your motherfiled with a return in an earlier year.CAUTION
!
The other person cannot take any of these can claim the other two.
benefits based on this qualifying child. In otherRemarried parent. If you remarry, the sup- Example 4—taxpayer who is a qualifyingwords, you and the other person cannot agree toport provided by your new spouse is treated as divide these tax benefits between you. child. The facts are the same as in Example 1provided by you.
Parents who never married. This special Table 3-2. When More Than One Person Files a Return Claiming the
rule for divorced or separated parents also ap- Same Qualifying Child (Tie-Breaker Rule)
plies to parents who never married.
Caution. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent
under the rules for children of divorced or separated parents, see Applying this
special test to divorced or separated parents.Support Test (To Be a Qualifying
Child) IF more than one person files a return claiming THEN the child will be treated as
the same qualifying child and . . . the qualifying child of the. . .To meet this test, the child cannot have provided
more than half of his or her own support for the only one of the persons is the child’s parent, parent.
year.
parent with whom the child livedThis test is different from the support test to
two of the persons are parents of the child and they for the longer period of timebe a qualifying relative, which is described later.
do not file a joint return together, during the year.However, to see what is or is not support, see
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) ,
two of the persons are parents of the child, they dolater. If you are not sure whether a child provided not file a joint return together, and the child lived parent with the higher adjustedmore than half of his or her own support, you with each parent the same amount of time during gross income (AGI).may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful. the year,
none of the persons are the child’s parent, person with the highest AGI.Scholarships. A scholarship received by a
child who is a full-time student is not taken into
Page 28 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 31 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
except that you are only 18 years old and did not credit, head of household filing status, credit for the child tax credit for th e child if he meets all the
provide more than half of your own support for child and dependent care expenses, exclusion requirements to do so. Because of this, you
the year. This means you are your mother’s for dependent care benefits, and the earned cannot claim an exemption or the child tax credit
qualifying child and she could claim you as a income credit, if you qualify for each of those tax for your son. However, your ex-husband cannot
dependent. Because of the Dependent Tax- benefits (and if your son’s father does not claim claim the boy as a qualifying child for head of
payer Test  explained earlier, you cannot treat your son as a dependent or as a qualifying child household filing status, the credit for child and
your daughter as a qualifying child and cannot for any of those tax benefits). dependent care expenses, the exclusion for de-
claim her as a dependent. Only your mother can pendent care benefits, and the earned income
treat your daughter as a qualifying child. Example 8—unmarried parents claim credit. You and your mother did not have any
same child. The facts are the same as in child care expenses or dependent care benefits,
Example 5—separated parents. You, Example 7 except that you and your son’s father but the boy is a qualifying child of both you and
your husband, and your 10-year-old son lived both claim your son as a qualifying child. In this your mother for head of household filing status
together until August 1, 2006, when your hus- case, only your son’s father will be allowed to and the earned income credit because he meets
band moved out of the household. In August and treat your son as a qualifying child. This is be- the relationship, age, residency, and support
September, your son lived with you. For the rest cause his AGI, $18,000, is more than your AGI, tests for both you and your mother. (Note: The
of the year, your son lived with your husband. $8,000. If you claimed an exemption, the child support test does not apply for the earned in-Your son is a qualifying child of both you and tax credit, head of household filing status, credit come credit.) However, you agree to let youryour husband because your son lived with each for child and dependent care expenses, exclu- mother claim your son. This means, if you do notof you for more than half the year and because sion for dependent care benefits, or the earned claim your son as a qualifying child for head ofhe met the relationship, age, and support tests income credit for your son, the IRS will disallow household filing status or the earned incomefor both of you. At the end of the year, you and your claim to all these tax benefits. credit, your mother can claim him as a qualifyingyour husband still were not divorced, legally child for each of those tax benefits for which sheseparated, or separated under a written separa- Example 9—child did not live with a par- qualifies.tion agreement, so the special rule for divorced ent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your sis-or separated parents does not apply. ter’s child, lived with your mother all year. You Example 2. The facts are the same as inYou and your husband will file separate re- are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your Example 1 except that you and your mother bothturns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your mother’s AGI is $15,000. Your niece is a qualify- claim your son as a qualifying child for head ofson as a qualifying child. This means, if your ing child of both you and your mother because household filing status and the earned incomehusband does not claim your son as a qualifying she meets the relationship, age, residency, and credit. You as the child’s parent will be the onlychild, you can claim your son as a dependent support tests for both you and your mother. one allowed to claim your son as a qualifyingand treat him as a qualifying child for the child However, only one of you can treat her as a child for these tax benefits. The IRS will disallowtax credit and exclusion for dependent care ben- qualifying child. Your mother agrees to let you your mother’s claim to these tax benefits unlessefits, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits. treat the child as a qualifying child. she has another qualifying child.However, you cannot claim head of household
filing status because you and your husband did Example 10—child did not live with a par- Qualifying Relativenot live apart the last 6 months of the year. As a ent. The facts are the same as in Example 9result, your filing status is married filing sepa- except that you and your mother both claim your There are four tests that must be met for arately, so you cannot claim the earned income niece as a qualifying child. In this case, only your person to be your qualifying relative. The fourcredit or the credit for child and dependent care mother will be allowed to treat your niece as a tests are:expenses. qualifying child. This is because your mother’s
AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300. If 1. Not a qualifying child test,Example 6—separated parents claim you claimed an exemption, the child tax credit,same child. The facts are the same as in 2. Member of household or relationship test,head of household filing status, credit for childExample 5 except that you and your husband and dependent care expenses, exclusion for 3. Gross income test, andboth claim your son as a qualifying child. In this dependent care benefits, or the earned incomecase, only your husband will be allowed to treat 4. Support test.credit for your niece, the IRS will disallow youryour son as a qualifying child. This is because, claim to all these tax benefits.during 2006, the boy lived with him longer than
Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rel-with you. If you claimed an exemption, the child
ative can be any age. There is no age test for aApplying this special test to divorced or sep-tax credit, head of household filing status, credit
qualifying relative.arated parents. If a child is treated as thefor child and dependent care expenses, exclu-
qualifying child of the noncustodial parent undersion for dependent care benefits, or the earned
the rules for children of divorced or separated Kidnapped child. You can treat a child asincome credit for your son, the IRS will disallow
parents described earlier, only the noncustodial your qualifying relative even if the child has beenyour claim to all these tax benefits. In addition,
parent can claim an exemption and the child tax kidnapped, but both of the following statementsbecause you and your husband did not live apart
credit for the child. However, the noncustodial must be true.the last 6 months of the year, your husband
parent cannot claim the child as a qualifyingcannot claim head of household filing status. As 1. The child is presumed by law enforcementchild for head of household filing status, thea result, his filing status is married filing sepa- authorities to have been kidnapped bycredit for child and dependent care expenses,rately, so he cannot claim the earned income someone who is not a member of yourthe exclusion for dependent care benefits, andcredit or the credit for child and dependent care
family or the child’s family.the earned income credit. Only the custodialexpenses
parent or other eligible parent can claim the child 2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the
as a qualifying child for these four tax benefits. IfExample 7—unmarried parents. You, child met the tests to be your qualifying
you and another eligible taxpayer both claim theyour 5-year-old son, and your son’s father lived relative for the part of the year before the
child as a qualifying child for purposes of thesetogether all year. You and your son’s father are date of the kidnapping.
four benefits, the IRS will disallow all but one ofnot married. Your son is a qualifying child of both
This treatment applies for all years until thethe claims using the tie-breaker rule in Tableyou and his father because he meets the rela-
child is returned. However, the last year this3-2.tionship, age, residency, and support tests for
treatment can apply is the earlier of:both you and his father. Your adjusted gross
Example 1. You and your 5-year-old sonincome (AGI) is $8,000 and your son’s father’s 1. The year there is a determination that thelived with your mother all year. Under the rulesAGI is $18,000. Your son’s father agrees to let child is dead, orfor children of divorced or separated parents,you treat the child as a qualifying child. This
2. The year the child would have reachedyour son is the qualifying child of yourmeans you can claim him as a dependent and
age 18.ex-husband, who can claim an exemption andtreat him as a qualifying child for the child tax
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

Page 32 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Live with you all year as a member of your If the person is placed in a nursing home forNot a Qualifying Child Test
household, or an indefinite period of time to receive constant
A child is not your qualifying relative if the child is medical care, the absence may be considered2. Be related to you in one of the ways listedyour qualifying child or the qualifying child of any temporary.under Relatives who do not have to liveother taxpayer. with you. Death or birth. A person who died during the
year, but lived with you as a member of yourIf at any time during the year the person wasExample 1. Your 22-year-old daughter, who
household until death, will meet this test. Theyour spouse, that person cannot be your qualify-is a full-time student, lives with you and meets all
same is true for a child who was born during theing relative. However, see Personal Exemp-the tests to be your qualifying child. She is not
year and lived with you as a member of yourtions, earlier.your qualifying relative.
household for the rest of the year. The test is
Relatives who do not have to live with you. also met if a child lived with you as a member ofExample 2. Your 2-year-old son lives with A person related to you in any of the following your household except for any required hospitalyour parents and meets all the tests to be their ways does not have to live with you all year as a stay following birth.qualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela- member of your household to meet this test. If your dependent died during the year andtive.
you otherwise qualified to claim an exemption• Your child, stepchild, eligible foster child,
for the dependent, you can still claim the exemp-or a descendant of any of them (for exam-Example 3. Your son lives with you but is
tion.ple, your grandchild). (A legally adoptednot your qualifying child because he is 30 years
child is considered your child.)old and does not meet the age test. He may be Example. Your dependent mother died onyour qualifying relative if the gross income test • Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- January 15. She met the tests to be your qualify-and the support test are met. ter, stepbrother, or stepsister. ing relative. The other tests to claim an exemp-
tion for a dependent were also met. You can• Your father, mother, grandparent, or otherExample 4. Your 13-year-old grandson claim an exemption for her on your return.direct ancestor, but not foster parent.lived with his mother for 3 months, with his uncle
for 4 months, and with you for 5 months during • Your stepfather or stepmother. Local law violated. A person does not meetthe year. He is not your qualifying child because this test if at any time during the year the rela-• A son or daughter of your brother or sister.he does not meet the residency test. He may be tionship between you and that person violates
your qualifying relative if the gross income test • A brother or sister of your father or local law.
and the support test are met. mother.
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a• Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-Child in Canada or Mexico. A child who lives member of your household all year. However,ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law,in Canada or Mexico may be your qualifying your relationship with her violated the laws of theor sister-in-law. state where you live, because she was marriedrelative, and you may be able to claim the child
Any of these relationships that were established to someone else. Therefore, she does not meetas a dependent. If the child does not live with
by marriage are not ended by death or divorce. this test and you cannot claim her as a depen-you, the child does not meet the residency test
dent.to be your qualifying child. If the persons the Example. You and your wife began sup-child does live with are not U.S. citizens and porting your wife’s father, a widower, in 2001. Adopted child. An adopted child is alwayshave no U.S. gross income, those persons are Your wife died in 2005. In spite of your wife’s treated as your own child. The term “adoptednot “taxpayers,” so the child is not the qualifying death, your father-in-law continues to meet this child” includes a child who was lawfully placedchild of any other taxpayer. If the child is not your test, and you can claim him as a dependent if all with you for legal adoption.qualifying child or the qualifying child of any other tests are met, including the gross incomeother taxpayer, the child is your qualifying rela- test and support test. Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if hetive if the gross income test and the support test or she lives with you all year as a member ofEligible foster child. An eligible foster childare met. your household. A cousin is a descendant of ais an individual who is placed with you by anYou cannot claim as a dependent a child who brother or sister of your father or mother.authorized placement agency or by judgment,lives in a foreign country other than Canada or
decree, or other order of any court of competentMexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S.
jurisdiction.resident alien, or U.S. national for some part of Gross Income Test
the year. There is an exception for certain Joint return. If you file a joint return, the per- To meet this test, a person’s gross income foradopted children who lived with you all year. See son can be related to either you or your spouse. the year must be less than $3,300.Citizen or Resident Test, earlier. Also, the person does not need to be related to
the spouse who provides support. Gross income defined. Gross income is allExample. You provide all the support of For example, your spouse’s uncle who re- income in the form of money, property, andyour children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in ceives more than half of his support from you services that is not exempt from tax.Mexico with your mother and have no income. may be your qualifying relative, even though he In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-You are single and live in the United States. does not live with you. However, if you and your ing business, gross income is the total net sales
Your mother is not a U.S. citizen and has no spouse file separate returns, your spouse’s un- minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-
U.S. income, so she is not a “taxpayer.” Your cle can be your qualifying relative only if he lives neous income from the business.
children are not your qualifying children because with you all year as a member of your house- Gross receipts from rental property are gross
they do not meet the residency test. Also, they hold. income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., to
are not the qualifying children of any other tax- determine the gross income from rental prop-Temporary absences. A person is consid-payer, so they are your qualifying relatives and erty.ered to live with you as a member of your house-you can claim them as dependents if all the tests Gross income includes a partner’s share ofhold during periods of time when one of you, orare met. You may also be able to claim your the gross (not a share of the net) partnershipboth, are temporarily absent due to special cir-mother as a dependent if all the tests are met, income.cumstances such as:including the gross income test and the support Gross income also includes all unemploy-
test. ment compensation and certain scholarship and• Illness,
fellowship grants. Scholarships received by de-• Education, gree candidates that are used for tuition, fees,
supplies, books, and equipment required for• Business,Member of Household or
particular courses may not be included in grossRelationship Test • Vacation, or income. For more information about scholar-
To meet this test, a person must either: • Military service. ships, see chapter 12.
Page 30 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 33 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax-exempt income, such as certain social you do so with borrowed money that you repay child from a child placement agency are co nsid-
security benefits, is not included in gross in- in a later year. ered support provided by the agency. Similarly,
come. If you use a fiscal year to report your income, payments you receive for the support of a foster
you must provide more than half of the depen- child from a state or county are considered sup-Disabled dependent working at sheltered dent’s support for the calendar year in which port provided by the state or county.workshop. For purposes of this test (the gross your fiscal year begins. If you are not in the trade or business ofincome test), the gross income of an individual
providing foster care and your unreimbursedwho is permanently and totally disabled at any Armed Forces dependency allotments. The
out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a fostertime during the year does not include income for part of the allotment contributed by the govern-
child were mainly to benefit an organizationservices the individual performs at a sheltered ment and the part taken out of your military pay
qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-workshop. The availability of medical care at the are both considered provided by you in figuring
butions, the expenses are deductible as charita-workshop must be the main reason for the indi- whether you provide more than half of the sup-
ble contributions but are not considered supportvidual’s presence there. Also, the income must port. If your allotment is used to support persons
you provided. For more information about thecome solely from activities at the workshop that other than those you name, you can take the
deduction for charitable contributions, see chap-are incident to this medical care. exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify.
ter 24. If your unreimbursed expenses are notA “sheltered workshop” is a school that:
deductible as charitable contributions, they areExample. You are in the Armed Forces.• Provides special instruction or training de- considered support you provided.You authorize an allotment for your widowedsigned to alleviate the disability of the indi- If you are in the trade or business of provid-mother that she uses to support herself and hervidual, and ing foster care, your unreimbursed expensessister. If the allotment provides more than half of
• Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi- are not considered support provided by you.each person’s support, you can take an exemp-
zations, or by a state, a U.S. possession, tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify,
a political subdivision of a state or posses- Example.  Lauren, an eligible foster child,even though you authorize the allotment only for
sion, the United States, or the District of lived with Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3your mother.
Columbia. months of the year. The Smiths cared for LaurenTax-exempt military quarters allowances. because they wanted to adopt her (although sheThese allowances are treated the same way as“Permanently and totally disabled” has the had not been placed with them for adoption).dependency allotments in figuring support. Thesame meaning here as under Qualifying child, They did not care for her as a trade or businessallotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-earlier. or to benefit the agency that placed her in theirance for quarters are both considered as pro- home. The Smiths’ unreimbursed expenses arevided by you for support. not deductible as charitable contributions but
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person’s are considered support they provided for
total support, include tax-exempt income, sav- Lauren.Relative)
ings, and borrowed amounts used to support
To meet this test, you generally must provide that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer- Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sum
more than half of a person’s total support during tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, advance payment to a home for the aged to take
the calendar year. nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed care of your relative for life and the payment is
However, if two or more persons provide Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, based on that person’s life expectancy, the
support, but no one person provides more than and tax-exempt interest. amount of support you provide each year is the
half of a person’s total support, see Multiple lump-sum payment divided by the relative’s life
Support Agreement, later. Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward expectancy. The amount of support you provide
your mother’s support during the year. She has also includes any other amounts you providedHow to determine if support test is met. earned income of $600, nontaxable social se- during the year.You figure whether you have provided more curity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter-than half of a person’s total support by compar- est of $200. She uses all these for her support.ing the amount you contributed to that person’s You cannot claim an exemption for your mother Total Supportsupport with the entire amount of support that because the $4,000 you provide is not moreperson received from all sources. This includes than half of her total support of $9,600. To figure if you provided more than half of asupport the person provided from his or her own person’s support, you must first determine thefunds. Example 2. Your brother’s daughter takes total support provided for that person. Total sup-You may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful in figur- out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay port includes amounts spent to provide food,ing whether you provided more than half of a her college tuition. She is personally responsible lodging, clothing, education, medical and dentalperson’s support. for the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-
support. You cannot claim an exemption for her cessities.Person’s own funds not used for support.
because you provide less than half of her sup-A person’s own funds are not support unless Generally, the amount of an item of support
port.they are actually spent for support. is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of supportSocial security benefits. If a husband and
Example. Your mother received $2,400 in is the fair rental value of the lodging.wife each receive benefits that are paid by one
social security benefits and $300 in interest. She check made out to both of them, half of the total Expenses that are not directly related to any
paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation. paid is considered to be for the support of each one member of a household, such as the cost of
She put $300 in a savings account. spouse, unless they can show otherwise. food for the household, must be divided among
Even though your mother received a total of If a child receives social security benefits and the members of the household.
$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400 uses them toward his or her own support, the
($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If you Example 1. Grace Brown, mother of Marybenefits are considered as provided by the child.
spent more than $2,400 for her support and no Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and theirSupport provided by the state (welfare,other support was received, you have provided two children. Grace gets social security benefitsfood stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits pro-more than half of her support. of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-vided by the state to a needy person generally portation, and recreation. Grace has no otherChild’s wages used for own support. You are considered support provided by the state. income. Frank and Mary’s total food expense forcannot include in your contribution to your However, payments based on the needs of the the household is $5,200. They pay Grace’schild’s support any support that is paid for by the recipient will not be considered as used entirely medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fairchild with the child’s own wages, even if you paid for that person’s support if it is shown that part of rental value of the lodging provided for Grace isthe wages. the payments were not used for that purpose. $1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar
rooming facilities. Figure Grace’s total supportYear support is provided. The year you pro- Foster care payments and expenses. Pay-
as follows:vide the support is the year you pay for it, even if ments you receive for the support of a foster
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

Page 34 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3-1. Worksheet for Determining Support Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year ............................................ 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person’s support ....................... 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ........................... 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person’s savings and other accounts at the end of the year ....... 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) .............................. 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
6a. Enter the total rent paid .................................................. 6a.
6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home,
also include this amount in line 21. ............................................ 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses ................................................. 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) .......... 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) .......................... 9.
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance. ................................. 10.
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ....................... 11.
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ............................. 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person’s share of the household expenses.............. 13.
14. Enter the person’s total clothing expenses ........................................ 14.
15. Enter the person’s total education expenses....................................... 15.
16. Enter the person’s total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance . . . 16.
17. Enter the person’s total travel and recreation expenses ............................... 17.
18. Enter the total of the person’s other expenses...................................... 18.
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person’s support for the year ............ 19.
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50) .................................................. 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support ................ 21.
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to
determine if this person is your qualifying relative.
Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person’s support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. . . . 23.
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ........................................................ 24.
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person’s support......... 25.
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for this
person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or separated
parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children of Divorced or
Separated Parents ,or Kidnapped Child under Qualifying Relative.
food = $4,040) is more than half of Grace’sFair rental value of lodging ...... $  1,800 Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) ..... 1,040 $6,440 total support.
Clothing, transportation, and Total support ............... $6,440
recreation .................. 2,400 Example 2. Your parents live with you, your
spouse, and your two children in a house youMedical expenses ............ 1,200 The support Frank and Mary provide ($1,800 own. The fair rental value of your parents’ sharelodging + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040
Page 32 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 35 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each), house, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro- Tuition payments and allowances under the
vided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities) GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under thewhich includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa-
of which you are considered to provide $4,200 GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances whilether receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200,
($3,600 + $600). they attend school are included in total support.which he spends equally between your mother
and himself for items of support such as cloth- Person living in his or her own home. The Example. During the year, your son re-ing, transportation, and recreation. Your total total fair rental value of a person’s home that he ceives $2,200 from the government under the GIfood expense for the household is $6,000. Your or she owns is considered support contributed Bill. He uses this amount for his education. Youheat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Your by that person. provide the rest of his support – $2,000. Be-mother has hospital and medical expenses of
Living with someone rent free. If you live cause GI benefits are included in total support,$600, which you pay during the year. Figure
with a person rent free in his or her home, you your son’s total support is $4,200 ($2,200 +your parents’ total support as follows:
must reduce the amount you provide for support $2,000). You have not provided more than half
by the fair rental value of lodging he or she of his support.Support provided Father Mother provides you.
Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000 Child care expenses. If you pay someone to
Property. Property provided as support is provide child or dependent care, you can includePension spent for their measured by its fair market value. Fair market these payments in the amount you provided forsupport ............. 2,100 2,100
value is the price that property would sell for on the support of your child or disabled dependent,
Share of food (1/6 of the open market. It is the price that would be even if you claim a credit for the payments. For$6,000) ............. 1,000 1,000 agreed upon between a willing buyer and a information on the credit, see chapter 32.
willing seller, with neither being required to act,Medical expenses for
and both having reasonable knowledge of the Other support items. Other items may bemother .............. 6 0 0
relevant facts. considered as support depending on the facts inParents’ total support. . . $4,100 $4,700 each case.Capital expenses. Capital items, such asYou must apply the support test separately furniture, appliances, and cars, that are boughtto each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000 for a person during the year can be included in Do Not Includelodging, $1,000 food) of your father’s total sup- total support under certain circumstances.port of $4,100 – less than half. You provide in Total SupportThe following examples show when a capital$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000 item is or is not support. The following items are not included in totalfood, $600 medical) – more than half of her total
support.support of $4,700. You meet the support test for Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawnyour mother, but not your father. Heat and utility mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is 1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paidcosts are included in the fair rental value of the given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. by persons from their own income. lodging, so these are not considered separately. Because the lawn mower benefits all members
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid byof the household, you cannot include the cost of
persons from their own income. Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, the lawn mower in the support of your child.
you are considered to provide support equal to 3. Life insurance premiums. the fair rental value of the room, apartment, Example 2. You buy a $150 television set
house, or other shelter in which the person lives. 4. Funeral expenses. as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.
Fair rental value includes a reasonable allow- The television set is placed in your child’s bed- 5. Scholarships received by your child if yourance for the use of furniture and appliances, and room. You can include the cost of the television child is a full-time student. for heat and other utilities that are provided. set in the support of your child.
6. Survivors’ and Dependents’ EducationalFair rental value defined. This is the Assistance payments used for the supportExample 3. You pay $5,000 for a car andamount you could reasonably expect to receive of the child who receives them.register it in your name. You and yourfrom a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It is 17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-used instead of actual expenses such as taxes, Government or charitable assistance you re-cause you own the car and do not give it to yourinterest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utilities, ceived because of your temporary relocationdaughter but merely let her use it, you cannotcost of furniture and appliances, etc. In some due to Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma, is notinclude the cost of the car in your daughter’scases, fair rental value may be equal to the rent included in total support. Disregard thesetotal support. However, you can include in yourpaid. amounts in determining who provided a per-daughter’s support your out-of-pocket expenses son’s support. If you provide the total lodging, the amount of of operating the car for her benefit.support you provide is the fair rental value of the
room the person uses, or a share of the fair Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, using Multiple Support Agreementrental value of the entire dwelling if the person personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-has use of your entire home. If you do not pro- vide all the rest of your son’s support – $4,000. Sometimes no one provides more than half ofvide the total lodging, the total fair rental value Since the car is bought and owned by your son, the support of a person. Instead, two or moremust be divided depending on how much of the the car’s fair market value ($4,500) must be persons, each of whom would be able to taketotal lodging you provide. If you provide only a included in his support. Your son has provided the exemption but for the support test, togetherpart and the person supplies the rest, the fair more than half of his own total support of $8,500 provide more than half of the person’s support.rental value must be divided between both of ($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your qualifyingyou according to the amount each provides. When this happens, you can agree that anychild. You did not provide more than half of his one of you who individually provides more thantotal support, so he is not your qualifying rela-Example. Your parents live rent free in a 10% of the person’s support, but only one, cantive. You cannot claim an exemption for yourhouse you own. It has a fair rental value of claim an exemption for that person as a qualify-son.$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair ing relative. Each of the others must sign a
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 statement agreeing not to claim the exemptionMedical insurance premiums. Medical insur-for the furniture. This does not include heat and for that year. The person who claims the exemp-ance premiums you pay, including premiums forutilities. The house is completely furnished with tion must keep these signed statements for hissupplementary Medicare coverage, are in-furniture belonging to your parents. You pay or her records. A multiple support declarationcluded in the support you provide.$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usually identifying each of the others who agreed not to
included in rent for houses in the area where Medical insurance benefits. Medical in- claim the exemption must be attached to the
your parents live. Therefore, you consider the surance benefits, including basic and supple- return of the person claiming the exemption.
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 mentary Medicare benefits, are not part of Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished support. be used for this purpose.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 33

Page 36 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can claim an exemption under a multiple she will not claim the child as a depen- • The signature page with the other parent’s
dent for the year, and the noncustodial signature and the date of the agreement.support agreement for someone related to you
parent attaches this written declarationor for someone who lived with you all year as a
to his or her return. (If the decree ormember of your household. The noncustodial parent must attachagreement went into effect after 1984, the required information even if it wassee Divorce decree or separationExample 1. You, your sister, and your filed with a return in an earlier year.CAUTION
!
agreement made after 1984, later.)two brothers provide the entire support of your
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-mother for the year. You provide 45%, your Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-rate maintenance or written separationsister 35%, and your two brothers each provide port provided by your new spouse is treated asagreement that applies to 2006 states10%. Either you or your sister can claim an provided by you.that the noncustodial parent can claimexemption for your mother. The other must sign Child support under pre-1985 agreement.the child as a dependent, the decree ora statement agreeing not to take an exemption All child support payments actually receivedagreement was not changed after 1984for your mother. The one who claims the exemp- from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985to say the noncustodial parent cannottion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara- agreement are considered used for the supportclaim the child as a dependent, and thetion, to his or her return and must keep the of the child.noncustodial parent provides at leaststatement signed by the other for his or her $600 for the child’s support during therecords. Because neither brother provides more Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, theyear.than 10% of the support, neither can take the noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for the
exemption and neither has to sign a statement. child’s support. This amount is considered sup-Custodial parent and noncustodial parent. port provided by the noncustodial parent even ifThe custodial parent is the parent with whom theExample 2. You and your brother each pro- the $1,200 was actually spent on things otherchild lived for the greater part of the year. Thevide 20% of your mother’s support for the year. than support.other parent is the noncustodial parent.The remaining 60% of her support is provided
Alimony. Payments to a spouse that areIf the parents divorced or separated duringequally by two persons who are not related to
includible in the spouse’s gross income as eitherthe year and the child lived with both parentsher. She does not live with them. Because more
alimony, separate maintenance payments, orbefore the separation, the custodial parent is thethan half of her support is provided by persons similar payments from an estate or trust, are notone with whom the child lived for the greater partwho cannot claim an exemption for her, no one treated as a payment for the support of a depen-of the rest of the year.can take the exemption. dent.
Example. Your child lived with you for 10Example 3. Your father lives with you and Parents who never married. This special rulemonths of the year. The child lived with yourreceives 25% of his support from social security, for divorced or separated parents also applies toformer spouse for the other 2 months. You are40% from you, 24% from his brother (your un- parents who never married.considered the custodial parent.cle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or your Multiple support agreement. If the support ofuncle can take the exemption for your father if Written declaration.  The custodial parent the child is determined under a multiple supportthe other signs a statement agreeing not to. The may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement agreement, this special support test for divorcedone who takes the exemption must attach Form (containing the same information required by the or separated parents does not apply.2120, or a similar declaration, to his return and form) to make the written declaration to release
must keep for his records the signed statement the exemption to the noncustodial parent. The
noncustodial parent must attach the form orfrom the one agreeing not to take the exemption.
statement to his or her tax return.
Phaseout ofThe exemption can be released for 1 year,
Support Test for Children of for a number of specified years (for example,
Exemptionsalternate years), or for all future years, as speci-Divorced or Separated Parents
fied in the declaration. If the exemption is re-
The amount you can claim as a deduction forIn most cases, a child of divorced or separated leased for more than 1 year, the original release
exemptions is reduced once your adjusted grossparents will be a qualifying child of one of the must be attached to the return of the noncus-
income (AGI) goes above a certain level for yourtodial parent for the first year, and a copy mustparents. See Children of divorced or separated
filing status. These levels are as follows:be attached for each later year.parents under Qualifying Child,  earlier. How-
ever, if the child does not meet the requirements Divorce decree or separation agreement AGI Levelto be a qualifying child of either parent, the child made after 1984. If the divorce decree or Thatmay be a qualifying relative of one of the par- separation agreement went into effect after Reducesents. In that case, the following rules must be 1984, the noncustodial parent can attach cer- Exemption
used in applying the support test. Filing Status Amounttain pages from the decree or agreement in-
A child will be treated as being the qualifying stead of Form 8332. To be able to do this, the
relative of his or her noncustodial parent if all decree or agreement must state all three of the Married filing separately ...... $  112,875
four of the following statements are true. Single .................. 150,500following.
Head of household ..........  188,1501. The parents: 1. The noncustodial parent can claim the Married filing jointly ......... 225,750child as a dependent without regard to anya. Are divorced or legally separated under Qualifying widow(er) ......... 225,750condition, such as payment of support.a decree of divorce or separate mainte- You must reduce the dollar amount of your2. The custodial parent will not claim the childnance, exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part ofas a dependent for the year.b. Are separated under a written separa- $2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-3. The years for which the noncustodial par-tion agreement, or rately), that your AGI exceeds the amountent, rather than the custodial parent, canc. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 shown above for your filing status. However,claim the child as a dependent.months of the year. beginning in 2006, you can lose no more than 2/3
The noncustodial parent must attach all of of the dollar amount of your exemptions. In other2. The child received over half of his or her the following pages of the decree or agreement words, each exemption cannot be reduced tosupport for the year from the parents. to his or her tax return. less than $1,100.3. The child is in the custody of one or both • The cover page (write the other parent’s If your AGI exceeds the level for your filingparents for more than half of the year. social security number on this page). status, use the Deduction for Exemptions Work-4. Either of the following statements is true. • The pages that include all of the informa- sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form
a. The custodial parent signs a written tion identified in items (1) through (3) 1040A to figure the amount of your deduction for
declaration, discussed later, that he or above. exemptions. However, if you are claiming a
Page 34 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 37 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$500 exemption for housing an individual dis- • Credit for withholding and estimated
tax. When you file your 2006 income taxplaced by Hurricane Katrina, use Form 8914
return, take credit for all the income taxinstead. 4. withheld from your salary, wages, pen-
sions, etc., and for the estimated tax you
paid for 2006.
• Underpayment penalty. If you did notTax Withholding
pay enough tax during the year, either
through withholding or by making esti-Social Security and Estimated mated tax payments, you may have to pay
a penalty. In most cases, the IRS can fig-
Numbers for
ure this penalty for you. See Underpay-Tax ment Penalty at the end of this chapter.Dependents
You must list the social security number (SSN) Useful ItemsWhat’s New for 2007of any dependent for whom you claim an exemp- You may want to see:tion in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or
Tax law changes for 2007. When you figureForm 1040A. Publicationhow much income tax you want withheld fromIf you do not list the dependent’s SSN your pay and when you figure your estimated ❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Taxwhen required or if you list an incorrect tax, consider tax law changes effective in 2007.SSN, the exemption may be disal- ❏ 553 Highlights of 2006 Tax ChangesCAUTION
!
See What’s New for 2007 in the front of thislowed. publication, or get Publication 553, Highlights of ❏ 919 How Do I Adjust My Tax
2006 Tax Changes. Withholding?
No SSN. If a person for whom you expect to
Form (and Instructions)claim an exemption on your return does not
have an SSN, either you or that person should ❏ W-4 Employee’s Withholding AllowanceRemindersapply for an SSN as soon as possible by filing Certificate
Form SS-5, Application for a Social Security ❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for PensionEstimated tax safe harbor for higher incomeCard, with the Social Security Administration or Annuity Paymentstaxpayers. If your adjusted gross income was(SSA). Information about applying for an SSN more than $150,000 ($75,000 if you are married ❏ W-4S Request for Federal Income Taxand Form SS-5 is available at your local SSA filing a separate return), you will have to deposit Withholding From Sick Payoffice. the smaller of 90% of your expected tax for 2007
❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an or 110% of the tax shown on your 2006 return to
avoid an estimated tax penalty.SSN. If you do not have a required SSN by the ❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals
filing due date, you can file Form 4868 for an ❏ 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax byPayment of estimated tax electronically.extension of time to file. Individuals, Estates, and TrustsYou may be able to pay your estimated tax by
electronic means. For more information, seeBorn and died in 2006.   If your child was
How To Pay Estimated Tax in chapter 2 of Publi-born and died in 2006, and you do not have an
cation 505.SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the
child’s birth certificate instead. If you do, enter Withholding“DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your Form
1040 or Form 1040A.   This section discusses income tax withholding
Introduction on these types of income:
This chapter discusses how to pay your tax as • Salaries and wages,Alien or adoptee with no SSN. If your depen-
you earn or receive income during the year. In • Tips,dent does not have and cannot get an SSN, you
general, the federal income tax is a • Taxable fringe benefits,must list the individual taxpayer identification pay-as-you-go tax. There are two ways to pay • Sick pay,number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica- as you go. • Pensions and annuities,tion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN. • Withholding. If you are an employee, • Gambling winnings,Taxpayer identification numbers for your employer probably withholds income • Unemployment compensation, andtax from your pay. Tax also may be with-aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non-
• Certain federal payments, such as socialheld from certain other income, includingresident alien who does not have and is not security.pensions, bonuses, commissions, andeligible to get an SSN, your dependent must
gambling winnings. In each case, the This section explains in detail the rules for with-apply for an individual taxpayer identification amount withheld is paid to the IRS in your holding tax from each of these types of income.number (ITIN). Write the number in column (2) of name.line 6c of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. To This section also covers backup withholding• Estimated tax. If you do not pay your taxapply for an ITIN, use Form W-7, Application for on interest, dividends, and other payments.through withholding, or do not pay enoughIRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number. tax that way, you might have to pay esti-
mated tax. People who are in business forTaxpayer identification numbers for Salaries and Wages
themselves generally will have to pay theiradoptees. If you have a child who was placed
Income tax is withheld from the pay of mosttax this way. You may have to pay esti-with you by an authorized placement agency,
employees. Your pay includes your regular pay,mated tax if you receive income such asyou may be able to claim an exemption for the bonuses, commissions, and vacation al-dividends, interest, capital gains, rent, andchild. However, if you cannot get an SSN or an lowances. It also includes reimbursements androyalties. Estimated tax is used to pay notITIN for the child, you must get an adoption other expense allowances paid under a nonac-only income tax, but self-employment taxtaxpayer identification number (ATIN) for the countable plan. See Supplemental Wages,and alternative minimum tax as well.
child from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Application later, for more information about reimburse-
for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending This chapter explains these methods. In ad- ments and allowances paid under a nonac-
U.S. Adoptions, for details. dition, it also explains the following. countable plan.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 35

Page 38 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your income is low enough that you will not be able to avoid overwithholding if your em- of worksheets. You can divide your to tal al-
have to pay income tax for the year, you may be ployer agrees to use the part-year method. See lowances any way, but you cannot c laim an
exempt from withholding. This is explained Part-Year Method in chapter 1 of Publication allowance that your spouse also claims.
under Exemption From Withholding, later. 505 for more information. If you and your spouse expect to file sepa-
rate returns, figure your allowances using sepa-
Military retirees. Military retirement pay is rate worksheets based on your own individual
treated in the same manner as regular pay for Changing Your Withholding income, adjustments, deductions, exemptions,
income tax withholding purposes, even though it and credits.
Events during the year may change your maritalis treated as a pension or annuity for other tax
status or the exemptions, adjustments, deduc-purposes. Alternative method of figuring withholdingtions, or credits you expect to claim on your tax allowances. You do not have to use the Formreturn. When this happens, you may need toHousehold workers. If you are a household W-4 worksheets if you use a more accurategive your employer a new Form W-4 to changeworker, you can ask your employer to withhold method of figuring the number of withholdingyour withholding status or number of al-income tax from your pay. allowances. See Alternative method of figuringlowances.Tax is withheld only if you want it withheld withholding allowances under Completing Form
If the event changes your withholding statusand your employer agrees to withhold it. If you W-4 and Worksheets in chapter 1 of Publication
or the number of allowances you are claiming,do not have enough income tax withheld, you 505 for more information.
you must give your employer a new Form W-4may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed
within 10 days after either of the following.later under Estimated Tax. Personal Allowances Worksheet. Use the
• Your divorce, if you have been claiming Personal Allowances Worksheet on page 1 of
married status.Farmworkers. Income tax generally is with- Form W-4 to figure your withholding allowances
• Any event that decreases the number ofheld from your cash wages for work on a farm based on exemptions and any special al-
withholding allowances you can claim.unless your employer both: lowances that apply.
• Pays you cash wages of less than $150
Generally, you can submit a new Form W-4during the year, and Deductions and Adjustments Worksheet.whenever you wish to change the number of• Has expenditures for agricultural labor to- Use this worksheet if you plan to itemize youryour withholding allowances for any other rea-taling less than $2,500 during the year. deductions or claim adjustments to the incomeson. on your 2007 tax return and you want to reduce
You can ask your employer to withhold in- your withholding.
Changing your withholding for 2008. Ifcome tax from noncash wages and other wages Fill out this worksheet to adjust the number ofevents in 2007 will decrease the number of yournot subject to withholding. If your employer does your withholding allowances for deductions, ad-withholding allowances for 2008, you must givenot agree to withhold tax, or if not enough is justments to income, and tax credits. The De-your employer a new Form W-4 by December 1,withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, as ductions and Adjustments Worksheet is on page2007. If the event occurs in December 2007,discussed later under Estimated Tax. 2 of Form W-4. Chapter 1 of Publication 505submit a new Form W-4 within 10 days. explains this worksheet.
Determining Amount of Tax Two-Earner/Multiple-Job Worksheet. YouChecking Your WithholdingWithheld Using Form W-4 may need to complete this worksheet if you have
more than one job or a working spouse. YouAfter you have given your employer a Form W-4,The amount of income tax your employer with- also can add to the amount, if any, on line 8 ofyou can check to see whether the amount of taxholds from your regular pay depends on two this worksheet any additional withholding nec-withheld from your pay is too little or too much.things. essary to cover any amount you expect to oweSee Publication 919,  later. If too much or too• The amount you earn. other than income tax, such as self-employmentlittle tax is being withheld, you should give your• The information you give your employer tax.employer a new Form W-4 to change your with-on Form W-4. holding.
Form W-4 includes three types of information Getting the Right Amount of TaxNote. You cannot give your employer a pay-that your employer will use to figure your with- Withheldment to cover withholding for past pay periods orholding. a payment for estimated tax.
In most situations, the tax withheld from your• Whether to withhold at the single rate or at
pay will be close to the tax you figure on yourthe lower married rate.
return if you follow these two rules.• How many withholding allowances you Completing Form W-4 and • You accurately complete all the Form W-4claim. (Each allowance reduces the Worksheets worksheets that apply to you.amount withheld.)
• You give your employer a new Form W-4Form W-4 has worksheets to help you figure• Whether you want an additional amount
when changes occur.how many withholding allowances you canwithheld.
claim. The worksheets are for your own records. But because the worksheets and withholdingDo not give them to your employer. methods do not account for all possible situa-Note. You must specify a filing status and a tions, you may not be getting the right amountnumber of withholding allowances on Form W-4. Multiple jobs. If you have income from more withheld. This is most likely to happen in theYou cannot specify only a dollar amount of with- than one job at the same time, complete only following situations.holding. one set of Form W-4 worksheets. Then split your • You are married and both you and yourallowances between the Forms W-4 for each spouse work.job. You cannot claim the same allowances with • You have more than one job at a time.more than one employer at the same time. YouNew Job • You have nonwage income, such as inter-can claim all your allowances with one employer
est, dividends, alimony, unemploymentWhen you start a new job, you must fill out Form and none with the other(s), or divide them any
compensation, or self-employment in-W-4 and give it to your employer. Your employer other way.
come.should have copies of the form. If you need to
change the information later, you must fill out a • You will owe additional amounts with yourMarried individuals. If both you and your
new form. return, such as self-employment tax.spouse are employed and expect to file a joint
If you work only part of the year (for example, return, figure your withholding allowances using • Your withholding is based on obsolete
you start working after the beginning of the your combined income, adjustments, deduc- Form W-4 information for a substantial
year), too much tax may be withheld. You may tions, exemptions, and credits. Use only one set part of the year.
Page 36 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 39 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your earnings are more than $130,000 if as paid under a nonaccountable plan if you doExemption From Withholding
you are single or $180,000 if you are mar- not return the excess payments within a reason-
If you claim exemption from withholding, yourried. able period of time.
employer will not withhold federal income tax• You work only part of the year. For more information about accountable andfrom your wages. The exemption applies only to• You change the number of your withhold- nonaccountable expense allowance plans, seeincome tax, not to social security or Medicareing allowances during the year. Reimbursements in chapter 26.tax.
You can claim exemption from withholding
Cumulative wage method. If you change the for 2007 only if both of the following situations Penaltiesnumber of your withholding allowances during apply.
the year, too much or too little tax may have • For 2006 you had a right to a refund of all You may have to pay a penalty of $500 if bothbeen withheld for the period before you made federal income tax withheld because you of the following apply.the change. You may be able to compensate for had no tax liability. • You make statements or claim withholdingthis if your employer agrees to use the cumula- • For 2007 you expect a refund of all federal allowances on your Form W-4 that reducetive wage withholding method for the rest of the income tax withheld because you expect the amount of tax withheld.year. You must ask in writing that your employer to have no tax liability. • You have no reasonable basis for thoseuse this method.
statements or allowances at the time youTo be eligible, you must have been paid for
prepare your Form W-4.the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi- Students. If you are a student, you are not
weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year. automatically exempt. See chapter 1 to see
There is also a criminal penalty for willfullywhether you must file a return. If you work only
supplying false or fraudulent information on yourpart time or only during the summer, you may
qualify for exemption from withholding.Publication 919 Form W-4 or for willfully failing to supply informa-
tion that would increase the amount withheld.
To make sure you are getting the right amount of The penalty upon conviction can be either a fineAge 65 or older or blind. If you are 65 or oldertax withheld, get Publication 919. It will help you of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 1 year,or blind, use one of the worksheets in chapter 1compare the total tax to be withheld during the of Publication 505, under Exemption From With- or both.year with the tax you can expect to figure on holding, to help you decide whether you can These penalties will apply if you deliberatelyyour return. It also will help you determine how claim exemption from withholding. Do not use and knowingly falsify your Form W-4 in an at-much additional withholding, if any, is needed either worksheet if you will itemize deductions, tempt to reduce or eliminate the proper withhold-each payday to avoid owing tax when you file claim exemptions for dependents, or claim tax ing of taxes. A simple error, an honest mistake,your return. If you do not have enough tax with- credits on your 2007 return. Instead, see Itemiz- will not result in one of these penalties. Forheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, as ing deductions or claiming exemptions or credits example, a person who has tried to figure theexplained under Estimated Tax, later. in chapter 1 of Publication 505. number of withholding allowances correctly, but
claims seven when the proper number is six, will
Claiming exemption from withholding. To not be charged a W-4 penalty.Rules Your Employer Must Follow claim exemption, you must give your employer a
Form W-4. Do not complete lines 5 and 6. EnterIt may be helpful for you to know some of the Tips“exempt” on line 7.withholding rules your employer must follow.
If you claim exemption, but later your situa-These rules can affect how to fill out your Form The tips you receive while working on your jobtion changes so that you will have to pay incomeW-4 and how to handle problems that may arise. are considered part of your pay. You must in-tax after all, you must file a new Form W-4 within
clude your tips on your tax return on the same10 days after the change. If you claim exemptionNew Form W-4. When you start a new job, line as your regular pay. However, tax is notin 2007, but you expect to owe income tax foryour employer should give you a Form W-4 to fill withheld directly from tip income, as it is from2008, you must file a new Form W-4 by Decem-out. Beginning with your first payday, your em- your regular pay. Nevertheless, your employerber 1, 2007.ployer will use the information you give on the will take into account the tips you report whenYour claim of exempt status may be re-form to figure your withholding. figuring how much to withhold from your regularviewed by the IRS.If you later fill out a new Form W-4, your pay.employer can put it into effect as soon as possi- An exemption is good for only 1 year. See chapter 6 for information on reportingble. The deadline for putting it into effect is the You must give your employer a new Form W-4 your tips to your employer. For more informationstart of the first payroll period ending 30 or more by February 15 each year to continue your ex- on the withholding rules for tip income, see Pub-days after you turn it in. emption.
lication 531, Reporting Tip Income.
No Form W-4. If you do not give your em-
How employer figures amount to withhold.ployer a completed Form W-4, your employer Supplemental Wages
The tips you report to your employer aremust withhold at the highest rate, as if you were
Supplemental wages include bonuses, commis- counted as part of your income for the monthsingle and claimed no withholding allowances.
sions, overtime pay, vacation allowances, cer- you report them. Your employer can figure your
tain sick pay, and expense allowances under withholding in either of two ways.Repaying withheld tax. If you find you are
certain plans. The payer can figure withholding • By withholding at the regular rate on thehaving too much tax withheld because you did
on supplemental wages using the same method sum of your pay plus your reported tips.not claim all the withholding allowances you are
used for your regular wages. However, if theseentitled to, you should give your employer a new • By withholding at the regular rate on yourpayments are identified separately from yourForm W-4. Your employer cannot repay any of pay plus a percentage of your reportedregular wages, your employer or other payer ofthe tax previously withheld. Instead, claim the tips.supplemental wages can withhold income taxfull amount withheld when you file your tax re-
from these wages at a flat rate.turn.
Not enough pay to cover taxes. If your regu-However, if your employer has withheld
lar pay is not enough for your employer to with-Expense allowances. Reimbursements ormore than the correct amount of tax for the Form
hold all the tax (including income tax, socialother expense allowances paid by your em-W-4 you have in effect, you do not have to fill out
security tax, Medicare tax, or railroad retirementployer under a nonaccountable plan are treateda new Form W-4 to have your withholding low-
tax) due on your pay plus your tips, you can giveas supplemental wages.ered to the correct amount. Your employer can
your employer money to cover the shortage.repay the amount that was withheld incorrectly. Reimbursements or other expense al-
See Giving your employer money for taxes inIf you are not repaid, your Form W-2 will reflect lowances paid under an accountable plan that
chapter 6.the full amount actually withheld. are more than your proven expenses are treated
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 37

Page 40 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Allocated tips. Your employer should not you may have to pay a penalty. See Underpay- Unemploymentwithhold income tax, social security tax, Medi- ment Penalty at the end of this chapter.
Compensationcare tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allo-
cated tips. Withholding is based only on your Pensions and Annuities You can choose to have income tax withheldpay plus your reported tips. Your employer
from unemployment compensation. To makeshould refund to you any incorrectly withheld Income tax usually will be withheld from your this choice, you will have to fill out Form W-4Vtax. See Allocated Tips in chapter 6 for more pension or annuity distributions unless you (or a similar form provided by the payer) andinformation. choose not to have it withheld. This rule ap- give it to the payer.plies to distributions from: Unemployment compensation is taxable. So,Taxable Fringe Benefits • A traditional individual retirement arrange- if you do not have income tax withheld, you may
ment (IRA), have to pay estimated tax. See Estimated Tax,The value of certain noncash fringe benefits you • A life insurance company under an en- later.receive from your employer is considered part of dowment, annuity, or life insurance con- If you do not pay enough tax, either throughyour pay. Your employer generally must with- tract, withholding or estimated tax, you may have tohold income tax on these benefits from your pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty,• A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan,regular pay. later, for information.• A stock bonus plan, andFor information on fringe benefits, see Fringe
• Any other plan that defers the time youBenefits under Employee Compensation in
receive compensation. Federal Paymentschapter 5.
Although the value of your personal use of an
The amount withheld depends on whether You can choose to have income tax withheldemployer-provided car, truck, or other highway
you receive payments spread out over more from certain federal payments you receive.motor vehicle is taxable, your employer can
These payments are:than 1 year (periodic payments), within 1 yearchoose not to withhold income tax on that
(nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible rollo-amount. Your employer must notify you if this 1. Social security benefits,
ver distribution (ERD). You cannot choose not tochoice is made. 2. Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,have income tax withheld from an ERD.For more information on withholding on tax- 3. Commodity credit loans you choose to in-able fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Publication clude in your gross income, andMore information. For more information on505. 4. Payments under the Agricultural Act oftaxation of annuities and distributions (including 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), or title II ofeligible rollover distributions) from qualified re-Sick Pay the Disaster Assistance Act of 1988, astirement plans, see chapter 10. For information amended, that are treated as insuranceon IRAs, see chapter 17. For more informationSick pay is a payment to you to replace your proceeds and that you receive because:on withholding on pensions and annuities, in-regular wages while you are temporarily absent a. Your crops were destroyed or damagedcluding a discussion of Form W-4P, see Pen-from work due to sickness or personal injury. To by drought, flood, or any other naturalsions and Annuities in chapter 1 of Publicationqualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plan disaster, or505.to which your employer is a party. b. You were unable to plant crops be-If you receive sick pay from your employer or cause of a natural disaster described inan agent of your employer, income tax must be Gambling Winnings (a).withheld. An agent who does not pay regular
Income tax is withheld at a flat 25% rate fromwages to you may choose to withhold income To make this choice, you will have to fill outcertain kinds of gambling winnings.tax at a flat rate. Form W-4V (or a similar form provided by theHowever, if you receive sick pay from a third Gambling winnings of more than $5,000 payer) and give it to the payer.party who is not acting as an agent of your from the following sources are subject to in- If you do not choose to have income taxemployer, income tax will be withheld only if you come tax withholding. withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax.choose to have it withheld. See Form W-4S, • Any sweepstakes, wagering pool, or lot- See Estimated Tax, later.later. tery. If you do not pay enough tax, either throughIf you receive payments under a plan in • Any other wager, if the proceeds are at withholding or estimated tax, you may have towhich your employer does not participate (such least 300 times the amount of the bet. pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty, atas an accident or health plan where you paid all the end of this chapter, for information.It does not matter whether your winnings arethe premiums), the payments are not sick pay
paid in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Win-and usually are not taxable. More information. For more informationnings not paid in cash are taken into account at about the tax treatment of social security andtheir fair market value.Union agreements. If you receive sick pay railroad retirement benefits, see chapter 11. Getunder a collective bargaining agreement be- Gambling winnings from bingo, keno, and slot Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide, for infor-tween your union and your employer, the agree- machines generally are not subject to income mation about the tax treatment of commodityment may determine the amount of income tax tax withholding. However, you may need to pro- credit loans or crop disaster payments.withholding. See your union representative or vide the payer with a social security number toyour employer for more information. avoid withholding. See Backup withholding on Backup Withholdinggambling winnings in chapter 1 of PublicationForm W-4S. If you choose to have income tax 505. If you receive gambling winnings not sub- Banks and other businesses that pay you cer-withheld from sick pay paid by a third party, such ject to withholding, you may need to pay esti- tain kinds of income must file an informationas an insurance company, you must fill out Form mated tax. See Estimated Tax, later. return (Form 1099) with the IRS. The informa-W-4S. Its instructions contain a worksheet you
If you do not pay enough tax through with- tion return shows how much you were paid dur-can use to figure the amount you want withheld.
holding or estimated tax payments, you may ing the year. It also includes your name andThey also explain restrictions that may apply.
have to pay a penalty. See Underpayment Pen- taxpayer identification number (TIN). TINs areGive the completed form to the payer of your
alty, later. explained in chapter 1.sick pay. The payer must withhold according to
These payments generally are not subject toyour directions on the form.
Form W-2G. If a payer withholds income tax withholding. However, “backup” withholding is
from your gambling winnings, you should re- required in certain situations. Backup withhold-Estimated tax. If you do not request withhold-
ceive a Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Win- ing can apply to most kinds of payments that areing on Form W-4S, or if you do not have enough
nings, showing the amount you won and the reported on Form 1099.tax withheld, you may have to make estimated
amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on linetax payments. If you do not pay enough esti- The payer must withhold at a flat 28% rate
64 of Form 1040.mated tax or have enough income tax withheld, in the following situations.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 41 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 4-A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Will you owe $1,000 or more
for 2007 after subtracting
income tax withholding and
credits from your total tax?
(Do not subtract any
estimated tax payments.)
You MUST make estimated
tax payment(s) by the
required due date(s).
Start Here
No
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 100%* of the tax shown
on your 2006 tax return?
/H17075
No
/H17075
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 90% (66-2/3% for farmers
and fishermen) of the tax
shown on your 2007 tax
return? Note: Your 2006 return must
have covered a 12-month
period.
You are NOT required to pay
estimated tax.
See When To Pay
Estimated Tax.
No
Yes
* 110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2006 and 2007 is from farming or fishing and your 2006 adjusted gross in come was more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2007 is married filing a separate return).
/H17074
/H17076
/H17076
• You do not give the payer your TIN in the do not pay enough through withholding or esti- General rule. You must pay estimated tax for
mated tax payments, you may have to pay a 2007 if both of the following apply.required manner.
penalty. If you do not pay enough by the due• The IRS notifies the payer that the TIN 1. You expect to owe at least $1,000 in taxdate of each payment period (see When To Payyou gave is incorrect. for 2007 after subtracting your withholdingEstimated Tax, later), you may be charged a• You are required, but fail, to certify that and credits.penalty even if you are due a refund when youyou are not subject to backup withholding. 2. You expect your withholding and credits tofile your tax return. For information on when the• The IRS notifies the payer to start with- be less than the smaller of:penalty applies, see Underpayment Penalty, atholding on interest or dividends because a. 90% of the tax to be shown on yourthe end of this chapter.you have underreported interest or divi- 2007 tax return, ordends on your income tax return. The IRS b. 100% of the tax shown on your 2006Who Does Not Have Towill do this only after it has mailed you four tax return. Your 2006 tax return mustnotices over at least a 210-day period. Pay Estimated Tax cover all 12 months.
See Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of Publi- If you receive salaries or wages, you can avoid Special rules for farmers, fishermen, andcation 505 for more information. having to pay estimated tax by asking your em- higher income taxpayers. There are excep-ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. To tions to the general rule for farmers, fishermen,Penalties. There are civil and criminal penal- do this, give a new Form W-4 to your employer. and certain higher income taxpayers. See Fig-ties for giving false information to avoid backup See chapter 1 of Publication 505. ure 4-A and chapter 2 of Publication 505 forwithholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi-
more information.Estimated tax not required. You do notnal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up to
have to pay estimated tax for 2007 if you meet$1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both. Aliens. Resident and nonresident aliensall three of the following conditions. also may have to pay estimated tax. Resident• You had no tax liability for 2006. aliens should follow the rules in this chapter
• You were a U.S. citizen or resident for the unless noted otherwise. Nonresident aliens
whole year. should get Form 1040-ES(NR), U.S. EstimatedEstimated Tax • Your 2006 tax year covered a 12-month Tax for Nonresident Alien Individuals.
period. You are an alien if you are not a citizen orEstimated tax is the method used to pay tax on national of the United States. You are a residentincome that is not subject to withholding. This You had no tax liability for 2006 if your total tax alien if you either have a green card or meet theincludes income from self-employment, interest, was zero or you did not have to file an income substantial presence test. For more informationdividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale of tax return. about the substantial presence test, see Publi-assets, prizes, and awards. You also may have cation 519.to pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax
Who Must Pay Estimatedbeing withheld from your salary, pension, or Married taxpayers. To figure whether you
other income is not enough. must pay estimated tax, apply the rules dis-Tax
Estimated tax is used to pay both income tax cussed here to your separate estimated income.
and self-employment tax, as well as other taxes If you had a tax liability for 2006, you may have If you can make joint estimated tax payments,
and amounts reported on your tax return. If you to pay estimated tax for 2007. you can apply these rules on a joint basis.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 39

Page 42 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You and your spouse can make joint esti- and credits for 2006 as a starting point. Use your installments. If you choose to pay in  install-
mated tax payments even if you are not living 2006 federal tax return as a guide. You can use ments, make your first payment by t he due date
together. Form 1040-ES to figure your estimated tax. for the first payment period. Make your remain-
Nonresident aliens use Form 1040-ES(NR) to ing installment payments by the due dates forHowever, you and your spouse cannot
figure estimated tax. the later periods.make joint estimated tax payments if:
You must make adjustments both for• You are legally separated under a decree No income subject to estimated tax duringchanges in your own situation and for recentof divorce or separate maintenance, first period. If you do not have income subjectchanges in the tax law. For 2007, there are• You and your spouse have different tax to estimated tax until a later payment period, youseveral changes in the law. For a discussion ofyears, or can make your first payment by the due date forthese changes, see Publication 553, Highlights• Either spouse is a nonresident alien (un- that period. You can pay your entire estimatedof 2006 Tax Changes, or visit the IRS website atless you elected to be treated as a resi- tax by the due date for that period, or you canwww.irs.gov.dent alien (see chapter 1 of Publication pay it in installments by the due date for thatForm 1040-ES includes a worksheet to help519)). period and the due dates for the remaining peri-you figure your estimated tax. Keep the work-
ods. The following chart shows when to makesheet for your records.Whether you and your spouse make joint esti- installment payments.For more complete information and exam-mated tax payments or separate payments will ples of how to figure your estimated tax for 2007,not affect your choice of filing a joint tax return or If you firstsee chapter 2 of Publication 505.separate returns for 2007. have income
on which you Make a Make later2006 separate returns and 2007 joint re- When To Pay Estimated must pay payment installmentsturn. If you plan to file a joint return with your estimated tax: by: by:*Taxspouse for 2007, but you filed separate returns
for 2006, your 2006 tax is the total of the tax
For estimated tax purposes, the year is dividedshown on your separate returns. You filed a Before Apr. 1  Apr. 15 June 15
into four payment periods. Each period has a Sept. 15separate return if you filed as single, head of
specific payment due date. If you do not pay Jan. 15 nexthousehold, or married filing separately.
enough tax by the due date of each of the pay- year2006 joint return and 2007 separate re- ment periods, you may be charged a penaltyturns. If you plan to file a separate return for even if you are due a refund when you file your2007, but you filed a joint return for 2006, your income tax return. The following chart gives the April 1–May 31 June 15 Sept. 152006 tax is your share of the tax on the joint payment periods and due dates for estimated Jan. 15 nextreturn. You file a separate return if you file as tax payments. yearsingle, head of household, or married filing sep-
arately. For the period: Due date:
To figure your share of the tax on the joint
return, first figure the tax both you and your June 1– Aug.  Sept. 15 Jan. 15 nextJan. 1* through Mar. 31 Apr. 15spouse would have paid had you filed separate 31 year
returns for 2006 using the same filing status as April 1 through May 31 June 15
for 2007. Then multiply the tax on the joint return
June 1 through Aug. 31 Sept. 15by the following fraction. After Aug. 31  Jan. 15 (None)
Sept. 1 through Dec. 31 Jan. 15 next year*The tax you would have paid next year**had you filed a separate return *See January payment, and Saturday, Sunday,
*If your tax year does not begin on January 1, holiday rule under When To Pay EstimatedThe total tax you and your see the Form 1040-ES instructions. Tax, earlier.spouse would have paid had
**See January payment, later.you filed separate returns
Example. Joe and Heather filed a joint re- How much to pay to avoid a penalty. To
turn for 2006 showing taxable income of Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule. If the due determine how much you should pay by each
$48,500 and a tax of $6,524. Of the $48,500 date for an estimated tax payment falls on a payment due date, see How To Figure Each
taxable income, $40,100 was Joe’s and the rest Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the payment Payment, next. If the earlier discussion of No
was Heather’s. For 2007, they plan to file mar- will be on time if you make it on the next day that income subject to estimated tax during first pe-
ried filing separately. Joe figures his share of the is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. For riod or the later discussion of Change in esti-
tax on the 2006 joint return as follows. example, a payment due September 15, 2007, mated tax applies to you, you may need to read
will be on time if you make it by September 17, Annualized Income Installment Method in chap-
Tax on $40,100 based on a separate 2007. September 15, 2007, is a Saturday. ter 2 of Publication 505 for information on how to
return ..................... $6,589 avoid a penalty.
Tax on $8,400 based on a separate January payment. If you file your 2007 Form
return .....................  8 8 6 1040 or Form 1040A by January 31, 2008, and
How To Figure EachTotal ...................... $  7,475 pay the rest of the tax you owe, you do not need
to make the payment due on January 15, 2008. PaymentJoe’s percentage of total ($6,589 ÷
$7,475) .................... 8 8 % Fiscal year taxpayers. If your tax year does You should pay enough estimated tax by theJoe’s share of tax on joint return not start on January 1, see the Form 1040-ES due date of each payment period to avoid a($6,524 × 88%) .............. $  5,741 instructions for your payment due dates. penalty for that period. You can figure your re-
quired payment for each period by using either
the regular installment method or the annualized
How To Figure Estimated When To Start income installment method. These methods areTax described in chapter 2 of Publication 505. If youYou do not have to make estimated tax pay- do not pay enough each payment period, youTo figure your estimated tax, you must figure ments until you have income on which you will may be charged a penalty even if you are due ayour expected adjusted gross income (AGI), tax- owe the tax. If you have income subject to esti- refund when you file your tax return.able income, taxes, deductions, and credits for mated tax during the first payment period, you
the year. must make your first payment by the due date Underpayment penalty. Under the regular
When figuring your 2007 estimated tax, it for the first payment period. You can pay all your method, if your estimated tax paymen t for any
may be helpful to use your income, deductions, estimated tax at that time, or you can pay it in period is less than one-fourth of  your estimated
Page 40 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 43 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax, you may be charged a penalty for underpay- with your name, address, and social security than $94,200 during 2006, too much s ocial se-
ment of estimated tax for that period when you number. Using the preprinted vouchers will curity or railroad retirement tax may have been
file your tax return. See chapter 4 of Publication speed processing, reduce the chance of error, withheld from your wages. You ma y be able to
505 for more information. and help save processing costs. claim the excess as a credit against your income
tax when you file your return. See Credit forIf you did not pay estimated tax last year, you
Change in estimated tax. After you make an Excess Social Security Tax or Railroad Retire-will have to get Form 1040-ES. After you make
estimated tax payment, changes in your income, ment Tax Withheld in chapter 37.your first payment, a Form 1040-ES package
adjustments, deductions, credits, or exemptions with the preprinted vouchers will be mailed to
may make it necessary for you to refigure your you. Follow the instructions in the package to Withholdingestimated tax. Pay the unpaid balance of your make sure you use the vouchers correctly.
amended estimated tax by the next payment Use the window envelopes that came with If you had income tax withheld during 2006,due date after the change or in installments by your Form 1040-ES package. If you use your you should be sent a statement by January 31,that date and the due dates for the remaining own envelopes, make sure you mail your pay- 2007, showing your income and the tax with-payment periods. ment vouchers to the address shown in the held. Depending on the source of your income,
Form 1040-ES instructions for the place where you will receive:
you live. • Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement,Estimated Tax Payments • Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,Do not use the address shown in theNot Required orForm 1040 or Form 1040A instruc-
• A form in the 1099 series.tions.You do not have to pay estimated tax if your CAUTION
!
withholding in each payment period is at least If you file a joint return and you are makingas much as: Forms W-2 and W-2G. File Form W-2 withjoint estimated tax payments, please enter the
• One-fourth of your required annual pay- your income tax return. File Form W-2G withnames and social security numbers on the pay-
ment, or your return if it shows any federal income taxment voucher in the same order as they will
• Your required annualized income install- withheld from your winnings.appear on the joint return.
ment for that period. You should get at least two copies of each
Change of address. You must notify the IRS form you receive. Attach one copy to the front ofYou also do not have to pay estimated tax if you if you are making estimated tax payments and your federal income tax return. Keep one copywill pay enough through withholding to keep the you changed your address during the year. for your records. You also should receive copiesamount you owe with your return under $1,000. You must send a clear and concise written to file with your state and local returns.
statement to the Internal Revenue Service
How To Pay Estimated Tax Center where you filed your last return and
provide all of the following: Form W-2
There are five ways to pay estimated tax. • Your full name (and spouse’s full name),
Your employer should send you a Form W-2 for• By crediting an overpayment on your 2006 • Your signature (and spouse’s signature), 2006 by January 31, 2007. You should receive areturn to your 2007 estimated tax. • Your old address (and spouse’s old ad- separate Form W-2 from each employer you• By sending in your payment with a pay- dress if different), worked for.ment voucher from Form 1040-ES. • Your new address, and If you stopped working before the end of the• By using the Electronic Federal Tax Pay- • Your social security number (and spouse’s year, your employer could have given you yourment System (EFTPS). For EFTPS infor- social security number). Form W-2 at any time after you stopped working.mation, see chapter 1.
However, your employer must give it to you byYou can use Form 8822, Change of Address, for• By electronic funds withdrawal if you are January 31, 2007.this purpose.filing Form 1040 or Form 1040A electroni- If you ask for the form, your employer mustcally.  Continue to use your old preprinted payment send it to you within 30 days after receiving your• By credit card using a pay-by-phone sys- vouchers until the IRS sends you new ones. written request or within 30 days after your finaltem or the Internet. However, do not correct the address on the old wage payment, whichever is later.voucher. If you have not received your Form W-2 on
time, you should ask your employer for it. If youCrediting an Overpayment
do not receive it by February 15, call the IRS.Paying ElectronicallyIf you show an overpayment of tax after complet- Form W-2 shows your total pay and other
ing your Form 1040 or Form 1040A for 2006, compensation and the income tax, social se-If you want to make estimated payments byyou can apply part or all of it to your estimated curity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheldusing EFTPS, by electronic funds withdrawal, ortax for 2007. On line 75 of Form 1040, or line 46 during the year. Include the federal income taxby credit card, see the Form 1040-ES instruc-of Form 1040A, enter the amount you want withheld (as shown on Form W-2) on:tions or How To Pay Estimated Tax in Publica-credited to your estimated tax rather than re- • Line 64 if you file Form 1040,tion 505.funded. The amount you have credited should • Line 38 if you file Form 1040A, or
be taken into account when figuring your esti- • Line 7 if you file Form 1040EZ.mated tax payments.
In addition, Form W-2 is used to report anyThe credit will be applied to your payments in
taxable sick pay you received and any incomeCredit for Withholdingthe order necessary to avoid the penalty for
tax withheld from your sick pay.underpayment of estimated tax. You cannot
and Estimated Taxhave any of that amount refunded to you until
the close of that tax year. You also cannot use Form W-2G
When you file your 2006 income tax return, takethat overpayment in any other way.
If you had gambling winnings in 2006, the payercredit for all the income tax and excess social
may have withheld income tax. If tax was with-security or railroad retirement tax withheld from
held, the payer will give you a Form W-2G show-your salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also, takeUsing the Payment Vouchers
ing the amount you won and the amount of taxcredit for the estimated tax you paid for 2006.
withheld.Each payment of estimated tax by check or These credits are subtracted from your tax. You
money order must be accompanied by a pay- Report the amounts you won on line 21 ofshould file a return and claim these credits, even
ment voucher from Form 1040-ES. If you made Form 1040. Take credit for the tax withheld onif you do not owe tax.
estimated tax payments last year, you should line 64 of Form 1040. If you had gambling win-
receive a copy of the 2007 Form 1040-ES in the Two or more employers. If you had two or nings, you must use Form 1040; you cannot use
mail. It will have payment vouchers preprinted more employers and were paid wages of more Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

Page 44 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The 1099 Series Separate Returns Divorced Taxpayers
Most forms in the 1099 series are not filed with If you are married but file a separate return, you If you made joint estimated t ax payments for
your return. You should be sent these forms by can take credit only for the tax withheld from 2006, and you were divorced during the year,
January 31, 2007. Unless instructed to file any your own income. Do not include any amount either you or your former spouse can c laim all of
of these forms with your return, keep them for withheld from your spouse’s income. However, the joint payments, or you each can c laim part of
your records. There are several different forms different rules may apply if you live in a commu- them. If you cannot agree on ho w to divide the
in this series, including: nity property state. payments, you must divide them in proportion to
Community property states are listed in each spouse’s individual tax as shown on your• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and
chapter 2. For more information on these rules, separate returns for 2006.Barter Exchange Transactions,
and some exceptions, see Publication 555, If you claim any of the joint payments on your• Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt,
Community Property. tax return, enter your former spouse’s social• Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distribu- security number (SSN) in the space provided ontions, the front of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you• Form 1099-G, Certain Government Pay- divorced and remarried in 2006, enter your pres-Fiscal Yearsments, ent spouse’s SSN in that space and write your• Form 1099-INT, Interest Income, If you file your tax return on the basis of a fiscal former spouse’s SSN, followed by “DIV,” to the
• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income, year (a 12-month period ending on the last day left of line 65, Form 1040, or line 39, Form
• Form 1099-OID, Original Issue Discount, of any month except December), you must fol- 1040A.
low special rules to determine your credit for• Form 1099-Q, Payments From Qualified
federal income tax withholding. For a discussionEducation Programs
of how to take credit for withholding on a fiscal• Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen-
year return, see Fiscal Years in chapter 3 ofsions, Annuities, Retirement or Underpayment PenaltyPublication 505.Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance
Contracts, etc., If you did not pay enough tax, either through
• Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit Estimated Tax withholding or by making estimated tax pay-
Statement, and ments, you will have an underpayment of esti-
Take credit for all your estimated tax payments• Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Rail- mated tax and you may have to pay a penalty.
for 2006 on line 65 of Form 1040 or line 39 ofroad Retirement Board. Generally, you will not have to pay a pen-
Form 1040A. Include any overpayment from alty for 2006 if any of the following situations
2005 that you had credited to your 2006 esti-If you received the types of income reported applies.
mated tax. You must use Form 1040 or Formon some forms in the 1099 series, you may not • The total of your withholding and esti-
1040A if you paid estimated tax. You cannot usebe able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. mated tax payments was at least as much
Form 1040EZ.See the instructions to these forms for details. as your 2005 tax (or 110% of your 2005
tax if your AGI was more than $150,000,Name changed. If you changed your name,Form 1099-R. Attach Form 1099-R to your
$75,000 if your 2006 filing status is mar-and you made estimated tax payments usingreturn if box 4 shows federal income tax with-
ried filing separately) and you paid all re-your old name, attach a brief statement to theheld. Include the amount withheld in the total on
quired estimated tax payments on time.front of your tax return indicating:line 64 of Form 1040 or line 38 of Form 1040A.
• The tax balance due on your return is noYou cannot use Form 1040EZ if you received • When you made the payments,
more than 10% of your total 2006 tax, andpayments reported on Form 1099-R. • The amount of each payment,
you paid all required estimated tax pay-• The IRS address to which you sent theBackup withholding. If you were subject to ments on time.payments,backup withholding on income you received dur- • Your total 2006 tax minus your withholding• Your name when you made the payments,ing 2006, include the amount withheld, as is less than $1,000.andshown in box 4 of your Form 1099, in the total on • You did not have a tax liability for 2005.• Your social security number.line 64 of Form 1040, line 38 of Form 1040A, or
• You did not have any withholding taxesline 7 of Form 1040EZ. The statement should cover payments you and your current year tax less any house-
made jointly with your spouse as well as any you hold employment taxes is less than
made separately. $1,000.Form Not Correct
Special rules apply if you are a farmer or fisher-Separate ReturnsIf you receive a form with incorrect information man. See Farmers and Fishermen in chapter 4on it, you should ask the payer for a corrected of Publication 505 for more information.If you and your spouse made separate esti-form. Call the telephone number or write to the mated tax payments for 2006 and you file sepa-address given for the payer on the form. The IRS can figure the penalty for you. If yourate returns, you can take credit only for yourcorrected Form W-2G or Form 1099 you receive think you owe the penalty but you do not want toown payments.will have an “X” in the “CORRECTED” box at the figure it yourself when you file your tax return,If you made joint estimated tax payments,top of the form. A special form, Form W-2c, you may not have to. Generally, the IRS willyou must decide how to divide the paymentsCorrected Wage and Tax Statement, is used to figure the penalty for you and send you a bill.between your returns. One of you can claim allcorrect a Form W-2. However, you must complete Form 2210 orof the estimated tax paid and the other none, or
Form 2210-F and attach it to your return if youyou can divide it in any other way you agree on.
think you are able to lower or eliminate yourIf you cannot agree, you must divide the pay-Form Received After Filing penalty. See chapter 4 of Publication 505.ments in proportion to each spouse’s individual
tax as shown on your separate returns for 2006.If you file your return and you later receive a
form for income that you did not include on your
return, you should report the income and take
credit for any income tax withheld by filing Form
1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
Return.
Page 42 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 45 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Two.
The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They explain whichIncome income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information on gains and losses
you report on Schedule D (Form 1040) and for information on selling your home.
source earned income. For details, see Publica- Babysitting. If you babysit for relatives or
tion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- neighborhood children, whether on a regular
dent Aliens Abroad. basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare
5. providers apply to you.
MiscellaneousIntroductionWages, Salaries, Compensation
This chapter discusses compensation received
This section discusses different types of em-for services as an employee, such as wages,and Other ployee compensation.salaries, and fringe benefits. The following top-
ics are included. Advance commissions and other earnings.
• Bonuses and awards.Earnings If you receive advance commissions or other
• Special rules for certain employees. amounts for services to be performed in the
• Sickness and injury benefits. future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you
must include these amounts in your income inWhat’s New The chapter explains what income is included the year you receive them.
in the employee’s gross income and what is not If you repay unearned commissions or other
Elective deferrals. The limit on the amount of included. amounts in the same year you receive them,
your wages you can elect to defer into certain reduce the amount included in your income by
retirement plans (such as section 401(k) plans) the repayment. If you repay them in a later taxUseful Itemsincreased. If you are age 50 or older, you may year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-You may want to see:be able to make additional catch-up elective ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),
deferrals. See Elective deferrals in Retirement or you may be able to take a credit for that year.PublicationPlan Contributions under Employee Compensa- See  Repayments in chapter 12.
tion. ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Allowances and reimbursements. If you re-ExpensesDesignated Roth contributions. Employers ceive travel, transportation, or other business
❏ 503 Child and Dependent Carewith certain retirement plans can create a quali- expense allowances or reimbursements from
Expensesfied Roth contribution program so that you may your employer, see Publication 463. If you are
elect to have part or all of your elective deferrals reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Taxto the plan designated as after-tax Roth contri- tion 521, Moving Expenses.
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomebutions. See the discussion under Elective De- Back pay awards. Include in income amountsferrals. you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
back pay. These include payments made to youKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005
for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,and Gulf Opportunity Zone Act of 2005.
and unpaid health insurance premiums. TheyThese Acts provide tax relief for persons af- Employee
should be reported to you by your employer onfected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma.
Form W-2.You may be able to exclude from income Compensation
amounts you receive as mileage reimburse- Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awardsments from a qualified charitable organization. This section discusses various types of em- you receive for outstanding work are included inSee Publication 4492, Information for Taxpay- ployee compensation including fringe benefits, your income and should be shown on your Formers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and retirement plan contributions, stock options, and W-2. These include prizes such as vacation tripsWilma. restricted property. for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award you
receive is goods or services, you must includeForm W-2. If you are an employee, you should the fair market value of the goods or services inreceive Form W-2 from your employer showing your income. However, if your employer merelythe pay you received for your services. Include promises to pay you a bonus or award at someReminder your pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, future time, it is not taxable until you receive it oror on line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not it is made available to you.Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or receive a Form W-2.
resident alien, you must report income from Employee achievement award. If you re-
sources outside the United States (foreign in- Child care providers. If you provide child- ceive tangible personal property (other than
come) on your tax return unless it is exempt by care, either in the child’s home or in your home cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as
U.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside or other place of business, the pay you receive an award for length of service or safety achieve-
or outside the United States and whether or not must be included in your income. If you are not ment, you generally can exclude its value from
you receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- an employee, you are probably self-employed your income. However, the amount you can ex-
ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This and must include payments for your services on clude is limited to your employer’s cost and
applies to earned income (such as wages and Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awards
tips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- Business, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net that are not qualified plan awards) for all such
est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, Profit From Business. You generally are not an awards you receive during the year. Your em-
and royalties). employee unless you are subject to the will and ployer can tell you whether your award is a
If you reside outside the United States, you control of the person who employs you as to qualified plan award. Your employer must  make
may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign what you are to do and how you are to do it. the award as part of a meaningful  presentation,
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 43

Page 46 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
under conditions and circumstances that do not the fair market value that you previously in- Stock appreciation rights. Do not include a
create a significant likelihood of it being dis- stock appreciation right granted by your em-cluded in your income. Do not include that part
guised pay. ployer in income until you exercise (use) theagain in your income. Include the rest of the
right. When you use the right, you are entitled topayment in your income in the year of payment.However, the exclusion does not apply to
a cash payment equal to the fair market value ofthe following awards. If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable
the corporation’s stock on the date of use minusunsecured note as payment for your services,• A length-of-service award if you received it
the fair market value on the date the right waspayments on the note that are credited towardfor less than 5 years of service or if you
granted. You include the cash payment in yourthe principal amount of the note are compensa-received another length-of-service award
income in the year you use the right.tion income when you receive them.during the year or the previous 4 years.
• A safety achievement award if you are a
Severance pay. You must include in incomemanager, administrator, clerical employee, Fringe Benefits
amounts you receive as severance pay and anyor other professional employee or if more
Fringe benefits received in connection with thethan 10% of eligible employees previously payment for the cancellation of your employ-
performance of your services are included inreceived safety achievement awards dur- ment contract.
your income as compensation unless you paying the year. Accrued leave payment. If you are a fed- fair market value for them or they are specificallyeral employee and receive a lump-sum payment excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-Example. Ben Green received three em- for accrued annual leave when you retire or ance of services (for example, under a covenantployee achievement awards during the year: a resign, this amount will be included as wages on not to compete) is treated as the performance ofnonqualified plan award of a watch valued at your Form W-2. services for purposes of these rules.$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo If you resign from one agency and are reem-
valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at ployed by another agency, you may have to Accounting period. You must use the same$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali- repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay- accounting period your employer uses to reportfied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each ment to the second agency. You can reduce your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-award by itself would be excluded from income. gross wages by the amount you repaid in the ployer has the option to report taxable noncashHowever, because the $1,750 total value of the same tax year in which you received it. Attach to fringe benefits by using either of the followingawards is more than $1,600, Ben must include your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement rules.$150 ($1,750 – $1,600) in his income. given to you by the agency you repaid to explain • The general rule: benefits are reported for
the difference between the wages on the return a full calendar year (January 1–DecemberGovernment cost-of-living allowances. and the wages on your Forms W-2. 31).Cost-of-living allowances generally are included
• The special accounting period rule: bene-Outplacement services. If you choose toin your income. However, they are not included
fits provided during the last 2 months ofaccept a reduced amount of severance pay soin your income if you are a federal civilian em-
the calendar year (or any shorter period)that you can receive outplacement servicesployee or a federal court employee who is sta-
are treated as paid during the following(such as training in r´esum´e writing and interviewtioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United
calendar year. For example, each yeartechniques), you must include the unreducedStates.
your employer reports the value of bene-amount of the severance pay in income.Allowances and differentials that increase fits provided during the last 2 months ofHowever, you can deduct the value of theseyour basic pay as an incentive for taking a less the prior year and the first 10 months ofoutplacement services (up to the difference be-desirable post of duty are part of your compen- the current year.tween the severance pay included in incomesation and must be included in income. For
and the amount actually received) as a miscella-example, your compensation includes Foreign
neous deduction (subject to the 2% of adjustedPost, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical Your employer does not have to use the same
gross income (AGI) limit) on Schedule A (Formdifferentials. For more information, see Publica- accounting period for each fringe benefit, but
1040).tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees must use the same period for all employees who
Stationed Abroad. receive a particular benefit.
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your em- You must use the same accounting periodNonqualified deferred compensation plans. ployer while you are sick or injured is part of that you use to report the benefit to claim anYour employer will report to you the total amount your salary or wages. In addition, you must employee business deduction (for use of a car,of deferrals for the year under a nonqualified include in your income sick pay benefits re- for example).deferred compensation plan. This amount is ceived from any of the following payers.
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This • A welfare fund. Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax-amount is not included in your income. • A state sickness or disability fund. able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otherHowever, if at any time during the tax year, compensation) of Form W-2. The total value of• An association of employers or employ-the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14.ees.not operated under those requirements, all The value of your fringe benefits may be added• An insurance company, if your employeramounts deferred under the plan for the tax year to your other compensation on one Form W-2, orpaid for the plan.and all preceding tax years are included in your you may receive a separate Form W-2 showingincome for the current year. This amount is in- However, if you paid the premiums on an acci- just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 withcluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you a notation in box 14.1. It also is shown on Form W-2, box 12, using receive under the policy are not taxable. For
code Z. more information, see Publication 525.
For information on the requirements and the Accident or Health PlanSocial security and Medicare taxes paid byamount to include in income, see Internal Reve-
employer. If you and your employer have annue Code section 409A and Notice 2005-1. The Generally, the value of accident or health plan
agreement that your employer pays your socialnotice is on page 274 of Internal Revenue Bulle- coverage provided to you by your employer is
security and Medicare taxes without deductingtin 2005-2 at not included in your income. Benefits you re-
them from your gross wages, you must reportwww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb05-02.pdf. ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-
the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages plained later under Sickness and Injury Benefits.
on your tax return. The payment also is treatedNote received for services. If your employer
as wages for figuring your social security andgives you a secured note as payment for your Long-term care coverage. Contributions by
Medicare taxes and your social security andservices, you must include the fair market value your employer to provide coverage for long-term
Medicare benefits. However, these payments(usually the discount value) of the note in your care services generally are not included in your
are not treated as social security and Medicareincome for the year you receive it. When you income. However, contributions made through a
wages if you are a household worker or a farmlater receive payments on the note, a propor- flexible spending or similar arrangement (such
worker.tionate part of each payment is the recovery of as a cafeteria plan) must be included in your
Page 44 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 47 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income. This amount will be reported as wages See the Instructions for Form 8839 for more For exceptions, see Entire cost excluded ,
in box 1 of your Form W-2. information. © and Entire cost taxed, later.
 Adoption benefits are reported by your em- If your employer provided more than $50,000Contributions you make to the plan are dis-
ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. They of coverage, the amount included in your in-cussed in Publication 502, Medical and Dental
also are included as social security and Medi- come is reported as part of your wages in box 1Expenses.
care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are of your Form W-2. It also is shown separately in
not included as wages in box 1. To determine box 12 with code C.Archer MSA contributions.  Contributions by
the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you mustyour employer to your Archer MSA generally are Group-term life insurance. This insurancecomplete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-not included in your income. Their total will be is term life insurance protection (insurance fortion Expenses. File the form with your return.reported in box 12 of Form W-2 with code R. You a fixed period of time) that:must report this amount on Form 8853, Archer • Provides a general death benefit,MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con-
• Is provided to a group of employees,tracts. File the form with your return. De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits • Is provided under a policy carried by theIf your employer does not make contributions
If your employer provides you with a product or employer, andto your MSA, you can make your own contribu-
service and the cost of it is so small that it would • Provides an amount of insurance to eachtions to your MSA. These contributions are dis-
be unreasonable for the employer to account for employee based on a formula that pre-cussed in Publication 969, Health Savings
it, the value is not included in your income. vents individual selection.Accounts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.
Generally, the value of benefits such as dis-Also, see Form 8853.
counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home Permanent benefits. If your group-term life
when working overtime, and company picnics insurance policy includes permanent benefits,Health flexible spending arrangement
are not included in your income. such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you(health FSA). If your employer provides a
must include in your income, as wages, the costhealth FSA that qualifies as an accident or Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you a of the permanent benefits minus the amount youhealth plan, the amount of your salary reduction, turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value at pay for them. Your employer should be able toand reimbursements of your medical care ex- Christmas or other holidays, do not include the tell you the amount to include in your income.penses and those of your spouse and depen- value of the gift in your income. However, if your
dents, generally are not included in your income. employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or a Accidental death benefits. Insurance that
similar item that you can easily exchange for provides accidental or other death benefits butHealth reimbursement arrangement (HRA). cash, you include the value of that gift as extra does not provide general death benefits (travelIf your employer provides an HRA that qualifies salary or wages regardless of the amount in- insurance, for example) is not group-term lifeas an accident or health plan, coverage and volved. insurance.reimbursements of your medical care expenses
Former employer. If your former employerand those of your spouse and dependents gen-
provided more than $50,000 of group-term lifeerally are not included in your income. Educational Assistance insurance coverage during the year, the amountSee also Reimbursement for medical care
included in your income is reported as wages inunder Other Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. You can exclude from your income up to $5,250
box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separatelyof qualified employer-provided educational as-
in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show theHealth savings accounts (HSA). If you are sistance. For more information, see Publication
amount of uncollected social security and Medi-an eligible individual, you and any other person, 970, Tax Benefits for Education.
care taxes on the excess coverage, with codesincluding your employer or a family member,
M and N. You must pay these taxes with yourcan make contributions to your HSA. Contribu-
income tax return. Include them in your total taxtions, other than employer contributions, are de- Employer-Provided Vehicles
on line 63, Form 1040, and enter “UT” and theductible on your return whether or not you
amount of the taxes on the dotted line next toIf your employer provides a car (or other high-itemize deductions. Contributions made by your
line 63.way motor vehicle) to you, your personal use ofemployer are not included in your income. Distri-
the car is usually a taxable noncash fringe bene-butions from your HSA that are used to pay Two or more employers. Your exclusion forfit.qualified medical expenses are not included in employer-provided group-term life insuranceYour employer must determine the actualyour income. Distributions not used for qualified coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 ofvalue of this fringe benefit to include in yourmedical expenses are included in your income. coverage, whether the insurance is provided byincome. For more information, see PublicationSee Publication 969 for more information. a single employer or multiple employers. If two525.Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide or more employers provide insurance coverage
partner’s HSA are not contributions by an em- that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-Certain employer-provided transporta-ployer. The contributions are treated as a distri- ported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not betion can be excluded from gross in-bution of money and are not included in the correct. You must figure how much to include income. See the discussion on
TIP
partner’s gross income. Contributions by a part- your income. Reduce the amount you figure byTransportation, later.nership to a partner’s HSA for services rendered any amount reported with code C in box 12 of
are treated as guaranteed payments that are your Forms W-2, add the result to the wages
includible in the partner’s gross income. In both reported in box 1, and report the total on yourGroup-Term Life Insurancesituations, the partner can deduct the contribu- return.
tion made to the partner’s HSA. Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 of Figuring the taxable cost. Use the followingContributions by an S corporation to a 2% group-term life insurance coverage provided to worksheet to figure the amount to include in yourshareholder-employee’s HSA for services ren- you by your employer (or former employer) is not income.dered are treated as guaranteed payments and included in your income. However, you mustare includible in the shareholder-employee’s include in income the cost of employer-providedgross income. The shareholder-employee can insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000deduct the contribution made to the share- of coverage reduced by any amount you payholder-employee’s HSA. toward the purchase of the insurance.
Adoption Assistance
You may be able to exclude from your income
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-
nection with your adoption of an eligible child.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 45

Page 48 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. You reached age 55 before January 2,Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of
1984, and were employed by the em-Group-Term Life Insurance To Group-Term Life Insurance to
ployer or its predecessor in 1983.Include in Income Include in Income—Illustrated
Entire cost taxed. You are taxed on the en-1. Enter the total amount of your 1. Enter the total amount of your tire cost of group-term life insurance if either ofinsurance coverage from your insurance coverage from your the following circumstances apply.employer(s) ........... 1. employer(s) ........... 1. 80,000 • The insurance is provided by your em-2. Limit on exclusion for 2. Limit on exclusion for ployer through a qualified employees’employer-provided employer-provided trust, such as a pension trust or a qualifiedgroup-term life insurance group-term life insurance
annuity plan.coverage ............. 2. 50,000 coverage ............. 2. 50,000
• You are a key employee and your em-3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 30,000
ployer’s plan discriminates in favor of key4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.
employees.Figure to the nearest tenth 4. Figure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0
5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your 5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your
age on the last day of the tax age on the last day of the tax Retirement Planning Servicesyear, find your age group in year, find your age group in
the left column, and enter the the left column, and enter the If your employer has a qualified retirement plan,cost from the column on the cost from the column on the qualified retirement planning services providedright for your age group . . . 5. right for your age group . . . 5. .23 to you (and your spouse) by your employer are6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .... 6. 6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .... 6. 6.90 not included in your income. Qualified services7. Enter the number of full 7. Enter the number of full include retirement planning advice, informationmonths of coverage at this months of coverage at this about your employer’s retirement plan, and in-cost. ................ 7. cost. ................ 7. 12 formation about how the plan may fit into your8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 .... 8. 8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 .... 8. 82.80 overall individual retirement income plan. You9. Enter the premiums 9. Enter the premiums cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,you paid per month 9. you paid per month 9. 4.15 accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-10. Enter the number of 10. Enter the number of vided by your employer.months you paid months you paid
the premiums .... 10. the premiums .... 10. 12
11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . . 11. 11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . . 11. 49.80
Transportation12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. 12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.
Include this amount in your Include this amount in your If your employer provides you with a qualifiedincome as wages ....... 12. income as wages ....... 12. 33.00 transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded
from your income, up to certain limits. A quali-
fied transportation fringe benefit is:
Table 5-1. Cost of $1,000 ofExample. You are 51 years old and work for • Transportation in a commuter highway ve-Group-Term Life Insurance for Oneemployers A and B. Both employers provide hicle (such as a van) between your homeMonthgroup-term life insurance coverage for you for and work place,the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with • A transit pass, orAge Costemployer A and $45,000 with employer B. You
• Qualified parking.Under 25 .................. $. 0 5pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
25 through 29 ............... . 0 6ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to Cash reimbursement by your employer for these30 through 34 ............... . 0 8include in your income as follows. expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-35 through 39 ............... . 0 9 rangement also is excludable. However, cash40 through 44 ............... . 1 0 reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable45 through 49 ............... . 1 5 only if a voucher or similar item that can be50 through 54 ............... . 2 3
exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily55 through 59 ............... . 4 3
available for direct distribution to you.60 through 64 ............... . 6 6
65 through 69 ............... 1.27
Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter70 and older ................ 2.06
highway vehicle transportation and transit pass
fringe benefits cannot be more than a total ofEntire cost excluded. You are not taxed on $105 a month.the cost of group-term life insurance if any of The exclusion for the qualified parking fringethe following circumstances apply. benefit cannot be more than $205 a month.
If the benefits have a value that is more than1. You are permanently and totally disabled
these limits, the excess must be included in yourand have ended your employment.
income.2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-
icy for the entire period the insurance is in Commuter highway vehicle. This is aforce during the tax year. highway vehicle that seats at least six adults
3. A charitable organization (defined in chap- (not including the driver). At least 80% of the
ter 24) to which contributions are deducti- vehicle’s mileage must reasonably be expected
ble is the only beneficiary of the policy for to be:
the entire period the insurance is in force • For transporting employees between theirduring the tax year. (You are not entitled to homes and work place, anda deduction for a charitable contribution for • On trips during which employees occupynaming a charitable organization as the at least half of the vehicle’s adult seatingbeneficiary of your policy.) capacity (not including the driver).4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:
a. You retired before January 2, 1984, and Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare-
were covered by the plan when you re- card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person
tired, or to ride mass transit (whether public or private)
Page 46 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 49 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter for SIMPLE plans is $10,000. The limit for sec-
highway vehicle operated by a person in the tion 501(c)(18)(D) plans is the lesser of $7,000 Special Rules forbusiness of transporting persons for compensa- or 25% of your compensation. The limit for sec-
tion. tion 457 plans is the lesser of your includible
Certain Employeescompensation or $15,000.Qualified parking. This is parking provided
This section deals with special rules for peopleto an employee at or near the employer’s place Designated Roth contributions. Employ-
in certain types of employment: members of theof business. It also includes parking provided on ers with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans
clergy, members of religious orders, peopleor near a location from which the employee can create qualified Roth contribution programs
working for foreign employers, military person-commutes to work by mass transit, in a com- so that you may elect to have part or all of your
nel, and volunteers.muter highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not elective deferrals to the plan designated as af-
include parking at or near the employee’s home. ter-tax Roth contributions.
ClergyExcess deferrals. Your employer or plan
Retirement Plan administrator should apply the proper annual
If you are a member of the clergy, you mustlimit when figuring your plan contributions. How-Contributions include in your income offerings and fees youever, you are responsible for monitoring the total
receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,you defer to ensure that the deferrals are notYour employer’s contributions to a qualified re- masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If themore than the overall limit.tirement plan for you are not included in income offering is made to the religious institution, it isat the time contributed. (Your employer can tell If you set aside more than the limit, the ex- not taxable to you.you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) cess generally must be included in your income    If you are a member of a religious organiza-However, the cost of life insurance coverage for that year, unless you have an excess deferral tion and you give your outside earnings to theincluded in the plan may have to be included. of a designated Roth contribution. See Publica- organization, you still must include the earningsSee Group-Term Life Insurance,  earlier, under tion 525 for a discussion of the tax treatment of in your income. However, you may be entitled toFringe Benefits. excess deferrals. a charitable contribution deduction for the
If your employer pays into a nonqualified amount paid to the organization. See chapterCatch-up contributions. You may be al-plan for you, you generally must include the 24.lowed catch-up contributions (additional electivecontributions in your income as wages for the deferral) if you are age 50 or older by the end oftax year in which the contributions are made. Pension. A pension or retirement pay for ayour tax year.However, if your interest in the plan is not trans- member of the clergy is usually treated as any
ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei- other pension or annuity. It must be reported on
Stock Optionsture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12a
time of the contribution, you do not have to and 12b of Form 1040A.
If you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sellinclude the value of your interest in your income
stock or other property as payment for your Housing.  Special rules for housing apply tountil it is transferable or is no longer subject to a
services, you usually will have income when you members of the clergy. Under these rules, yousubstantial risk of forfeiture.
receive the option, when you exercise the option do not include in your income the rental value ofFor information on distributions from (use it to buy or sell the stock or other property), a home (including utilities) or a designated hous-retirement plans, see Publication 575, or when you sell or otherwise dispose of the ing allowance provided to you as part of yourPension and Annuity Income (or Publi-
TIP
option. However, if your option is a statutory pay. However, the exclusion cannot be morecation 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Re- stock option, you will not have any income until than the reasonable pay for your service. If youtirement Benefits, if you are a federal employee you sell or exchange your stock. Your employer pay for the utilities, you can exclude any allow-or retiree). can tell you which kind of option you hold. For ance designated for utility cost, up to your actual
more information, see Publication 525. cost. The home or allowance must be provided
as compensation for your services as an or-Elective deferrals. If you are covered by cer- dained, licensed, or commissioned minister.Restricted Propertytain kinds of retirement plans, you can choose to However, you must include the rental value ofhave part of your compensation contributed by the home or the housing allowance as earningsGenerally, if you receive property for your serv-your employer to a retirement fund, rather than from self-employment on Schedule SE (Formices, you must include its fair market value inhave it paid to you. The amount you set aside 1040) if you are subject to the self-employmentyour income in the year you receive the prop-(called an elective deferral) is treated as an tax. For more information, see Publication 517,erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-employer contribution to a qualified plan. An Social Security and Other Information for Mem-erty that has certain restrictions that affect itselective deferral, other than a designated Roth bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.value, you do not include the value of the prop-contribution (discussed later), is not included in
erty in your income until it has substantiallywages subject to income tax at the time contrib-
vested. (You can choose to include the value ofuted. However, it is included in wages subject to Members of Religious
the property in your income in the year it issocial security and Medicare taxes. Orderstransferred to you.) For more information, seeElective deferrals include elective contribu- Restricted Property in Publication 525.tions to the following retirement plans. If you are a member of a religious order who has
Dividends received on restricted stock. taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section
Dividends you receive on restricted stock are that you renounce and turn over to the order401(k) plans).
treated as compensation and not as dividend depends on whether your services are per-2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ- income. Your employer should include these formed for the order.ees. payments on your Form W-2.3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen- Services performed for the order. If you aresion plans (SARSEP). Stock you chose to include in income. performing the services as an agent of the orderDividends you receive on restricted stock you4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- in the exercise of duties required by the order,chose to include in your income in the yearees (SIMPLE plans). do not include in your income the amountstransferred are treated the same as any other5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans). turned over to the order.dividends. Report them on your return as divi-6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. If your order directs you to perform servicesdends. For a discussion of dividends, see chap- for another agency of the supervising church or7. Section 457 plans. ter 8. an associated institution, you are considered to
Overall limit on deferrals. For 2006, you   For information on how to treat dividends be performing the services as an agent of the
generally should not have deferred more than a reported on both your Form W-2 and Form order. Any wages you earn as an agent of a n
total of $15,000 of contributions to the plans 1099-DIV, see Dividends received on restricted order that you turn over to the order are not
listed in (1) through (3) and (5) above. The limit stock in Publication 525. included in your income.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 47

Page 50 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are a member of a church Your compensation for official services to a • Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
order and have taken a vow of poverty. You foreign government is exempt from federal in- tance program.
renounce any claims to your earnings and turn come tax if all of the following are true.
• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a
over to the order any salaries or wages you • You are not a citizen of the United States member of the Armed Forces who died
earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order or you are a citizen of the Philippines after September 10, 2001.
assigns you to work in a hospital that is an (whether or not you are a citizen of the
associated institution of the church. However, Rehabilitative program payments. VAUnited States).
you remain under the general direction and con- payments to hospital patients and resident vet-• Your work is like the work done by em-
trol of the order. You are considered to be an erans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-ployees of the United States in foreign
agent of the order and any wages you earn at tic or rehabilitative programs are not treated ascountries.
the hospital that you turn over to your order are nontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report these• The foreign government gives an equalnot included in your income. payments as income on Form 1040, line 21.exemption to employees of the United
States in its country.Services performed outside the order. If
you are directed to work outside the order, your Volunteers
Waiver of alien status. If you are an alienservices are not an exercise of duties required
who works for a foreign government or interna- The tax treatment of amounts you receive as aby the order unless they meet both of the fol-
tional organization and you file a waiver under volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similarlowing requirements.
section 247(b) of the Immigration and National- agency is covered in the following discussions.• They are the kind of services that are ordi-
ity Act to keep your immigrant status, differentnarily the duties of members of the order. Peace Corps. Living allowances you receiverules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Publi-• They are part of the duties that you must as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leadercation 525.exercise for, or on behalf of, the religious for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,
order as its agent. and clothing are exempt from tax.Employment abroad. For information on the
tax treatment of income earned abroad, seeIf you are an employee of a third party, the Taxable allowances. The following al-Publication 54.services you perform for the third party will not lowances must be included in your income and
be considered directed or required of you by the reported as wages.
order. Amounts you receive for these services Military • Allowances paid to your spouse and minorare included in your income, even if you have children while you are a volunteer leadertaken a vow of poverty.  Payments you receive as a member of a military training in the United States.
service generally are taxed as wages except for • Living allowances designated by the Di-Example. Mark Brown is a member of a retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-religious order and has taken a vow of poverty. Allowances generally are not taxed. For more pensation. These are allowances forHe renounces all claims to his earnings and information on the tax treatment of military al- personal items such as domestic help,turns over his earnings to the order. lowances and benefits, see Publication 3, laundry and clothing maintenance, enter-Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed Armed Forces’ Tax Guide. tainment and recreation, transportation,by the superiors of the order to get a job with a and other miscellaneous expenses.Military retirement pay. If your retirementprivate tax-exempt school. Mark became an em- • Leave allowances.pay is based on age or length of service, it isployee of the school, and, at his request, the
• Readjustment allowances or terminationtaxable and must be included in your income asschool made the salary payments directly to the
payments. These are considered receiveda pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 ororder.
by you when credited to your account.on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do notBecause Mark is an employee of the school,
include in your income the amount of any reduc-he is performing services for the school rather
tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide athan as an agent of the order. The wages Mark Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corpssurvivor annuity for your spouse or childrenearns working for the school are included in his volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentunder the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec-income. allowance during his period of service, to be paidtion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan. to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofFor more detailed discussion of survivor an- duty. Although the allowance is not available toForeign Employer nuities, see chapter 10. him until the end of his service, Gary must in-
clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it isSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreign Disability. If you are retired on disability,
credited to his account.employer. see  Military and Government Disability Pen-
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). IfU.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen who
you are a VISTA volunteer, you must includeworks in the United States for a foreign govern- Veterans’ benefits. Do not include in your
meal and lodging allowances paid to you in yourment, an international organization, a foreign income any veterans’ benefits paid under any
income as wages.embassy, or any foreign employer, you must law, regulation, or administrative practice ad-
include your salary in your income. ministered by the Department of Veterans Af- National Senior Services Corps programs.
fairs (VA). The following amounts paid toSocial security and Medicare taxes. You Do not include in your income amounts you
veterans or their families are not taxable.are exempt from social security and Medicare receive for supportive services or reimburse-
• Education, training, and subsistence al-employee taxes if you are employed in the ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-
lowances.United States by an international organization or lowing programs.
a foreign government. However, you must pay • Disability compensation and pension pay- • Retired Senior Volunteer Program
self-employment tax on your earnings from serv- ments for disabilities paid either to veter- (RSVP).
ices performed in the United States, even ans or their families. • Foster Grandparent Program.
though you are not self-employed. This rule also • Grants for homes designed for wheelchair • Senior Companion Program.applies if you are an employee of a qualifying living.
wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov- • Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who Service Corps of Retired Executivesernment. lost their sight or the use of their limbs. (SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-• Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-Employees of international organizations or ive services or reimbursements fordends paid either to veterans or their ben-foreign governments. Your compensation out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do noteficiaries, including the proceeds of afor official services to an international organiza- include these amounts in income.veteran’s endowment policy paid beforetion is exempt from federal income tax if you are
death.not a citizen of the United States or you are a Volunteer tax counseling. Do not include in
citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you are • Interest on insurance dividends you leave your income any reimbursements you receive
a citizen of the United States). on deposit with the VA. for transportation, meals, and other expenses
Page 48 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 51 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you have in training for, or actually providing, Retirement and profit-sharing plans. If you condition is equal to the amount you would
receive payments from a retirement orvolunteer federal income tax counseling for the be entitled to receive from the VA.
profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-elderly (TCE).
bility retirement, do not treat the payments as aYou can deduct as a charitable contribution Pension based on years of service. If youdisability pension. The payments must be re-your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in receive a disability pension based on years ofported as a pension or annuity. For more infor-taking part in the volunteer income tax assis- service, you generally must include it in yourmation on pensions, see chapter 10.tance (VITA) program. See chapter 24. income. However, if the pension qualifies for the
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa- exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis-
bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for cussed earlier), do not include in income the part
accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The of your pension that you would have received if
payment is not a disability payment. Include it inSickness and Injury the pension had been based on a percentage of
your income in the tax year you receive it. disability. You must include the rest of your pen-
Benefits sion in your income.How to report. If you retired on disability, you
must include in income any disability pension Retroactive VA determination. If you retireThis section discusses sickness and injury ben- you receive under a plan that is paid for by your from the armed services based on years of serv-efits including disability pensions, long-term employer. You must report your taxable disabil- ice and are later given a retroactive serv-care insurance contracts, workers’ compensa- ity payments as wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or ice-connected disability rating by the VA, yourtion, and other benefits. Form 1040A, until you reach minimum retire- retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-
ment age. Minimum retirement age generally is cluded from income up to the amount of VA
the age at which you can first receive a pensionDisability Pensions disability benefits you would have been entitledor annuity if you are not disabled. to receive. You can claim a refund of any taxBeginning on the day after you reach mini-Generally, if you retire on disability, you must paid on the excludable amount (subject to themum retirement age, payments you receive arereport your pension or annuity as income. statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the turn on Form 1040X for each previous yearYou may be entitled to a tax credit if payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or during the retroactive period.you were permanently and totally dis- on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. The rulesabled when you retired. For informa- If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-
TIP
for reporting pensions are explained in How Totion on this credit and the definition of permanent ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-Report in chapter 10.and total disability, see chapter 33. ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance
benefit from your income. However, you mustFor information on disability payments from a
include in your income any lump-sum readjust-governmental program provided as a substitute Military and Government ment or other nondisability severance paymentfor unemployment compensation, see chapter Disability Pensions you received on release from active duty, even if12.
you are later given a retroactive disability ratingCertain military and government disability pen-
by the VA.sions are not taxable.Disability income. Generally, you must report
as income any amount you receive for personal Service-connected disability. You may be Terrorist attack or military action. Do notinjury or sickness through an accident or health able to exclude from income amounts you re- include in your income disability payments youplan that is paid for by your employer. If both you ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allow- receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-and your employer pay for the plan, only the ance for personal injury or sickness resulting rorist or military action.amount you receive that is due to your em- from active service in one of the following gov-ployer’s payments is reported as income. How- ernment services.ever, certain payments may not be taxable to Long-Term Care• The armed forces of any country.you. Your employer should be able to give you • The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Insurance Contractsspecific details about your pension plan and tell Administration.you the amount you paid for your disability pen- Long-term care insurance contracts generally• The Public Health Service.sion. In addition to disability pensions and annui- are treated as accident and health insurance• The Foreign Service.ties, you may be receiving other payments for contracts. Amounts you receive from themsickness and injury. (other than policyholder dividends or premiumConditions for exclusion. Do not include
Do not report as income any amounts refunds) generally are excludable from incomethe disability payments in your income if any of
paid to reimburse you for medical ex- as amounts received for personal injury or sick-the following conditions apply.
penses you incurred after the plan was ness. To claim an exclusion for payments made
TIP
1. You were entitled to receive a disabilityestablished. on a per diem or other periodic basis under apayment before September 25, 1975. long-term care insurance contract, you must file2. You were a member of a listed govern- Form 8853 with your return.Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of ment service or its reserve component, or
A long-term care insurance contract is ana health or accident insurance plan, do not in- were under a binding written commitment
insurance contract that only provides coverageclude any amounts you receive from the plan for to become a member, on September 24,
for qualified long-term care services. The con-personal injury or sickness as income on your 1975.
tract must:tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi- 3. You receive the disability payments for acal expenses you deducted in an earlier year, • Be guaranteed renewable,combat-related injury. This is a personalyou may have to include some, or all, of the • Not provide for a cash surrender value orinjury or sickness that:
reimbursement in your income. See  Reim- other money that can be paid, assigned,a. Results directly from armed conflict,bursement in a later year in chapter 21. pledged, or borrowed,b. Takes place while you are engaged in • Provide that refunds, other than refundsCafeteria plans. Generally, if you are cov- extra-hazardous service, on the death of the insured or completeered by an accident or health insurance plan c. Takes place under conditions simulat- surrender or cancellation of the contract,through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the ing war, including training exercises and dividends under the contract may beinsurance premiums was not included in your such as maneuvers, or used only to reduce future premiums orincome, you are not considered to have paid the d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war. increase future benefits, andpremiums and you must include any benefits
• Generally not pay or reimburse expensesyou receive in your income. If the amount of the 4. You would be entitled to receive disability
premiums was included in your income, you are incurred for services or items that wouldcompensation from the Department of Vet-
considered to have paid the premiums, and any be reimbursed under Medicare, excepterans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-
benefits you receive are not taxable. where Medicare is a secondary payer ortion for it. Your exclusion under this
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 49

Page 52 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the contract makes per diem or other peri- Railroad sick pay.    Payments you receive as
odic payments without regard to ex- sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
penses. surance Act are taxable and you must include 6.them in your income. However, do not include
them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobQualified long-term care services. Quali-
injury.fied long-term care services are:
Tip IncomeIf you received income because of a disabil-• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
ity, see Disability Pensions, earlier.peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-
habilitative services, and maintenance and
personal care services, and Federal Employees’ Compensation Act Introduction• Required by a chronically ill individual and (FECA). Payments received under this Act for This chapter is for employees who receive tips.provided pursuant to a plan of care as personal injury or sickness, including payments All tips you receive are income and are sub-prescribed by a licensed health care prac- to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable. ject to federal income tax. You must include intitioner. However, you are taxed on amounts you receive gross income all tips you receive directly,
under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45 charged tips paid to you by your employer, andChronically ill individual. A chronically ill in- days while a claim is being decided. Report this your share of any tips you receive under a
dividual is one who has been certified by a income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or tip-splitting or tip-pooling arrangement.
licensed health care practitioner within the pre- on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sick The value of noncash tips, such as tickets,vious 12 months as one of the following. leave while a claim is being processed is taxable passes, or other items of value are also income
• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is and subject to tax.and must be included in your income as wages.
unable to perform at least two activities of Reporting your tip income correctly is notIf part of the payments you receivedaily living without substantial assistance difficult. You must do three things.under FECA reduces your social se-due to loss of functional capacity. Activi- 1. Keep a daily tip record.curity or equivalent railroad retirementCAUTION
!
ties of daily living are eating, toileting,
benefits received, that part is considered social 2. Report tips to your employer.transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-
security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene- 3. Report all your tips on your income taxnence.
fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of the return.• An individual who requires substantial su-
taxability of these benefits, see Social securitypervision to be protected from threats to
and equivalent railroad retirement benefitshealth and safety due to severe cognitive This chapter will explain these three things andunder Other Income, in Publication 525.impairment. show you what to do on your tax return if you
  You can deduct the amount you spend to have not done the first two. This chapter will also
buy back sick leave for an earlier year to be show you how to treat allocated tips.Limit on exclusion. You generally can ex- eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for thatclude from gross income up to $250 a day for period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject to Useful Items2006. See Limit on exclusion, under Long-Term
the 2% of AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). You may want to see:Care Insurance Contracts, under Sickness and
If you buy back sick leave in the same year youInjury Benefits in Publication 525 for more infor-
used it, the amount reduces your taxable sick Publicationmation.
leave pay. Do not deduct it separately. ❏ 531 Reporting Tip Income
Workers’ Compensation ❏ 1244 Employee’s Daily Record of TipsOther compensation. Many other amounts and Report to EmployerAmounts you receive as workers’ compensation you receive as compensation for sickness or
for an occupational sickness or injury are fully injury are not taxable. These include the follow- Form (and Instructions)
exempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’ ing amounts. ❏ 4137 Social Security and Medicare Taxcompensation act or a statute in the nature of a • Compensatory damages you receive for on Unreported Tip Incomeworkers’ compensation act. The exemption also physical injury or physical sickness,
applies to your survivors. The exemption, how- ❏ 4070 Employee’s Report of Tips towhether paid in a lump sum or in periodic
ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits Employerpayments.
you receive based on your age, length of serv- • Benefits you receive under an accident orice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you health insurance policy on which eitherretired because of an occupational sickness or you paid the premiums or your employerinjury. paid the premiums but you had to include Keeping a Daily TipIf part of your workers’ compensation them in your income.
reduces your social security or • Disability benefits you receive for loss of Recordequivalent railroad retirement benefits income or earning capacity as a result of
CAUTION
!
received, that part is considered social security injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol- Why keep a daily tip record? You must(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and icy. keep a daily tip record so you can:may be taxable. For more information, see Pub- • Compensation you receive for permanent • Report your tips accurately to your em-lication 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail- loss or loss of use of a part or function of ployer,road Retirement Benefits. your body, or for your permanent disfig- • Report your tips accurately on your taxurement. This compensation must be return, andReturn to work.   If you return to work after based only on the injury and not on the • Prove your tip income if your return is everqualifying for workers’ compensation, salary period of your absence from work. These questioned.payments you receive for performing light duties benefits are not taxable even if your em-
are taxable as wages. ployer pays for the accident and health
How to keep a daily tip record. There areplan that provides these benefits. two ways to keep a daily tip record. You can
Other Sickness and Injury either:
Reimbursement for medical care. A reim- • Write information about your tips in a tipBenefits
bursement for medical care is generally not tax- diary, or
able. However, it may reduce your medicalIn addition to disability pensions and annuities, • Keep copies of documents that show your
expense deduction. For more information, seeyou may receive other payments for sickness or tips, such as restaurant bills and credit
chapter 21.injury. card charge slips.
Page 50 Chapter 6 Tip Income

Page 53 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Social security and Medicare taxes or rail-You should keep your daily tip record with your How to report.   If your employer does not
road retirement tax on your reported tips.personal records. You must keep your records give you any other way to report tips, you can
for as long as they are important for administra- use Form 4070. Fill in the information asked for 3. Federal, state, and local income taxes on
tion of the federal tax law. For information on on the form, sign and date the form, and give it to your reported tips.
how long to keep records, see Publication 552, your employer. To get a 1-year supply of the Any taxes that remain unpaid can be col-Recordkeeping for Individuals. form, ask the IRS or your employer for Publica- lected by your employer from your nexttion 1244. paycheck. If withholding taxes remain uncol-  If you keep a tip diary, you can use Form If you do not use Form 4070, give your lected at the end of the year, you may be subject4070A, Employee’s Daily Record of Tips. To get employer a statement with the following infor- to a penalty for underpayment of estimatedForm 4070A, ask the Internal Revenue Service mation. taxes. See Publication 505, Tax Withholding(IRS) or your employer for Publication 1244.
• Your name, address, and social security and Estimated Tax, for more information.Publication 1244 includes a 1-year supply of
number.Form 4070A. Each day, write in the information Uncollected taxes.  You must report• Your employer’s name, address, and busi-asked for on the form. on your tax return any social securityness name (if it is different from the em-If you do not use Form 4070A, start your and Medicare taxes or railroad retire-CAUTION
!
ployer’s name).records by writing your name, your employer’s ment tax that remained uncollected at the end of• The month (or the dates of any shortername, and the name of the business if it is 2006. See Reporting uncollected social securityperiod) in which you received tips.different from your employer’s name. Then, and Medicare taxes on tips  under Reporting
• The total tips required to be reported foreach workday, write the date and the following Tips on Your Tax Return , later. These uncol-
that period.information. lected taxes will be shown in box 12 of your 2006
Form W-2 (codes A and B).• Cash tips you get directly from customers You must sign and date the statement. Youor from other employees. should keep a copy with your personal records.
• Tips from credit card charge customers Tip Rate DeterminationYour employer may require you to report yourthat your employer pays you. (Also include tips more than once a month. However, the and Education Programtips from debit card charge customers.) statement cannot cover a period of more than• The value of any noncash tips you get, one calendar month. Your employer may participate in the Tip Ratesuch as tickets, passes, or other items of Determination and Education Program. The pro-value. Electronic tip statement. Your employer gram was developed to help employees andcan have you furnish your tip statements elec-• The amount of tips you paid out to other employers understand and meet their tip report-tronically.employees through tip pools or tip split- ing responsibilities.ting, or other arrangements, and the There are two agreements under the pro-When to report. Give your report for eachnames of the employees to whom you gram: the Tip Rate Determination Agreementmonth to your employer by the 10th of the nextpaid the tips. (TRDA) and the Tip Reporting Alternative Com-month. If the 10th falls on a Saturday, Sunday, mitment (TRAC). In addition, employers in theor legal holiday, give your employer the report by food and beverage industry may be able to getDo not write in your tip diary the the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or approval of an employer-designed EmTRACamount of any service charge that your legal holiday. program. For information on the EmTRAC pro-employer adds to a customer’s bill andCAUTION
!
gram, see Notice 2001-1, which is on page 261then pays to you and treats as wages. This is Example 1. You must report your tips re- of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2 atpart of your wages, not a tip. ceived in April 2007 by May 10, 2007. www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01–02.pdf .
If you are employed in the gaming industry,Electronic tip record. You may use an Example 2. You must report your tips re- your employer may have a Gaming Industry Tipelectronic system provided by your employer to ceived in May 2007 by June 11, 2007. June 10th Compliance Agreement Program. See Revenuerecord your daily tips. You must receive and is on a Sunday, and the 11th is the next day that Procedure 2003-35, which is on page 919 ofkeep a paper copy of this record. is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Internal Revenue Bulletin No. 2003-20 at
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03–20.pdf .Final report. If your employment ends dur-
If you are employed in the food and beverageing the month, you can report your tips when
industry, your employer may participate in anyour employment ends.Reporting Tips to Your Attributed Tip Income Program (ATIP). See
Revenue Procedure 2006-30, which is on pagePenalty for not reporting tips. If you do notEmployer 110 of Internal Revenue Bulletin No. 2006-31 atreport tips to your employer as required, you
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-31.pdf.may be subject to a penalty equal to 50% of the
Your employer can provide you with a copyWhy report tips to your employer? You social security and Medicare taxes or railroad
of any applicable agreement. To find out moremust report tips to your employer so that: retirement tax you owe on the unreported tips.
about these agreements, visit(For information about these taxes, see Report-• Your employer can withhold federal in-
www.irs.gov  and type “restaurant” in theing social security and Medicare taxes on tipscome tax and social security and Medicare
Keyword  search box. You may also callnot reported to your employer  under Reportingtaxes or railroad retirement tax, 1-800-829-4933 or visitTips on Your Tax Return , later.) The penalty• Your employer can report the correct www.irs.gov/localcontacts for the IRS Taxpayeramount is in addition to the taxes you owe.amount of your earnings to the Social Se- Assistance Center in your area; or send an emailYou can avoid this penalty if you can showcurity Administration or Railroad Retire- to TIP.Program@irs.gov and request informa-reasonable cause for not reporting the tips toment Board (which affects your benefits tion on this program.your employer. To do so, attach a statement towhen you retire or if you become disabled,
your return explaining why you did not reportor your family’s benefits if you die), and
them.• You can avoid the penalty for not reporting
tips to your employer (explained later). Giving your employer money for taxes. Reporting Tips on Your
Your regular pay may not be enough for your
employer to withhold all the taxes you owe on Tax ReturnWhat tips to report. Report to your employer
your regular pay plus your reported tips. If thisonly cash, check, debit, or credit card tips you
happens, you can give your employer moneyreceive. How to report tips.   Report your tips withuntil the close of the calendar year to pay theIf your total tips for any one month from any your wages on line 1 of Form 1040EZ or line 7 ofrest of the taxes.one job are less than $20, do not report the tips Form 1040A or Form 1040.If you do not give your employer enoughfor that month to that employer.
money, your employer will apply your regularDo not report the value of any noncash tips, What tips to report. You must report all tipspay and any money you give to the taxes in thesuch as tickets or passes, to your employer. You you received in 2006 on your tax return, includ-following order.do not pay social security and Medicare taxes or ing both cash tips and noncash tips. Any tips you
railroad retirement tax on these tips. 1. All taxes on your regular pay. reported to your employer for 2006 are included
Chapter 6 Tip Income Page 51

Page 54 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in the wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.
Add to the amount in box 1 only the tips you did Allocated Tipsnot report to your employer.
7.If your employer allocated tips to you, they areIf you received $20 or more in cash and
shown separately in box 8 of your Form W-2.charge tips in a month and did not
They are not included in box 1 with your wagesreport all of those tips to your em-CAUTION
!
and reported tips. If box 8 is blank, this discus-ployer, see Reporting social security and Medi-
sion does not apply to you.care taxes on tips not reported to your employer, Interest Incomelater. What are allocated tips? These are tips that
your employer assigned to you in addition toIf you did not keep a daily tip record as the tips you reported to your employer for therequired and an amount is shown in year. Your employer will have done this only if: Reminderbox 8 of your Form W-2, see AllocatedCAUTION
!
• You worked in a restaurant, cocktailTips, later.
lounge, or similar business that must allo- Foreign-source income. If you are a U.S. citi-If you kept a daily tip record and reported cate tips to employees, zen with interest income from sources outsidetips to your employer as required under the • The tips you reported to your employerrules explained earlier, add the following tips to the United States (foreign income), you mustwere less than your share of 8% of foodthe amount in box 1 of your Form W-2. report that income on your tax return unless it isand drink sales, and• Cash and charge tips you received that exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you• You did not participate in your employer’stotaled less than $20 for any month. reside inside or outside the United States andAttributed Tip Income Program (ATIP).• The value of noncash tips, such as tickets, whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from thepasses, or other items of value. foreign payer.How were your allocated tips figured? The
tips allocated to you are your share of an amountExample. John Allen began working at the figured by subtracting the reported tips of allDiamond Restaurant (his only employer in 2006) employees from 8% (or an approved lower rate)on June 30 and received $10,000 in wages of food and drink sales (other than carryoutduring the year. John kept a daily tip record Introductionsales and sales with a service charge of 10% orshowing that his tips for June were $18 and his more). Your share of that amount was figured This chapter discusses the following topics.tips for the rest of the year totaled $7,000. He using either a method provided by an em- • Different types of interest income.was not required to report his June tips to his ployer-employee agreement or a method pro-employer, but he reported all of the rest of his • What interest is taxable and what interestvided by IRS regulations based on employees’tips to his employer as required. is nontaxable.sales or hours worked. For information about theJohn’s Form W-2 from Diamond Restaurant • When to report interest income.exact allocation method used, ask your em-shows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plus $7,000 re- ployer. • How to report interest income on your taxported tips) in box 1. He adds the $18 unre- return.Must you report your allocated tips on yourported tips to that amount and reports $17,018
return? You must report allocated tips onas wages on his tax return. In general, any interest you receive or that isyour tax return unless either of the following
credited to your account and can be withdrawnexceptions applies.Reporting social security and Medicare
is taxable income. Exceptions to this rule aretaxes on tips not reported to your employer. • You kept a daily tip record, or other evi-
If you received $20 or more in cash and charge dence that is as credible and as reliable as discussed later in this chapter.
tips in a month from any one job and did not a daily tip record, as required under rules You may be able to deduct expenses youreport all of those tips to your employer, you explained earlier. have in earning this income on Schedule Amust report the social security and Medicare • Your tip record is incomplete, but it shows (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Seetaxes on the unreported tips as additional tax on that your actual tips were more than the
chapter 28.your return. To report these taxes, you must file tips you reported to your employer plus
a return even if you would not otherwise have to the allocated tips.
file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot file Useful ItemsIf either exception applies, report your actual tipsForm 1040EZ or Form 1040A.) on your return. Do not report the allocated tips. You may want to see:Use Form 4137 to figure these taxes. Enter See What tips to report under Reporting Tips onthe tax on line 59, Form 1040, and attach Form Your Tax Return, earlier. Publication4137 to your return.
❏ 537 Installment SalesHow to report allocated tips. If you mustIf you are subject to the Railroad Re-
report allocated tips on your return, add thetirement Tax Act, you cannot use Form ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesamount in box 8 of your Form W-2 to the amount4137 to pay railroad retirement tax onCAUTION
!
❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discountin box 1. Report the total as wages on line 7 ofunreported tips. To get railroad retirement credit,
Form 1040. (You cannot file Form 1040EZ oryou must report tips to your employer. (OID) Instruments
Form 1040A.)
Because social security and Medicare taxesReporting uncollected social security and Form (and Instructions)
were not withheld from the allocated tips, youMedicare taxes on tips. If your employer ❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest andmust report those taxes as additional tax on yourcould not collect all the social security and Medi-
Ordinary Dividendsreturn. Complete Form 4137, and include thecare taxes or railroad retirement tax you owe on
allocated tips on line 1 of the form. See Report-tips reported for 2006, the uncollected taxes will ❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest anding social security and Medicare taxes on tipsbe shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 (codes A Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040Anot reported to your employer under Reportingand B). You must report these amounts as addi- FilersTips on Your Tax Return, earlier.tional tax on your return. You may have uncol-
lected taxes if your regular pay was not enough ❏ 3115 Application for Change in
for your employer to withhold all the taxes you Accounting Method
owe and you did not give your employer enough
❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Seriesmoney to pay the rest of the taxes.
EE and I U.S. Savings BondsTo report these uncollected taxes, you must
Issued After 1989file a return even if you would not otherwise have
to file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot file ❏ 8818 Optional Form To RecordForm 1040EZ or Form 1040A.) Include the taxes Redemption of Series EE and Iin your total tax amount on line 63, and write
U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After“UT” and the total of the uncollected taxes on the
1989dotted line next to line 63.
Page 52 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 55 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
even though the interest is paid to you as custo- give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest
dian. received on your behalf.General Information If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includesPenalty for failure to supply SSN. If you amounts belonging to another person, see theA few items of general interest are covered here. do not give your SSN to the payer of interest, discussion on nominee distributions under Howyou may have to pay a penalty. See Failure toRecordkeeping. You should keep a To Report Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publi-supply social security number under Penalties inlist showing sources and amounts of cation 550, or see the Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)chapter 1. Backup withholding also may apply.interest received during the year. Also, or Schedule B (Form 1040) instructions.
RECORDS
keep the forms you receive that show your inter- Backup withholding. Your interest income is Incorrect amount. If you receive a Formest income (Forms 1099-INT, for example) as generally not subject to regular withholding. 1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (oran important part of your records. However, it may be subject to backup withhold- other incorrect information), you should ask theing to ensure that income tax is collected on the issuer for a corrected form. The new FormTax on investment income of a child under income. Under backup withholding, the payer of 1099-INT you receive will be marked “Cor-age 18. Part of a child’s 2006 investment in- interest must withhold, as income tax, 28% of rected.”come may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. the amount you are paid.This may happen if all the following are true. Backup withholding may also be required if Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income
1. The child was under age 18 at the end of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter- may also be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original
2006. A child born on January 1, 1989, is mined that you underreported your interest or Issue Discount. For more information about
considered to be age 18 at the end of dividend income. For more information, see amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue
2006. Backup Withholding in chapter 4. Discount (OID), later in this chapter.
2. The child had more than $1,700 of invest- Reporting backup withholding. If backup Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interestment income (such as taxable interest and withholding is deducted from your interest in- dividends you receive from a regulated invest-dividends) and has to file a tax return. come, the payer must give you a Form 1099-INT ment company (mutual fund) are not included in3. Either parent was alive at the end of 2006. for the year that indicates the amount withheld. your taxable income. (However, see Informa-
The Form 1099-INT will show any backup with-If all these statements are true, Form 8615, Tax tion-reporting requirement , next.) Ex-
holding as “Federal income tax withheld.”for Children Under Age 18 Who Have Invest- empt-interest dividends should be shown in box
ment Income of More Than $1,700, must be 8 of Form 1099-INT.Joint accounts. If two or more persons holdcompleted and attached to the child’s tax return. property (such as a savings account or bond) as Information-reporting requirement. Al-If any of these statements is not true, Form 8615 joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenants though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-is not required and the child’s income is taxed at in common, each person’s share of any interest able, you must show them on your tax return ifhis or her own tax rate. from the property is determined by local law. you have to file. This is an information-reportingHowever, the parent can choose to include requirement and does not change the ex-the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s Income from property given to a child. empt-interest dividends into taxable income.return if certain requirements are met. Use Form Property you give as a parent to your child under
8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s Inter- the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid fromest and Dividends, for this purpose. Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law specified private activity bonds may be subjectFor more information about the tax on invest- becomes the child’s property. to the alternative minimum tax. See Alternativement income of children and the parents’ elec- Income from the property is taxable to the Minimum Tax  in chapter 30 for more informa-tion, see chapter 31. child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal tion. Chapter 1 of Publication 550 contains aobligation to support the child is taxable to the discussion on private activity bonds under StateBeneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest parent or guardian having that legal obligation. or Local Government Obligations.you receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust
Savings account with parent as trustee.is generally taxable income. You should receive Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur-Interest income from a savings accounta Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’s ance dividends that you leave on deposit withopened for a child who is a minor, but placed inShare of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is notthe name and subject to the order of the par-the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its taxable. This includes interest paid on dividendsents as trustees, is taxable to the child if, underinstructions will tell you where to report the in- on converted United States Government Lifethe law of the state in which the child resides,come on your Form 1040. Insurance and on National Service Life Insur-both of the following are true. ance policies.Social security number (SSN). You must • The savings account legally belongs to thegive your name and SSN to any person required child. Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).by federal tax law to make a return, statement, • The parents are not legally permitted to Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.or other document that relates to you. This in- use any of the funds to support the child. Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. Youcludes payers of interest. generally do not include it in your income until
SSN for joint account. If the funds in a joint you make withdrawals from the IRA. See chap-Form 1099-INT. Interest income is generallyaccount belong to one person, list that person’s ter 17.reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similarname first on the account and give that person’s statement, by banks, savings and loans, andSSN to the payer. (For information on who owns other payers of interest. This form shows you thethe funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts, interest you received during the year. Keep thislater.) If the joint account contains combined Taxable Interestform for your records. You do not have to attachfunds, give the SSN of the person whose name it to your tax return.is listed first on the account. Taxable interest includes interest you receiveReport on your tax return the total amount ofThese rules apply both to joint ownership by from bank accounts, loans you make to others,interest income that you receive for the tax year.a married couple and to joint ownership by other and other sources. The following are some otherindividuals. For example, if you open a joint Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT. sources of taxable interest.savings account with your child using funds be- Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, you
longing to the child, list the child’s name first on must still report all of your taxable interest in- Dividends that are actually interest. Cer-
the account and give the child’s SSN. come. For example, you may receive distributive tain distributions commonly called dividends
shares of interest from partnerships or S corpo- are actually interest. You must report as inter-Custodian account for your child. If your rations. This interest is reported to you on est so-called “dividends” on deposits or onchild is the actual owner of an account that is Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or Schedule K-1 share accounts in:recorded in your name as custodian for the child, (Form 1120S). • Cooperative banks,give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example,
• Credit unions,you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of Nominees. Generally, if someone receives
interest on an account owned by your child, interest as a nominee for you, that person will • Domestic building and loan associations,
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 53

Page 56 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Domestic savings and loan associations, earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal- If you receive a Form 1099-INT for intere st in-
culator. If no other interest is credited to your come on deposits that were frozen at the end of• Federal savings and loan associations,
account during the year, the Form 1099-INT you 2006, see Frozen deposits under How To Re-and
receive will show $35 interest for the year. You port Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publication• Mutual savings banks.
must report $35 interest income on your tax 550, for information about reporting this interest
return. income exclusion on your tax return.
Money market funds. Generally, amounts The interest you exclude is treated asInterest on insurance dividends. Interest onyou receive from money market funds should be credited to your account in the following year.insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-reported as dividends, not as interest. You must include it in income in the year you cansurance company that can be withdrawn annu- withdraw it.ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited toCertificates of deposit and other deferred
your account. However, if you can withdraw itinterest accounts. If you open any of these Example. $100 of interest was credited ononly on the anniversary date of the policy (oraccounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals your frozen deposit during the year. You with-other specified date), the interest is taxable inof 1 year or less during the term of the account. drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofthe year that date occurs.You generally must include this interest in your the end of the year. You must include $80 inincome when you actually receive it or are enti- Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increase your income and exclude $20 from your incometled to receive it without paying a substantial in the value of prepaid insurance premiums, for the year. You must include the $20 in yourpenalty. The same is true for accounts that ma- advance premiums, or premium deposit funds is income for the year you can withdraw it.ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for ums due on insurance policies or made avail- Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at amore than 1 year, see Original Issue Discount able for you to withdraw. discount when interest has been defaulted or(OID), later. when the interest has accrued but has not beenU.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations,Interest subject to penalty for early with- paid, the transaction is described as trading asuch as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferred bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is notissued by any agency or instrumentality of theinterest account before maturity, you may have income and is not taxable as interest if paid later.United States is taxable for federal income taxto pay a penalty. You must report the total When you receive a payment of that interest, it ispurposes.amount of interest paid or credited to your ac- a return of capital that reduces the remaining
count during the year, without subtracting the Interest on tax refunds. Interest you receive cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues
penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav- on tax refunds is taxable income. after the date of purchase, however, is taxable
ings in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more interest income for the year it is received orInterest on condemnation award. If the con-information on how to report the interest and accrued. See Bonds Sold Between Interestdemning authority pays you interest to compen-deduct the penalty. Dates, later, for more information.sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the
Money borrowed to invest in certificate of interest is taxable. Below-market loans. In general, a be-deposit. The interest you pay on money bor-
Installment sale payments. If a contract for low-market loan is a loan on which no interest isrowed from a bank or savings institution to meet
the sale or exchange of property provides for charged or on which interest is charged at a ratethe minimum deposit required for a certificate of
deferred payments, it also usually provides for below the applicable federal rate. See Be-deposit from the institution and the interest you interest payable with the deferred payments. low-Market Loans  in chapter 1 of Publicationearn on the certificate are two separate items. That interest is taxable when you receive it. If 550 for more information.You must report the total interest you earn on little or no interest is provided for in a deferredthe certificate in your income. If you itemize payment contract, part of each payment may bedeductions, you can deduct the interest you pay U.S. Savings Bondstreated as interest. See Unstated Interest andas investment interest, up to the amount of your Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, In-net investment income. See Interest Expenses This section provides tax information on U.S.stallment Sales.in chapter 3 of Publication 550. savings bonds. It explains how to report the
interest income on these bonds and how to treatInterest on annuity contract. Accumulated
Example. You deposited $5,000 with a transfers of these bonds.interest on an annuity contract you sell before its
bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to maturity date is taxable. For other information on U.S. savingsmake up the $10,000 minimum deposit required bonds, write to:Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter-to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-
est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable astificate earned $575 at maturity in 2006, but you For series EE and I:interest unless state law automatically changesreceived only $265, which represented the $575 Bureau of the Public Debtit to a payment on the principal.you earned minus $310 interest charged on your Accrual Services Division$5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form Interest income on frozen deposits. Ex- P.O. Box 13281099-INT for 2006 showing the $575 interest clude from your gross income interest on fro- Parkersburg, WV 26106-1328you earned. The bank also gives you a state- zen deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the endment showing that you paid $310 interest for of the year, you cannot withdraw any part of For series HH/H:2006. You must include the $575 in your in- the deposit because: Bureau of the Public Debtcome. If you itemize your deductions on Sched- • The financial institution is bankrupt or in- Current Income Services Divisionule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject solvent, or HH/H Assistance Branchto the net investment income limit. • The state where the institution is located P.O. Box 2186
has placed limits on withdrawals because Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186Gift for opening account. If you receive non- other financial institutions in the state arecash gifts or services for making deposits or for Or, on the Internet, visit:bankrupt or insolvent.opening an account in a savings institution, you www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/prod-may have to report the value as interest. ucts/products.htm.The amount of interest you must exclude isFor deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or the interest that was credited on the frozenservices valued at more than $10 must be re- deposits minus the sum of: Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or
1. The net amount you withdrew from these crual method of accounting, you must reportmore, gifts or services valued at more than $20
deposits during the year, and interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itmust be reported as interest. The value is deter-
accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestmined by the cost to the financial institution. 2. The amount you could have withdrawn as
until you receive it or until the bonds mature.of the end of the year (not reduced by any
Accrual methods of accounting are explained inExample. You open a savings account at penalty for premature withdrawals of a
chapter 1 under Accounting Methods.your local bank and deposit $800. The account time deposit).
Page 54 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 57 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Report all interest on any bonds ac-Table 7-1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
quired during or after the year of
change when the interest is realized
upon disposition, redemption, or finalIF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
maturity, whichever is earliest, and
you buy a bond in your name and the name of you. b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-
another person as co-owners, using only your quired before the year of change whenown funds the interest is realized upon disposition,
redemption, or final maturity, whicheveryou buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond.
is earliest, with the exception of the in-who is the sole owner of the bond
terest reported in prior tax years.
you and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion
5. It includes your signature.co-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond.
purchase price You must attach this statement to your tax re-
turn for the year of change, which you must fileyou and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate
by the due date (including extensions).property state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally
You can have an automatic extension of 6property report one-half of the interest.
months from the due date of your return for the
year of change (excluding extensions) to file the
statement with an amended return. At the top ofCash method taxpayers. If you use the cash series EE, series E, and series I bonds in ei-
the statement, enter “Filed pursuant to sectionmethod of accounting, as most individual tax- ther of the following ways.
301.9100-2.” To get this extension, you mustpayers do, you generally report the interest on 1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest have filed your original return for the year ofU.S. savings bonds when you receive it. The until the earlier of the year you cash or change by the due date (including extensions).cash method of accounting is explained in chap- dispose of the bonds or the year they ma-ter 1 under Accounting Methods. By the date you file the original state-ture. (However, see Savings bonds traded,
ment with your return, you must alsolater.)
Series HH Bonds.  These bonds were issued send a copy to the address below.Note. Series E bonds issued in 1976 ma-
at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by tured in 2006. If you have used method 1,
direct deposit to your bank account. If you are a Internal Revenue Serviceyou generally must report the interest on
cash method taxpayer, you must report interest Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulingsthese bonds on your 2006 return.
on these bonds as income in the year you re- Branch)2. Method 2. Choose to report the increaseceive it. P.O. Box 7604in redemption value as interest each year.
Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980; Benjamin Franklin Station
You must use the same method for all series EE,they were last offered in August 2004. Before Washington, DC 20044
series E, and series I bonds you own. If you do1980, series H bonds were issued. Series H
not choose method 2 by reporting the increasebonds are treated the same as series HH bonds. If you use a private delivery service, send thein redemption value as interest each year, youIf you are a cash method taxpayer, you must copy to the address below.must use method 1.report the interest when you receive it.
Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30 If you plan to cash your bonds in the Internal Revenue Serviceyears. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years. same year that you will pay for higher Attention: CC:IT&A (Automaticeducation expenses, you may want to
TIP
Rulings Branch)Series EE and series I bonds. Interest on use method 1 because you may be able to 1111 Constitution Avenue, NWthese bonds is payable when you redeem the exclude the interest from your income. To learn Room 4516bonds. The difference between the purchase how, see Education Savings Bond Program , Washington, DC 20224price and the redemption value is taxable inter- later. Instead of filing this statement, you can re-est. quest permission to change from method 2 toChange from method 1. If you want to
Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds were method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,change your method of reporting the interest
first offered in July 1980. They have a maturity follow the form instructions for an automaticfrom method 1 to method 2, you can do so
period of 30 years. change. No user fee is required.without permission from the IRS. In the year of
change you must report all interest accrued toBefore July 1980, series E bonds were is- Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued indate and not previously reported for all yoursued. The original 10-year maturity period of the names of co-owners, such as you and your
bonds.series E bonds has been extended to 40 years child or you and your spouse, interest on the
Once you choose to report the interest eachfor bonds issued before December 1965 and 30 bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who
year, you must continue to do so for all seriesyears for bonds issued after November 1965. bought the bond.
EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and forPaper series EE and series E bonds are issued One co-owner’s funds used.  If you usedany you get later, unless you request permissionat a discount. The face value is payable to you at your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxto change, as explained next.maturity. Electronic series EE bonds are issued on the interest. This is true even if you let theat their face value. The face value plus accrued Change from method 2. To change from other co-owner redeem the bond and keep allinterest is payable to you at maturity. method 2 to method 1, you must request per- the proceeds. Under these circumstances, sinceOwners of paper series E and EE bonds can mission from the IRS. Permission for the the other co-owner will receive a Form 1099-INTconvert them to electronic bonds. These con- change is automatically granted if you send the at the time of redemption, the other co-ownerverted bonds do not retain the denomination IRS a statement that meets all the following must provide you with another Form 1099-INTlisted on the paper certificate but are posted at requirements. showing the amount of interest from the bondtheir purchase price (with accrued interest). that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re-1. You have typed or printed at the top:
Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first deemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nominee“Change in Method of Accounting Under
offered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed distributions under How To Report Interest In-Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.
bonds issued at their face amount with a matur- come in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more2002-9 (or later update).”
ity period of 30 years. The face value plus all information about how a person who is a nomi-2. It includes your name and social security
accrued interest is payable to you at maturity. nee reports interest income belonging to an-number under the label in (1).
other person.3. It identifies the savings bonds for whichReporting options for cash method tax-
you are requesting this change.payers. If you use the cash method of report- Both co-owners’ funds used. If you and
ing income, you can report the interest on 4. It includes your agreement to: the other co-owner each contribute part of the
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 55

Page 58 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bond’s purchase price, the interest is generally Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, series Form 1099-INT should show the interest as the
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to ataxable to each of you, in proportion to the difference between the amount you received
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you mustamount each of you paid. and the amount paid for the bond. However,
include in your income for that year the interest your Form 1099-INT may show more interestCommunity property. If you and your earned to the date of transfer if you have not than you have to include on your income taxspouse live in a community property state and already reported it. However, if you are consid- return. For example, this may happen if any ofhold bonds as community property, one-half of ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in the following are true.the interest is considered received by each of value both before and after the transfer contin- • You chose to report the increase in theyou. If you file separate returns, each of you ues to be taxable to you, you can continue to redemption value of the bond each year.generally must report one-half of the bond inter- defer reporting the interest earned each year. The interest shown on your Formest. For more information about community You must include the total interest in your in- 1099-INT will not be reduced by amountsproperty, see Publication 555, Community Prop- come in the year you cash or dispose of the previously included in income.erty. bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, • You received the bond from a decedent.whichever is earlier.Table 7-1. These rules are also shown in The interest shown on your FormThe same rules apply to previously unre-Table 7-1. 1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter-ported interest on series EE or series E bonds if est reported by the decedent before death,the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH orOwnership transferred. If you bought series or on the decedent’s final return, or by theseries H bonds you acquired in a trade for theE, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with your estate on the estate’s income tax return.series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bondsown funds and had them reissued in your • Ownership of the bond was transferred.traded, later.co-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone, The interest shown on your Formyou must include in your gross income for the Decedents. The manner of reporting interest 1099-INT will not be reduced by interestyear of reissue all interest that you earned on income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds, that accrued before the transfer.these bonds and have not previously reported. after the death of the owner, depends on the • You were named as a co-owner and theBut, if the bonds were reissued in your name accounting and income-reporting method previ- other co-owner contributed funds to buyalone, you do not have to report the interest ously used by the decedent. This is explained in the bond. The interest shown on youraccrued at that time. chapter 1 of Publication 550. Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by theThis same rule applies when bonds (other
amount you received as nominee for theSavings bonds traded. If you postponed re-than bonds held as community property) are
other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier inporting the interest on your series EE or series Etransferred between spouses or incident to di-
this chapter, for more information aboutbonds, you did not recognize taxable incomevorce.
the reporting requirements.)when you traded the bonds for series HH or
Purchased jointly. If you and a co-owner series H bonds, unless you received cash in the • You received the bond in a taxable distri-
each contributed funds to buy series E, series trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se- bution from a retirement or profit-sharing
EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can- plan. The interest shown on your Form
bonds reissued in the co-owner’s name alone, not trade any other series of bonds for series HH 1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter-
you must include in your gross income for the bonds.) Any cash you received is income up to est portion of the amount taxable as a
year of reissue your share of all the interest the amount of the interest earned on the bonds distribution from the plan and not taxable
earned on the bonds that you have not previ- traded. When your series HH or series H bonds as interest. (This amount is generally
ously reported. The former co-owner does not mature, or if you dispose of them before matur- shown on Form 1099-R, Distributionshave to include in gross income at the time of ity, you report as interest the difference between From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement orreissue his or her share of the interest earned their redemption value and your cost. Your cost Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurancethat was not reported before the transfer. This is the sum of the amount you paid for the traded Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.)interest, however, as well as all interest earned series EE or series E bonds plus any amount
after the reissue, is income to the former you had to pay at the time of the trade. For more information on including the correctco-owner. amount of interest on your return, see How To
This income-reporting rule also applies when Example.  In 2004, you traded series EE Report Interest Income , later. Publication 550
the bonds are reissued in the name of your bonds (on which you postponed reporting the includes examples showing how to report these
former co-owner and a new co-owner. But the interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 amounts.
new co-owner will report only his or her share of in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in- Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-the interest earned after the transfer. come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time empt from state and local taxes. Theof the trade, the series EE bonds had accruedIf bonds that you and a co-owner bought Form 1099-INT you receive will indi-
TIP
interest of $523 and a redemption value ofjointly are reissued to each of you separately in cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond$2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma-the same proportion as your contribution to the interest in box 3.turity, when you receive $2,500. You must reportpurchase price, neither you nor your co-owner
$300 as interest income in the year of maturity.has to report at that time the interest earned
This is the difference between their redemptionbefore the bonds were reissued. Education Savingsvalue, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the
Bond ProgramExample 1. You and your spouse each amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It is
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series also the difference between the accrued interest
You may be able to exclude from income all orEE savings bond. The bond was issued to you of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223
part of the interest you receive on the redemp-and your spouse as co-owners. You both post- cash received on the trade.)
tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during thepone reporting interest on the bond. You later Choice to report interest in year of trade. year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one You could have chosen to treat all of the previ- penses during the same year. This exclusion isin your name and one in your spouse’s name. At ously unreported accrued interest on the series known as the Education Savings Bond Program.that time neither you nor your spouse has to EE or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds You do not qualify for this exclusion if yourreport the interest earned to the date of reissue. as income in the year of the trade. If you made filing status is married filing separately.this choice, it is treated as a change fromExample 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE Form 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure yourmethod 1. See Change from method 1  undersavings bond entirely with your own funds. The exclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 orSeries EE and series I bonds, earlier.bond was issued to you and your spouse as Form 1040A.co-owners. You both postpone reporting interest Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds inter-
Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualifiedon the bond. You later have the bond reissued est. When you cash a bond, the bank or
as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one in U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issuedother payer that redeems it must give you a
your spouse’s name. You must report half the after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must beForm 1099-INT if the interest part of the pay-
interest earned to the date of reissue. ment you receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your issued either in your name (sole owner) or in
Page 56 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 59 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your and your spouse’s names (co-owners). Example. In February 2006, Mark and U.S. Treasury Bills,You must be at least 24 years old before the Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-
Notes, and Bondsbond’s issue date. For example, a bond bought ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in April
by a parent and issued in the name of his or her 1996. They received proceeds of $7,272 repre- Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debtschild under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu- senting principal of $5,000 and interest of (obligations) of the U.S. Government.sion by the parent or child. $2,272. In 2006, they paid $4,000 of their daugh-
The issue date of a bond may be earlier ter’s college tuition. They are not claiming an Taxation of interest. Interest income from
than the date the bond is purchased Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject toeducation credit for that amount, and their
because the issue date assigned to a federal income tax, but is exempt from all stateCAUTION
!
daughter does not have any tax-free educational
bond is the first day of the month in which it is and local income taxes. You should receiveassistance. They can exclude $1,250 ($2,272 ×purchased. Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interest($4,000 ÷ $7,272)) of interest in 2006. They (in box 3) that was paid to you for the year.must pay tax on the remaining $1,022 ($2,272 −
Payments of principal and interest generallyBeneficiary. You can designate any individual $1,250) interest. will be credited to your designated checking or(including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.
Modified adjusted gross income limit. savings account by direct deposit through theVerification by IRS. If you claim the exclu- The interest exclusion is limited if your modified TREASURY DIRECT system.sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp- adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is: Treasury bills. These bills generally have ation information from the Department of the • $63,100 to $78,100 for taxpayers filing sin- 4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period.Treasury. gle or head of household, and They are issued at a discount in the amount of
Qualified expenses. Qualified higher edu- • $94,700 to $124,700 for married taxpayers $1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The difference
cational expenses are tuition and fees required between the discounted price you pay for thefiling jointly or for a qualifying widow(er)
for you, your spouse, or your dependent (for bills and the face value you receive at maturity iswith dependent child.whom you can claim an exemption) to attend an interest income. Generally, you report this inter-You do not qualify for the interest exclusion ifeligible educational institution. est income when the bill is paid at maturity.
your modified AGI is equal to or more than theQualified expenses include any contribution Treasury notes and bonds. Treasuryupper limit for your filing status.you make to a qualified tuition program or to a notes have maturity periods of more than 1 year,Coverdell education savings account. Modified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion, ranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods forQualified expenses do not include expenses is adjusted gross income (Form 1040A, line 21 Treasury bonds are longer than 10 years. Bothfor room and board or for courses involving notes and bonds generally pay interest every 6or Form 1040, line 37) figured before the inter-sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a months. Generally, you report this interest forest exclusion, and modified by adding backdegree or certificate granting program. the year paid. For more information, see U.S.any:
Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds in chapter 1 ofEligible educational institutions. These 1. Foreign earned income exclusion, Publication 550.institutions include most public, private, and 2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction,nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational For other information on Treasury3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residentsschools that are accredited and are eligible to notes or bonds, write to:of American Samoa,participate in student aid programs run by the
4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,Department of Education. Bureau of The Public Debt
5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received P.O. Box 7015Reduction for certain benefits. You must under an employer’s adoption assistance Parkersburg, WV 26106–7015reduce your qualified higher educational ex- program,penses by all of the following tax-free benefits. Or, on the Internet, visit:6. Deduction for student loan interest, and1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow- www. publicdebt.treas.gov7. Deduction for domestic production activi-ships (see Scholarships and fellowships in ties.chapter 12).
Use the worksheet in the instructions for line2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por- For information on series EE, series I, and9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If yoution of distributions from a Coverdell ESA. series HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savings
claim any of the exclusion or deduction items3. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or Bonds, earlier.
inheritances) received for educational ex- listed above (except items 6 and 7), add the Treasury inflation-protected securitiespenses, such as: amount of the exclusion or deduction (except (TIPS). These securities pay interest twice aany deduction for student loan interest or do-a. Veterans’ educational assistance bene- year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amountmestic production activities) to the amount onfits, that is adjusted to take into account inflation and
line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the total onb. Qualified tuition reductions, or deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-
Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI.c. Employer-provided educational assis- ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments
tance. under Original Issue Discount (OID), in Publica-If you have investment interest expense in- tion 550.curred to earn royalties and other investment4. Any expense used in figuring the Hope
income, see Education Savings Bond Programand lifetime learning credits.
Bonds Sold Betweenin chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Amount excludable. If the total proceeds Interest DatesRecordkeeping. If you claim the inter-(interest and principal) from the qualified U.S. est exclusion, you must keep a writtensavings bonds you redeem during the year are If you sell a bond between interest paymentrecord of the qualified U.S. savingsRECORDS
not more than your adjusted qualified higher dates, part of the sales price represents interestbonds you redeem. Your record must includeeducational expenses for the year, you may be accrued to the date of sale. You must report thatthe serial number, issue date, face value, andable to exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds part of the sales price as interest income for thetotal redemption proceeds (principal and inter-are more than the expenses, you may be able to year of sale.est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818,exclude only part of the interest. If you buy a bond between interest paymentOptional Form To Record Redemption of SeriesTo determine the excludable amount, multi- dates, part of the purchase price representsEE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989,ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction. interest accrued before the date of purchase.
to record this information. You should also keepThe numerator of the fraction is the qualified When that interest is paid to you, treat it as a
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-higher educational expenses you paid during return of your capital investment, rather than
mentation that shows you paid qualified higherthe year. The denominator of the fraction is the interest income, by reducing your basis in the
total proceeds you received during the year. educational expenses during the year. bond. See Accrued interest on bonds  under
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 57

Page 60 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Report Interest Income  in chapter 1 of De minimis OID. You can treat the discount Form 1099-OID not received. If you had OID
Publication 550 for information on reporting the as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) for the year but did not receive a Form
payment. of the stated redemption price at maturity multi- 1099-OID, see  www.irs.gov , which lists total
plied by the number of full years from the date of OID on certain debt instruments and has infor-
original issue to maturity. This small discount is mation that will help you figure OID. If your debt
Insurance known as “de minimis” OID. instrument is not listed, consult the issuer for
further information about the accrued OID forLife insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi- Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond with the year.ciary of the insured person are usually not tax- a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,able. But if you receive the proceeds in Nominee. If someone else is the holder ofissued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofinstallments, you must usually report a part of record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10each installment payment as interest income. ment that belongs to you and receives a Form(the number of full years from the date of originalFor more information about insurance pro- 1099-OID on your behalf, that person must giveissue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20ceeds received in installments, see Publication you a Form 1099-OID.discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income. zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID.Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur- recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.) You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 orance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- box 6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the follow-ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income Example 2. The facts are the same as in ing apply.from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. Example 1, except that the bond was issued at • You bought the debt instrument after itsSee chapter 10 for information on pension and $950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount original issue and paid a premium or anannuity income from nonqualified plans. is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you acquisition premium.must include the OID in income as it accrues
• The debt instrument is a stripped bond orover the term of the bond.State or Local a stripped coupon (including certain zero
Debt instrument bought after original is- coupon instruments).Government Obligations sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de For information about figuring the correctminimis OID at a premium, the discount is notInterest on a bond used to finance government amount of OID to include in your income, seeincludible in income. If you buy a debt instrumentoperations generally is not taxable if the bond is Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt Instruments inwith de minimis OID at a discount, the discountissued by a state, the District of Columbia, a Publication 1212.is reported under the market discount rules. Seepossession of the United States, or any of their
Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publica-political subdivisions. Refiguring periodic interest shown on Formtion 550.Bonds issued after 1982 by an Indian tribal 1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrumentgovernment are treated as issued by a state. Exceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules or acquired it from another holder during theInterest on these bonds is generally tax exempt discussed in this chapter do not apply to the year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates ,if the bonds are part of an issue of which sub- following debt instruments. earlier, for information about the treatment ofstantially all of the proceeds are to be used in the periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, seeexercise of any essential government function. Form 1099-OID for that instrument.Stripped tax-exempt obligations underInterest on arbitrage bonds issued by state
Stripped Bonds and Coupons in chapter 1or local governments after October 9, 1969, is Certificates of deposit (CDs). If you buy aof Publication 550).taxable. CD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you must2. U.S. savings bonds.Interest on a private activity bond that is not a include in income each year a part of the total3. Short-term debt instruments (those with aqualified bond is taxable. For more information interest due and report it in the same manner asfixed maturity date of not more than 1 yearon whether such interest is taxable or tax ex- other OID.from the date of issue).empt, see State or Local Government Obliga- This also applies to similar deposit arrange-tions in chapter 1 of Publication 550. 4. Obligations issued by an individual before ments with banks, building and loan associa-
March 2, 1984. tions, etc., including:Information reporting requirement. If you 5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow- • Time deposits,must file a tax return, you are required to show ing are true.any tax-exempt interest you received on your • Bonus plans,
return. This is an information-reporting require- a. The lender is not in the business of • Savings certificates,
ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter- lending money. • Deferred income certificates,
est to taxable interest. b. The amount of the loan, plus the • Bonus savings certificates, and
amount of any outstanding prior loans • Growth savings certificates.between the same individuals, isOriginal Issue $10,000 or less. Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 gener-Discount (OID) c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one of ally must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are
the principal purposes of the loan. CDs that are not in registered form. They are notOriginal issue discount (OID) is a form of inter-
issued in the depositor’s name and are transfer-est. You generally include OID in your income as
able from one individual to another.it accrues over the term of the debt instrument, Form 1099-OID. The issuer of the debt instru-
Banks must provide the IRS and the personwhether or not you receive any payments from ment (or your broker, if you held the instrument
redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.the issuer. through a broker) should give you Form
A debt instrument generally has OID when 1099-OID, Original Issue Discount, or a similar More information. See chapter 1 of Publica-the instrument is issued for a price that is less statement, if the total OID for the calendar year tion 550 for more information about OID andthan its stated redemption price at maturity. OID is $10 or more. Form 1099-OID will show, in box related topics, such as market discount bonds.is the difference between the stated redemption 1, the amount of OID for the part of the year that
price at maturity and the issue price. you held the bond. It also will show, in box 2, the
All debt instruments that pay no interest stated interest that you must include in your
before maturity are presumed to be issued at a income. A copy of Form 1099-OID will be sent to
discount. Zero coupon bonds are one example the IRS. Do not file your copy with your return.
When To Report
of these instruments. Keep it for your records.
The OID accrual rules generally do not apply In most cases, you must report the entire Interest Income
to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma- amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as
turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown When to report your interest income depends on
See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  in on Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, for whether you use the cash method or an accrual
chapter 1 of Publication 550. more information. method to report income.
Page 58 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 61 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1 7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
the cash method. If you use this method, you (Form 1040A), Part I, if you file Form 1040A on frozen deposits.
generally report your interest income in the year and any of the following are true. 8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
in which you actually or constructively receive it. • Your taxable interest income is more than on a bond that you bought between inter-
However, there are special rules for reporting $1,500. est payment dates.
the discount on certain debt instruments. See • You are claiming the interest exclusion 9. Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list isU.S. Savings Bonds  and Original Issue Dis- under the Education Savings Bond Pro- true.count, earlier. gram (discussed earlier). On Part I, line 1, list each payer’s name and the
• You received interest from aExample. On September 1, 2004, you amount received from each. If you received aseller-financed mortgage, and the buyerloaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com- Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-used the property as a home.pounded annually. You are not in the business kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.
• You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.of lending money. The note stated that principal
savings bond interest that includesand interest would be due on August 31, 2006. Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,
amounts you reported before 2006.In 2006, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi- except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and
pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash • You received, as a nominee, interest that Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Formmethod, you must include in income on your actually belongs to someone else. 1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxable2006 return the $508.80 interest you received in • You received a Form 1099-INT for interest interest income you received. You must reportthat year. on frozen deposits. all of your taxable interest income even if you do
Constructive receipt. You constructively not receive a Form 1099-INT.List each payer’s name and the amount of inter-
receive income when it is credited to your ac- If you forfeited interest income because ofest income received from each payer on line 1. If
count or made available to you. You do not need the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-you received a Form 1099-INT or Formto have physical possession of it. For example, ductible amount will be shown on Form1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-you are considered to receive interest, divi- 1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with-age firm as the payer.dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac- drawal of savings  in chapter 1 of PublicationYou cannot use Form 1040A if you must usecount in a bank, savings and loan, or similar 550.Form 1040, as described next.financial institution, or interest on life insurance Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amountpolicy dividends left to accumulate, when they
of interest income you received from U.S. sav-are credited to your account and subject to your Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 in- ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, andwithdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet stead of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if: Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3entered in your passbook.
to any other taxable interest income you re-1. You forfeited interest income because ofYou constructively receive income on the
ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 wasthe early withdrawal of a time deposit,deposit or account even if you must:
previously included in interest income. If part of2. You received or paid accrued interest on• Make withdrawals in multiples of even
the amount shown in box 3 was previously in-securities transferred between interestamounts,
cluded in your interest income, see U.S. savingspayment dates,• Give a notice to withdraw before making
bond interest previously reported, later.3. You had a financial account in a foreignthe withdrawal,
Box 4 of Form 1099-INT (federal income taxcountry, unless the combined value of all• Withdraw all or part of the account to with-
withheld) will contain an amount if you wereforeign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-draw the earnings, or
subject to backup withholding. Report theing all of 2006 or the accounts were with• Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless
amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, oncertain U.S. military banking facilities,the interest you are to receive on an early
Form 1040A, line 39, or on Form 1040, line 644. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987withdrawal or redemption is substantially
(federal income tax withheld).less than the interest payable at maturity. and choose to reduce interest income from
the bonds by any amortizable bond pre- Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment
mium (see Bond Premium Amortization in expenses you may be able to deduct as anAccrual method. If you use an accrual chapter 3 of Publication 550), itemized deduction. See chapter 3 of Publicationmethod, you report your interest income when
5. You are reporting OID in an amount more 550 for more information about investment ex-you earn it, whether or not you have received it.
or less than the amount shown on Form penses.Interest is earned over the term of the debt
1099-OID, orinstrument. U.S. savings bond interest previously re-6. You received tax-exempt interest from pri- ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT forExample. If, in the previous example, you vate activity bonds issued after August 7, U.S. savings bond interest, the form may showuse an accrual method, you must include the 1986. interest you do not have to report. See Forminterest in your income as you earn it. You would 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds interest , ear-report the interest as follows: 2004, $80; 2005, Schedule B. You must complete Schedule lier, under U.S. Savings Bonds.$249.60; and 2006, $179.20. B (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 and On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1,any of the following apply. or on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1,Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is 1. Your taxable interest income is more than report all the interest shown on your Formtaxable in the year the coupon becomes due and $1,500. 1099-INT. Then follow these steps.payable. It does not matter when you mail the
2. You are claiming the interest exclusioncoupon for payment. 1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotalunder the Education Savings Bond Pro- of all interest listed on line 1.gram (discussed earlier). 2. Below the subtotal enter “U.S. Savings3. You had a foreign account or you received Bond Interest Previously Reported” anda distribution from, or were a grantor of, orHow To Report enter amounts previously reported or inter-transferor to, a foreign trust. est accrued before you received the bond.4. You received interest from aInterest Income 3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotalseller-financed mortgage, and the buyer and enter the result on line 2.used the property as a home.Generally, you report all of your taxable interest
5. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, line
savings bond interest that includes More information. For more information8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.
amounts you reported before 2006. about how to report interest income, see chapterYou cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest
1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for the6. You received, as a nominee, interest thatincome is more than $1,500. Instead, you must
form you must file.actually belongs to someone else.use Form 1040A or Form 1040.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 59

Page 62 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Form
1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to showGeneral Information you the distributions you received from them
8. during the year. Keep this form with your rec-This section discusses general rules for divi-
ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxdend income.
return.
Tax on investment income of a child under Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.
age 18. Part of a child’s 2006 investment in-Dividends and Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, youcome may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This must still report all of your taxable dividend in-may happen if all of the following are true. come. For example, you may receive distributiveOther Corporate shares of dividends from partnerships or sub-
• The child was under age 18 at the end of chapter S corporations. These dividends are
2006. A child born on January 1, 1989, is reported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)Distributions considered to be age 18 at the end of and Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).
2006.
Reporting tax withheld. If tax is withheld• The child had more than $1,700 of invest- from your dividend income, the payer must givement income (such as taxable interest andReminder you a Form 1099-DIV that indicates the amountdividends) and has to file a tax return.
withheld.• Either parent was alive at the end of 2006.Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen with
Nominees. If someone receives distribu-dividend income from sources outside the If all of these statements are true, Form 8615, tions as a nominee for you, that person will giveTax for Children Under Age 18 With InvestmentUnited States (foreign income), you must report you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-Income of More Than $1,700, must be com-that income on your tax return unless it is ex- tions received on your behalf.pleted and attached to the child’s tax return. Ifempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-
any of these statements is not true, Form 8615 isside inside or outside the United States and Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-not required and the child’s income is taxed atwhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interesthis or her own tax rate.foreign payer. that are received by a broker on your behalf
However, the parent can choose to include must be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC,
the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s Miscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.
return if certain requirements are met. Use Form See Reporting Substitute Payments under Short
8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s Inter- Sales in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for moreIntroduction est and Dividends, for this purpose. information about reporting these payments.
For more information about the tax on invest-This chapter discusses the tax treatment of:
ment income of children and the parents’ elec-• Ordinary dividends, Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. Iftion, see chapter 31.• Capital gain distributions, you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect
• Nondividend distributions, and amount (or other incorrect information), youBeneficiary of an estate or trust. Dividends should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The• Other distributions you may receive from a and other distributions you receive as a benefi- new Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor-corporation or a mutual fund. ciary of an estate or trust are generally taxable rected.”income. You should receive a Schedule K-1
This chapter also explains how to report divi- (Form 1041), Beneficiary’s Share of Income,
Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,dend income on your tax return. Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fiduciary.
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after aYour copy of Schedule K-1 and its instructions  Dividends are distributions of money, stock, dividend is declared, but before it is paid, thewill tell you where to report the income on youror other property paid to you by a corporation. owner of record (usually the payee shown on theForm 1040.You also may receive dividends through a part- dividend check) must include the dividend innership, an estate, a trust, or an association that income.Social security number (SSN).  You mustis taxed as a corporation. However, some give your name and SSN (or individual taxpayeramounts you receive that are called dividends identification number (ITIN)) to any person re- Dividends received in January. If a regu-are actually interest income. (See Dividends that quired by federal tax law to make a return, state- lated investment company (mutual fund) or real
are actually interest under Taxable Interest in ment, or other document that relates to you. This estate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi-
chapter 7.) includes payers of dividends. If you do not give dend (including any exempt-interest dividend or
your SSN or ITIN to the payer of dividends, you capital gain distribution) in October, November,Most distributions are paid in cash (or
may have to pay a penalty. or December payable to shareholders of recordcheck). However, distributions can consist of
For more information on SSNs and ITINs, on a date in one of those months but actuallymore stock, stock rights, other property, or serv-
see Social security number (SSN) in chapter 7. pays the dividend during January of the nextices.
calendar year, you are considered to have re-
Backup withholding. Your dividend income ceived the dividend on December 31. You reportUseful Items is generally not subject to regular withholding. the dividend in the year it was declared.
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-You may want to see:
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the
income. Under backup withholding, the payer ofPublication
dividends must withhold, as income tax, 28% of❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals Ordinary Dividendsthe amount you are paid.
Backup withholding may also be required if❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions mon type of distribution from a corporation. Theymined that you underreported your interest or
are paid out of the earnings and profits of adividend income. For more information, seeForm (and Instructions) corporation and are ordinary income to you. ThisBackup Withholding in chapter 4.
means they are not capital gains. You can as-❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and sume that any dividend you receive on commonStock certificate in two or more names. IfOrdinary Dividends or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unlesstwo or more persons hold stock as joint tenants,
❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi-tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common,
Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040A nary dividends will be shown in box 1a of theeach person’s share of any dividends from the
Form 1099-DIV you receive.Filers stock is determined by local law.
Page 60 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 63 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
121-day period (from July 7, 2006, through Sep- Dividends that are not qualified dividends.Qualified Dividends The following dividends are not qualified divi-tember 5, 2006).
dends. They are not qualified dividends even ifQualified dividends are the ordinary dividends they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.Example 3. You bought 10,000 shares ofthat are subject to the same 5% or 15% maxi-
ABC Mutual Fund common stock on June 29, • Capital gain distributions.mum tax rate that applies to net capital gain.
2006. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of • Dividends paid on deposits with mutualThey should be shown in box 1b of the Form
savings banks, cooperative banks, credit10 cents a share. The ex-dividend date was July1099-DIV you receive.
unions, U.S. building and loan associa-7, 2006. The ABC Mutual Fund advises you thatQualified dividends are subject to the 15% tions, U.S. savings and loan associations,the portion of the dividend eligible to be treatedrate if the regular tax rate that would apply is federal savings and loan associations, andas qualified dividends equals 2 cents per share.25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that would similar financial institutions. (Report theseYour Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual Fundapply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends are amounts as interest income.)shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000 andsubject to the 5% rate. • Dividends from a corporation that is aqualified dividends of $200. However, you sold
To qualify for the 5% or 15% maximum tax-exempt organization or farmer’s coop-the 10,000 shares on August 2, 2006. You haverate, all of the following requirements must be erative during the corporation’s tax year inno qualified dividends from ABC Mutual Fundmet. which the dividends were paid or duringbecause you held the ABC Mutual Fund stock the corporation’s previous tax year.• The dividends must have been paid by a for less than 61 days.U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor- • Dividends paid by a corporation on em-
Holding period reduced where risk of lossporation. (See Qualified foreign corpora- ployer securities which are held on the
is diminished. When determining whethertion later.) date of record by an employee stock own-
you met the minimum holding period discussed ership plan (ESOP) maintained by that• The dividends are not of the type listed
earlier, you cannot count any day during which corporation.later under Dividends that are not qualified
you meet any of the following conditions.dividends. • Dividends on any share of stock to the
extent that you are obligated (whether• You meet the holding period (discussed 1. You had an option to sell, were under a
under a short sale or otherwise) to makenext). contractual obligation to sell, or had made related payments for positions in substan-(and not closed) a short sale of substan- tially similar or related property.tially identical stock or securities.Holding period. You must have held the stock • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only iffor more than 60 days during the 121-day period 2. You were grantor (writer) of an option to you know or have reason to know that thethat begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date. buy substantially identical stock or securi- payments are not qualified dividends.The ex-dividend date is the first date following ties. • Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, boxthe declaration of a dividend on which the buyer 3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holding 1b, from a foreign corporation to the extentof a stock will not receive the next dividend one or more other positions in substantially you know or have reason to know the pay-payment. Instead, the seller will get the divi- similar or related property. ments are not qualified dividends.dend.
For information about how to apply conditionWhen counting the number of days you held (3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.the stock, include the day you disposed of the Table 8-1. Income Tax Treatiesstock, but not the day you acquired it. See the
Qualified foreign corporation. A foreignexamples later. Income tax treaties the United States has
corporation is a qualified foreign corporation if with the following countries satisfyException for preferred stock. In the case it meets any of the following conditions. requirement (2) under Qualified foreignof preferred stock, you must have held the stock corporation.1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.more than 90 days during the 181-day period
possession.that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date Australia Indonesia Romania
if the dividends are due to periods totaling more 2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits Austria Ireland Russian
than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are due of a comprehensive income tax treaty with Bangladesh1 Israel Federation
to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold- the United States that the Treasury De- Barbados2 Italy Slovak
ing period in the previous paragraph applies. partment determines is satisfactory for this Belgium Jamaica Republic
purpose and that includes an exchange of Canada Japan SloveniaExample 1. You bought 5,000 shares of China Kazakhstan Sri Lanka 3information program. For a list of thoseXYZ Corp. common stock on June 29, 2006. Cyprus Korea South Africatreaties, seeTable 8-1.XYZ Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per Czech Latvia Spain3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)share. The ex-dividend date was July 7, 2006. Republic Lithuania Swedenabove, but the stock for which the dividendYour Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. shows Denmark Luxembourg Switzerlandis paid is readily tradable on an estab-$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in box Egypt Mexico Thailandlished securities market in the United1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold the Estonia Morocco Trinidad andStates. See Readily tradable stock, later.5,000 shares on August 2, 2006. You held your Finland Netherlands Tobagoshares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of the France New Zealand TunisiaException. A corporation is not a qualified121-day period (from June 30, 2006, through Germany Norway Turkeyforeign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-August 2, 2006). The 121-day period began on
Greece Pakistan Ukrainevestment company during its tax year in whichMay 8, 2006 (60 days before the ex-dividend
Hungary Philippines Unitedthe dividends are paid or during its previous taxdate), and ended on September 5, 2006. You
Iceland Poland Kingdomyear.have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-
India Portugal Venezuelacause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61 Readily tradable stock. Any stock (such as 1Effective for dividends paid after August 6, 2006.days. common, ordinary stock, or preferred stock) or 2Effective for dividends paid after December 19,
2004.an American depositary receipt in respect of thatExample 2. Assume the same facts as in 3Effective for dividends paid after July 11, 2004.stock is considered to satisfy requirement (3) if itExample 1 except that you bought the stock on
is listed on one of the following securities mar-July 6, 2006 (the day before the ex-dividend
kets: the New York Stock Exchange, the NAS-date), and you sold the stock on September 7,
DAQ Stock Market, the American Stock2006. You held the stock for 63 days (from July
Exchange, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cin-7, 2006, through September 7, 2006). The $500
cinnati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stock Ex-of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of your
change, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, orForm 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends be-
the Pacific Exchange, Inc.cause you held the stock for 61 days of the
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions Page 61

Page 64 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return, rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri-Dividends Used to Buy butions by a corporation of rights to acquire theand keep Copy C for your records.
corporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividendsMore Stock Basis adjustment. Increase your basis in and stock rights are not taxable to you, and youyour mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, by do not report them on your return.The corporation in which you own stock may the difference between the gain you report andhave a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan the credit you claim for the tax paid. Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.lets you choose to use your dividends to buy Distributions of stock dividends and stock(through an agent) more shares of stock in the Additional information. For more information rights are taxable to you if any of the followingcorporation instead of receiving the dividends in on the treatment of distributions from mutual apply.cash. If you are a member of this type of plan funds, see Publication 564. 1. You or any other shareholder has theand you use your dividends to buy more stock at
choice to receive cash or other propertya price equal to its fair market value, you still instead of stock or stock rights.must report the dividends as income.
2. The distribution gives cash or other prop-If you are a member of a dividend reinvest- Nondividend erty to some shareholders and an increasement plan that lets you buy more stock at a price in the percentage interest in the corpora-less than its fair market value, you must report Distributions tion’s assets or earnings and profits toas dividend income the fair market value of the other shareholders.additional stock on the dividend payment date. A nondividend distribution is a distribution that is 3. The distribution is in convertible preferredYou also must report as dividend income any not paid out of the earnings and profits of a stock and has the same result as in (2).service charge subtracted from your cash divi- corporation. You should receive a Form 4. The distribution gives preferred stock to1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora-dends before the dividends are used to buy the some common stock shareholders andtion showing the nondividend distribution. Onadditional stock. But you may be able to deduct common stock to other common stockForm 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution willthe service charge. See chapter 28 for more shareholders.be shown in box 3. If you do not receive such ainformation about deducting expenses of pro- 5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (Thestatement, you report the distribution as an ordi-ducing income. distribution, however, is not taxable if it isnary dividend.In some dividend reinvestment plans, you an increase in the conversion ratio of con-
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a vertible preferred stock made solely to takeBasis adjustment. A nondividend distributionprice less than fair market value. If you choose into account a stock dividend, stock split,reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxedto do this, you must report as dividend income or similar event that would otherwise resultuntil your basis in the stock is fully recovered.the difference between the cash you invest and in reducing the conversion right.)This nontaxable portion is also called a return ofthe fair market value of the stock you buy. When capital. It is a return of your investment in the The term “stock” includes rights to acquirefiguring this amount, use the fair market value of stock of the company. If you buy stock in a stock, and the term “shareholder” includes athe stock on the dividend payment date. corporation in different lots at different times, holder of rights or of convertible securities.
and you cannot definitely identify the shares If you receive taxable stock dividends or
subject to the nondividend distribution, reduce stock rights, include their fair market value at theMoney Market Funds
the basis of your earliest purchases first. time of the distribution in your income.
When the basis of your stock has been re-Report amounts you receive from money market Preferred stock redeemable at a premium.duced to zero, report any additional nondividendfunds as dividend income. Money market funds If you hold preferred stock having a redemptiondistribution that you receive as a capital gain.are a type of mutual fund and should not be price higher than its issue price, the differenceWhether you report it as a long-term orconfused with bank money market accounts that (the redemption premium) generally is taxableshort-term capital gain depends on how longpay interest. as a constructive distribution of additional stockyou have held the stock. See Holding Period in on the preferred stock. For more information,chapter 14. see chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Example. You bought stock in 1994 for Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-Capital Gain $100. In 1997, you received a nondividend dis- ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair market
tribution of $80. You did not include this amount value when distributed. If you receive stock or
Distributions in your income, but you reduced the basis of stock rights that are not taxable to you, see
your stock to $20. You received a nondividend Stocks and Bonds under Basis of Investment
    Capital gain distributions (also called capital distribution of $30 in 2006. The first $20 of this Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for infor-
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to amount reduced your basis to zero. You report mation on how to figure their basis.
your account by regulated investment compa- the other $10 as a long-term capital gain for
nies (commonly called mutual funds) and real Fractional shares. You may not own enough2006. You must report as a long-term capital
estate investment trusts (REITs). They will be stock in a corporation to receive a full share ofgain any nondividend distribution you receive on
shown in box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-this stock in later years.
receive from the mutual fund or REIT. dend. However, with the approval of the share-
holders, the corporation may set up a plan inReport capital gain distributions as long-term Liquidating Distributions which fractional shares are not issued, but in-capital gains regardless of how long you owned
stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are givenyour shares in the mutual fund or REIT.  Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liq- to the shareholders. Any cash you receive foruidating dividends, are distributions you receiveUndistributed capital gains of mutual funds fractional shares under such a plan is treated asduring a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs an amount realized on the sale of the fractionalporation. These distributions are, at least in part,keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on shares. You must determine your gain or lossone form of a return of capital. They may be paidthem. You must treat your share of these gains and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-in one or more installments. You will receive aas distributions, even though you did not actu- ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is theForm 1099-DIV from the corporation showingally receive them. However, they are not in- difference between the cash you receive and theyou the amount of the liquidating distribution included on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are basis of the fractional shares sold.box 8 or 9.reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share- For more information on liquidating distribu-holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital Example. You own one share of commontions, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.Gains. stock that you bought on January 3, 1998, for
Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a of $100. The corporation declared a common stock
Form 2439) as long-term capital gains on dividend of 5% on June 30, 2006. The fair mar-Distributions of StockSchedule D (Form 1040), column (f), line 11. ket value of the stock at the time the stock
The tax paid on these gains by the mutual dividend was declared was $200. You were paidand Stock Rights
fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439. $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under
  Distributions by a corporation of its own stockYou take credit for this tax by including it on a plan described in the above paragraph. You
are commonly known as stock dividends. StockForm 1040, line 70, and checking box a on that figure your gain or loss as follows:
Page 62 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 65 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value of old stock ..... $200.00 dividends left with the Department of Veterans If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,
Fair market value of stock dividend Affairs is not taxable. you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.
(cash received) ...............  +10.00 List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, eachFair market value of old stock and Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage payer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-stock dividend ................ $210.00 dividends you receive in money from a coopera- dends you received. If your securities are heldBasis (cost) of old stock after the tive organization are included in your income. by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list thestock dividend (($200 ÷ $210) × $100) $95.24 Do not include in your income patronage name of the brokerage firm that is shown onBasis (cost) of stock dividend (($10 ÷ dividends you receive on: Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock is$210) × $100) ................ +  4.76 • Property bought for your personal use, or held by a nominee who is the owner of record,Total ...................... $100.00 • Capital assets or depreciable property and the nominee credited or paid you dividendsCash received ................ $10.00 bought for use in your business. But you on the stock, show the name of the nominee andBasis (cost) of stock dividend ...... − 4.76 must reduce the basis (cost) of the items the dividends you received or for which you wereGain $5.24 bought. If the dividend is more than the credited.adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-Because you had held the share of stock for Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedport the excess as income.more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend on line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040, linewas declared, your gain on the stock dividend is 9a.These rules are the same whether the cooper-a long-term capital gain.
ative paying the dividend is a taxable orScrip dividends. A corporation that de- Qualified dividends. Report qualified divi-tax-exempt cooperative.clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b of
certificate that entitles you to a fractional share. Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in boxAlaska Permanent Fund dividends.   Do notThe certificate is generally nontaxable when you 1b is already included in box 1a. Do not addreport these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-receive it. If you choose to have the corporation the amount in box 1b to, or substract it from,port these amounts on Form 1040, line 21, Formsell the certificate for you and give you the pro- the amount in box 1a. Do not include any of the1040A, line 13, or Form 1040EZ, line 3.ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- following on lines 9b.tween the proceeds and the portion of your basis • Qualified dividends you received as ain the corporation’s stock that is allocated to the nominee. See Nominees under How tocertificate. Report Dividend Income in chapter 1 ofHow To ReportHowever, if you receive a scrip certificate Publication 550.that you can choose to redeem for cash instead • Dividends on stock for which you did notDividend Incomeof stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-
meet the holding period. See Holding pe-ceive it. You must include its fair market value in
riod earlier under Qualified Dividends. Generally, you can use either Form 1040 orincome on the date you receive it.
• Dividends on any share of stock to theForm 1040A to report your dividend income.
Report the total of your ordinary dividends on extent that you are obligated (whether
line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report under a short sale or otherwise) to make
qualified dividends on line 9b of Form 1040 or related payments for positions in substan-Other Distributions Form 1040A. tially similar or related property.
  If you receive capital gain distributions, you • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only ifYou may receive any of the following distribu- may be able to use Form 1040A or you may you know or have reason to know that thetions during the year. have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri- payments are not qualified dividends.butions only in chapter 16. If you receive nondiv- • Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, boxidend distributions required to be reported asExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest 1b, from a foreign corporation to the extentcapital gains, you must use Form 1040. Youdividends you receive from a regulated invest- you know or have reason to know the pay-cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receive anyment company (mutual fund) are not included in ments are not qualified dividends.dividend income.your taxable income. Exempt-interest dividends
should be shown on, box 8 of Form 1099-INT. If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-
Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichInformation reporting requirement. Al- ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-you received $10 or more in dividends and otherthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax- dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in thedistributions, you should receive a Formable, you must show them on your tax return if Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched-1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive Formyou have to file a return. This is an information ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxablereporting requirement and does not change the tions, whichever applies. Enter qualifieddividend income.exempt-interest dividends to taxable income. dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.See Form 1099-DIV for more information on
Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex- Investment interest deducted. If you claimhow to report dividend income.
empt-interest dividends paid from specified pri- a deduction for investment interest, you may
vate activity bonds may be subject to the have to reduce the amount of your qualifiedForm 1040A. You must complete Schedulealternative minimum tax. See Alternative Mini- dividends that are eligible for the 5% or 15% tax1 (Form 1040A), Part II, and attach it to yourmum Tax in chapter 30 for more information. rate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi-Form 1040A, if:
dends you choose to include in investment in-• Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,
come when figuring the limit on your investmentDividends on insurance policies. Insurance box 1a) are more than $1,500, or
interest deduction. This is done on the Qualifiedpolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses • You received, as a nominee, dividends
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet orto pay your premiums are not taxable. However, that actually belong to someone else.
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor-you must report as taxable interest income the
mation about the limit on investment interest,interest that is paid or credited on dividends left List on line 5 each payer’s name and the
see Interest Expenses in chapter 23.with the insurance company. amount of ordinary dividends you received. If
If dividends on an insurance contract (other you received a Form 1099-DIV from a brokerage
than a modified endowment contract) are distrib- firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer. Expenses related to dividend income. You
uted to you, they are a partial return of the Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed may be able to deduct expenses related to divi-
premiums you paid. Do not include them in your on line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040A, dend income if you itemize your deductions on
gross income until they are more than the total of line 9a. Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28 for
all net premiums you paid for the contract. Re- general information about deducting expenses
port any taxable distributions on insurance poli- of producing income.Form 1040. You must fill in Schedule B, Partcies on Form 1040, line 21. II, and attach it to your Form 1040, if:
More information. For more information• Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,
box 1a) are more than $1,500, or about how to report dividend income, see chap-Dividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi-
ter 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for thedends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli- • You received, as a nominee, dividends
form you must file.cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on that actually belong to someone else.
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions Page 63

Page 66 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
When to report. If you are a cash basis tax-
payer, report rental income on your return for the Rental Expensesyear you actually or constructively receive it.
9. You are a cash basis taxpayer if you report This part discusses expenses of renting prop-income in the year you receive it, regardless of erty that you ordinarily can deduct from yourwhen it was earned. You constructively receive rental income. It includes information on theincome when it is made available to you, for expenses you can deduct if you rent part of yourRental Income example, by being credited to your bank ac- property, or if you change your property to rentalcount. use. Depreciation, which you can also deduct
For more information about when you con- from your rental income, is discussed later.and Expenses structively receive income, see Accounting
When to deduct. You generally deduct yourMethods in chapter 1.
rental expenses in the year you pay them.
Advance rent. Advance rent is any amount Vacant rental property. If you hold propertyIntroduction
you receive before the period that it covers. for rental purposes, you may be able to deductThis chapter discusses rental income and ex- Include advance rent in your rental income in the your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-penses. It covers the following topics. year you receive it regardless of the period cov- ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or
• Rental income. ered or the method of accounting you use. maintaining the property while the property is
• Rental expenses. vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss of
Example. You sign a 10-year lease to rent• Personal use of dwelling unit (including rental income for the period the property is va-
your property. In the first year, you receivevacation home). cant.
$5,000 for the first year’s rent and $5,000 as rent• Depreciation. Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct yourfor the last year of the lease. You must include• Limits on rental losses. ordinary and necessary expenses for managing,$10,000 in your income in the first year.• How to report your rental income and ex- conserving, or maintaining rental property from
penses. the time you make it available for rent.Security deposits. Do not include a security
deposit in your income when you receive it if you Depreciation. You can begin to depreciateIf you sell or otherwise dispose of your rental
plan to return it to your tenant at the end of the rental property when it is ready and available forproperty, see Publication 544, Sales and Other
lease. But if you keep part or all of the security rent. See Placed-in-Service Date under Depre-Dispositions of Assets.
deposit during any year because your tenant ciation in Publication 527.If you have a loss from damage to, or theft of, does not live up to the terms of the lease, includerental property, see Publication 547, Casualties, Expenses for rental property sold. If you sellthe amount you keep in your income for thatDisasters, and Thefts. property you held for rental purposes, you canyear. deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses forIf you rent a condominium or a cooperative If an amount called a security deposit is to be managing, conserving, or maintaining the prop-apartment, some special rules apply to you even used as a final payment of rent, it is advance erty until it is sold.though you receive the same tax treatment as rent. Include it in your income when you receiveother owners of rental property. See Publication it. Personal use of rental property. If you527, Residential Rental Property, for more infor- sometimes use your rental property for personalmation. purposes, you must divide your expenses be-Payment for canceling a lease. If your tenant
tween rental and personal use. Also, your rentalpays you to cancel a lease, the amount you
Useful Items expense deductions may be limited. See Per-receive is rent. Include the payment in your
sonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacationincome in the year you receive it regardless ofYou may want to see:
Home), later.your method of accounting.
Publication Part interest. If you own a part interest inExpenses paid by tenant. If your tenant pays rental property, you can deduct your part of the❏ 527 Residential Rental Property any of your expenses, the payments are rental expenses that you paid.❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed in income. You must include them in your income.
Uncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax-Service Before 1987 You can deduct the expenses if they are deduct-
payer, you do not report uncollected rent. Be-ible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses,❏ 535 Business Expenses cause you do not include it in your income, youlater, for more information.
cannot deduct it.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
If you use an accrual method, you reportProperty or services. If you receive property❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property income when you earn it. If you are unable toor services, instead of money, as rent, include
collect the rent, you may be able to deduct it as athe fair market value of the property or servicesForm (and Instructions) business bad debt. See chapter 10 of Publica-in your rental income.
tion 535 for more information about business❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization If the services are provided at an agreed
bad debts.upon or specified price, that price is the fair❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—
market value unless there is evidence to theIndividuals
contrary. Repairs and Improvements❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rentalRental of property also used as a home. If❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental
property. You cannot deduct the cost of im-you rent property that you also use as yourIncome and Loss
provements. You recover the cost of improve-home and you rent it fewer than 15 days during
ments by taking depreciation (explained later).the tax year, do not include the rent you receive
in your income and do not deduct rental ex- Separate the costs of repairs and im-penses. However, you can deduct on Schedule provements, and keep accurate rec-A (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualtyRental Income ords. You will need to know the cost ofRECORDS
and theft losses that are allowed for nonrental improvements when you sell or depreciate yourproperty. See Personal Use of Dwelling UnitYou generally must include in your gross income property.(Including Vacation Home), later.all amounts you receive as rent. Rental income
is any payment you receive for the use or occu- Repairs. A repair keeps your property in good
pation of property. In addition to amounts you Part interest. If you own a part interest in operating condition. It does not materially add to
receive as normal rent payments, there are rental property, you must report your part of the the value of your property or substa ntially pro-
other amounts that may be rental income. rental income from the property. long its life. Repainting your property inside or
Page 64 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 67 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster- of traveling away from home if the primary pur-
ing, and replacing broken windows are exam- pose of the trip was the improvement of your Property Changedples of repairs. property. You recover the cost of improvements
If you make repairs as part of an extensive by taking depreciation. For information on travel to Rental Useremodeling or restoration of your property, the expenses, see chapter 26.
whole job is an improvement. If you change your home or other property, (or aTo deduct travel expenses, you must
part of it), to rental use at any time other than atImprovements. An improvement adds to the keep records that follow the rules in
the beginning of your tax year, you must dividevalue of property, prolongs its useful life, or chapter 26.RECORDS
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance,adapts it to new uses. Improvements include
between rental use and personal use.the following items.
You can deduct as rental expenses only theLocal transportation expenses.  You can• Putting a recreation room in an unfinished
part of the expense that is for the part of the yearbasement. deduct your ordinary and necessary local trans-
the property was used or held for rental pur-portation expenses if you incur them to collect• Paneling a den. poses.rental income or to manage, conserve, or main-• Adding a bathroom or bedroom. For depreciation purposes, treat the propertytain your rental property.• Putting decorative grillwork on a balcony. as being placed in service on the conversion• Putting up a fence. Generally, if you use your personal car, date.
• Putting in new plumbing or wiring. pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you You cannot deduct depreciation or insurance
• Putting in new cabinets. can deduct the expenses using one of two meth- for the part of the year the property was held for
ods: actual expenses or the standard mileage• Putting on a new roof. personal use. However, you can include the
rate. For 2006, the standard mileage rate for all• Paving a driveway. home mortgage interest and real estate tax ex-
business miles is 44 1/2 cents a mile. For more penses for the part of the year the property was
If you make an improvement to property, the information, see chapter 26. held for personal use as an itemized deduction
cost of the improvement must be capitalized. on Schedule A (Form 1040).To deduct car expenses under eitherThe capitalized cost can generally be depreci- method, you must keep records thatated as if the improvement were separate prop- Example. Your tax year is the calendarfollow the rules in chapter 26. In addi-RECORDS
erty. year. You moved from your home in May andtion, you must complete Form 4562, Part V, and started renting it on June 1. You can deduct asattach it to your tax return. rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearlyOther Expenses expenses, such as taxes and insurance.
Starting with June, you can deduct as rentalOther expenses you can deduct from your rental Tax return preparation. You can deduct, as a
expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-income include advertising, cleaning and main- rental expense, the part of the tax return prepa-
ally billed monthly, such as utilities.tenance, utilities, fire and liability insurance, ration fees you paid to prepare Schedule E
taxes, interest, commissions for the collection of (Form 1040), Part I. For example, on your 2006
rent, ordinary and necessary travel and trans- Schedule E, you can deduct fees paid in 2006 toportation, and other expenses, discussed next. prepare your 2005 Schedule E, Part I. You can
Renting Part ofalso deduct, as a rental expense, any expenseRental payments for property. You can de-
(other than federal taxes and penalties) you paidduct the rent you pay for property that you use Propertyto resolve a tax underpayment related to yourfor rental purposes. If you buy a leasehold for
rental activities.rental purposes, you can deduct an equal part of If you rent part of your property, you must dividethe cost each year over the term of the lease. certain expenses between the part of the prop-
erty used for rental purposes and the part of theRental of equipment. You can deduct the
property used for personal purposes, as thoughrent you pay for equipment that you use for
you actually had two separate pieces of prop-Not Rented for Profitrental purposes. However, in some cases, lease
erty.contracts are actually purchase contracts. If so,
If you do not rent your property to make a profit, You can deduct the expenses related to theyou cannot deduct these payments. You can
part of the property used for rental purposes,you can deduct your rental expenses only up torecover the cost of purchased equipment
such as home mortgage interest and real estatethrough depreciation. the amount of your rental income. You cannot
taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Formcarry forward to the next year any rental ex-Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you 1040). You can also deduct as a rental expensepenses that are more than your rental income forpay an insurance premium for more than one a part of other expenses that normally are non-the year. For more information about the rulesyear in advance, each year you can deduct the deductible personal expenses, such as ex-for an activity not engaged in for profit, seepart of the premium payment that will apply to penses for electricity or painting the outside ofchapter 1 of Publication 535.that year. You cannot deduct the total premium your house.
in the year you pay it. You can deduct the expenses for the part of
Where to report. Report your not-for-profit the property used for personal purposes, subjectLocal benefit taxes. Generally, you cannot rental income on Form 1040, line 21. You can to certain limitations, only if you itemize yourdeduct charges for local benefits that increase deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).include your mortgage interest (if you use thethe value of your property, such as charges for property as your main home or second home), You cannot deduct any part of the cost of theputting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewer first phone line even if your tenants have unlim-real estate taxes, and casualty losses on thesystems. These charges are nondepreciable ited use of it.appropriate lines of Form 1040, Schedule A,capital expenditures. You must add them to the
You do not have to divide the expenses thatItemized Deductions, if you itemize your deduc-basis of your property. You can deduct local
belong only to the rental part of your property.tions.benefit taxes if they are for maintaining, repair-
For example, if you paint a room that you rent, oring, or paying interest charges for the benefits. Claim your other rental expenses, subject to if you pay premiums for liability insurance inthe rules explained in chapter 1 of PublicationTravel expenses. You can deduct the ordi- connection with renting a room in your home,535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions onnary and necessary expenses of traveling away your entire cost is a rental expense. If you install
Form 1040, Schedule A, line 22. You can deductfrom home if the primary purpose of the trip was a second phone line strictly for your tenants’
these expenses only if they, together with cer-to collect rental income or to manage, conserve, use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-
tain other miscellaneous itemized deductions,or maintain your rental property. You must prop- ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-
total more than 2% of your adjusted gross in-erly allocate your expenses between rental and ciation, discussed later, on the part of the
come.nonrental activities. You cannot deduct the cost property used for rental purposes as well as on
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 65

Page 68 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the furniture and equipment you use for rental the apartment and allowed you to use it evenDwelling Unit though you did not refund any of the rent. Yourpurposes.
Used as Home family actually used the apartment for 10 of
those days. Therefore, the apartment is treatedHow to divide expenses. If an expense is for The tax treatment of rental income and ex- as having been rented for 160 (170 − 10) days.both rental use and personal use, such as mort- penses for a dwelling unit that you also use for You figure 10% of the total days rented to othersgage interest or heat for the entire house, you personal purposes depends on whether you use at a fair rental price is 16 days. Your family alsomust divide the expense between the rental use it as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Income used the apartment for 7 other days during theand the personal use. You can use any reasona- and Deductions, later.) year.ble method for dividing the expense. It may be You use a dwelling unit as a home during You used the apartment as a home becausereasonable to divide the cost of some items (for the tax year if you use it for personal purposes you used it for personal purposes for 17 days.example, water) based on the number of people more than the greater of: That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10%using them. However, the two most common of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).1. 14 days, ormethods for dividing an expense are one based
2. 10% of the total days it is rented to otherson the number of rooms in your home and one
at a fair rental price.based on the square footage of your home. Use As Main Home Before or After
See Figuring Days of Personal Use, later. Renting
If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur-
For purposes of determining whether a dwell-poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price,
ing unit was used as a home, you may notdo not count that day as a day of rental use inPersonal Use of
have to count days you used the property asapplying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day of
your main home before or after renting it orpersonal use in applying both (1) and (2) above.Dwelling Unit
offering it for rent as days of personal use. DoThis rule does not apply when dividing expenses
not count them as days of personal use if:between rental and personal use.(Including Vacation
• You rented or tried to rent the property for
Fair rental price. A fair rental price for your 12 or more consecutive months.Home) property generally is the amount of rent that a • You rented or tried to rent the property for
person who is not related to you would be willing a period of less than 12 consecutiveIf you have any personal use of a dwelling unit to pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rental months and the period ended because(including a vacation home) that you rent, you price if it is substantially less than the rents you sold or exchanged the property.must divide your expenses between rental use charged for other properties that are similar toand personal use. See Figuring Days of Per- This special rule does not apply when dividingyour property.sonal Use and  How To Divide Expenses, later. expenses between rental and personal use.
 If you used your dwelling unit for personal
purposes, it may be considered a “dwelling unit Examples Figuring Daysused as a home.” If it is, you cannot deduct
rental expenses that are more than your rental
of Personal UseThe following examples show how to determine
income for the unit. See Dwelling Unit Used as whether you used your rental property as a
A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is anyHome and How To Figure Rental Income and home.
day that the unit is used by any of the followingDeductions, later. If your dwelling unit is not
persons.Example 1. You converted the basement ofconsidered a dwelling unit used as a home, you
your home into an apartment with a bedroom, acan deduct rental expenses that are more than 1. You or any other person who has an inter-
bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented therental income for the unit subject to certain lim- est in it, unless you rent it to another owner
basement apartment at a fair rental price toits. See Limits on Rental Losses, later. as his or her main home under a shared
college students during the regular school year. equity financing agreement (defined later).
You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273 However, see Use as Main Home BeforeException for minimal rental use. If you use
days). You figured 10% of the total days rented or After Renting under Dwelling Unit Usedthe dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer
to others at a fair rental price is 27 days. As Home, earlier.than 15 days during the year, do not include any
During June (30 days), your brother stayed 2. A member of your family or a member ofof the rent in your income and do not deduct any
with you and lived in the basement apartment the family of any other person who has anof the rental expenses. To determine if you use a
rent free. interest in it, unless the family memberdwelling unit as a home, see Dwelling Unit Used
Your basement apartment was used as a uses the dwelling unit as his or her mainas Home, later.
home because you used it for personal pur- home and pays a fair rental price. Family
poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your brother includes only brothers and sisters,Dwelling unit.  A dwelling unit includes a is considered personal use. Your personal use half-brothers and half-sisters, spouses, an-house, apartment, condominium, mobile home, (30 days) is more than the greater of 14 days or cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.) andboat, vacation home, or similar property. A 10% of the total days it was rented (27 days). lineal descendants (children, grandchild-dwelling unit has basic living accommodations, ren, etc.).such as sleeping space, a toilet, and cooking Example 2. You rented the guest bedroom 3. Anyone under an arrangement that letsfacilities. A dwelling unit does not include prop- in your home at a fair rental price during the local you use some other dwelling unit.erty used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar college’s homecoming, commencement, and 4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.establishment. football weekends (a total of 27 days). Your
  Property is used solely as a hotel, motel, sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for the Main home. If the other person or member ofinn, or similar establishment if it is regularly last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10% the family in (1) or (2) above has more than oneavailable for occupancy by paying customers of the total days rented to others at a fair rental home, his or her main home is ordinarily the oneand is not used by an owner as a home during price is 3 days. he or she lived in most of the time.the year. The room was used as a home because you
Shared equity financing agreement. This isused it for personal purposes for 21 days. That is
Example. You rent a room in your home an agreement under which two or more personsmore than the greater of 14 days or 10% of the
that is always available for short-term occu- acquire undivided interests for more than 5027 days it was rented (3 days).
pancy by paying customers. You do not use the years in an entire dwelling unit, including the
room yourself, and you allow only paying cus- Example 3. You own a condominium apart- land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-
tomers to use the room. The room is used solely ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rental tled to occupy the unit as his or her main home
as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment price for a total of 170 days during the year. For upon payment of rent to the other co-owner or
and is not a dwelling unit. 12 of those days, the tenant was not able to use owners.
Page 66 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 69 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 9-1. Worksheet for Figuring the Limit on Rental Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
Use this worksheet only if you answer “yes” to all the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
1. Enter rents received ..................................................................
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest (see instructions) ........................
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes ..................................................
c. Enter the rental portion of deduction casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ........................
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) . . .............................................
e. Fully deductible rental expenses.  Add lines 2a–2d . . . . .......................................
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................................
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining the dwelling unit (such as repairs,
insurance, and utilities) ................................................................
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest (see instructions) . . . . . . . . . . .....................
c. Add lines 4a and 4b ..................................................................
d. Allowable expenses.  Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4c . . . . . . . . . ..............................
5. Subtract line 4d from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................................
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) . . . . . .....................
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit . . . . . . . . . ..............................
c. Add lines 6a and 6b ..................................................................
d. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation.  Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6c . . . . ....
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year.  Subtract line 4d from line 4c . . . . . . . . . . ...........
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year.  Subtract line 6d from line
6 c ..............................................................................
Enter the amounts on lines 2e, 4d, and 6d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I.
Worksheet Instructions line 19, enter 10% of your adjusted gross in- more than the limit on home mortgage interest.
Follow these instructions for the worksheet come figured without your rental income and Do not include interest on a loan that di d not
expenses from the dwelling unit. If your loss benefit the dwelling unit (as explained in the lineabove. If you were unable to deduct all your
occurred after August 24, 2005, and was the 2a instructions).expenses last year because of the rental income
result of Hurricane Katrina, enter zero on line 19. Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excesslimit, add these unused amounts to your ex-
Enter the rental portion of the result from Form casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684penses for this year.
4684, line 18, on line 2c of this worksheet. you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it todwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule
figure your personal losses on Schedule A. In-A (Form 1040) if you had not rented the unit. Do A. Enter the amount from Form 4684,stead, figure the personal portion on a separatenot include interest on a loan that did not benefit line 10 ....................Form 4684.the dwelling unit. For example, do not include B. Enter the rental portion of A ......Line 2d.  Enter the total of your rental ex-interest on a home equity loan used to pay off penses that are directly related only to the rental C. Enter the amount from line 2c of thiscredit cards or other personal loans, buy a car, activity. These include interest on loans used for worksheet ..................or pay college tuition. Include interest on a loan rental activities other than to buy, build, or im-used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit, D. Subtract C from B. Enter the resultprove the dwelling unit. Also include rental
or to refinance such a loan. Enter the rental here and on line 6a of this worksheetagency fees, advertising, office supplies, and
portion of this interest on line 2a of the work- Allocating the limited deduction.  If youdepreciation on office equipment used in your
cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4c or 6csheet. rental activity.
this year, you can allocate the allowable deduc-Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental
tion in any way you wish among the expensesrelated to the dwelling unit that you could deduct portion of the mortgage interest you could de-
included on line 4c or 6c. Enter the amount youon Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not rentedduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the
allocate to each expense on the appropriate linethe dwelling unit. To do this, complete Form dwelling unit. Enter on line 4b of this worksheet
of Schedule E, Part I.4684, Casualties and Thefts, Section A, treating the rental portion of the mortgage interest you
the losses as personal losses. On Form 4684, could not deduct on Schedule A because it is
Donation of use of property. You use a Because your neighbor has an interest in theExamples
dwelling unit for personal purposes if: unit, both of you are considered to have used the
The following examples show how to determine unit for personal purposes during those 2• You donate the use of the unit to a charita-
days of personal use. weeks.ble organization,
• The organization sells the use of the unit
Example 1. You and your neighbor are Example 2. You and your neighbors areat a fund-raising event, and
co-owners of a condominium at the beach. You co-owners of a house under a shared equity• The “purchaser” uses the unit. rent the unit to vacationers whenever possible. financing agreement. Your neighbors live in the
The unit is not used as a main home by anyone. house and pay you a fair rental price.
Your neighbor uses the unit for 2 weeks every Even though your neighbors have an interest
year. in the house, the days your neighbors live there
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 67

Page 70 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are not counted as days of personal use by you. 2. You used the cottage for personal pur-
This is because your neighbors rent the house poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in Depreciationas their main home under a shared equity fi- May).
nancing agreement. 3. The total use of the cottage was 99 days You recover your cost in income producing
(14 days personal use + 85 days rental property through yearly tax deductions. You doExample 3. You own a rental property that use). this by depreciating the property; that is, byyou rent to your son. Your son has no interest in deducting some of the cost on your tax return4. Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) ofthis property. He uses it as his main home. He each year.the cottage expenses.pays you a fair rental price for the property. Three basic factors determine how much de-When determining whether you used the cot-Your son’s use of the property is not personal preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) your
tage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) youuse by you because your son is using it as his basis in the property, (2) the recovery period for
used it is personal use even though you re-main home, he has no interest in the property, the property, and (3) the depreciation method
ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-and he is paying you a fair rental price. used. You cannot simply deduct your mortgage
fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83 or principal payments, or the cost of furniture,
Example 4. You rent your beach house to days of rental use for this purpose. Because you fixtures and equipment, as an expense.
Joshua. Joshua rents his house in the moun- used the cottage for personal purposes more You can deduct depreciation only on the part
tains to you. You each pay a fair rental price. than 14 days and more than 10% of the days of of your property used for rental purposes. De-
You are using your house for personal pur- preciation reduces your basis for figuring gain orrental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If you
poses on the days that Joshua uses it because loss on a later sale or exchange.have a net loss, you may not be able to deduct
your house is used by Joshua under an arrange-   You may have to use Form 4562 to figureall of the rental expenses. See Property Used as
ment that allows you to use his house. and report your depreciation. See How To Re-a Home in the following discussion.
port Rental Income and Expenses, later.
How To Figure Rental Claiming the correct amount of depreciation.Days Used for Repairs and You should claim the correct amount of depreci-Maintenance Income and Deductions ation each tax year. Even if you did not claim
depreciation that you were entitled to deduct,Any day that you spend working substantially full How you figure your rental income and deduc- you must still reduce your basis in the propertytime repairing and maintaining (not improving) tions depends on whether you used the dwelling by the full amount of depreciation that you couldyour property is not counted as a day of personal unit as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used as have deducted. If you did not deduct the correctuse. Do not count such a day as a day of per- Home, earlier) and, if you used it as a home, amount of depreciation for property in any year,sonal use even if family members use the prop- how many days the property was rented at a fair you may be able to make a correction for thaterty for recreational purposes on the same day. rental price. year by filing Form 1040X, Amended U.S Indi-
vidual Income Tax Return. If you are not allowed
How To Divide Expenses to make the correction on an amended return,
Property Not Used as a Home you can change your accounting method toIf you use a dwelling unit for both rental and claim the correct amount of depreciation. SeeIf you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,personal purposes, divide your expenses be- Claiming the correct amount of depreciation  inreport all the rental income and deduct all thetween the rental use and the personal use based Publication 527 for more information.rental expenses. See How To Report Rentalon the number of days used for each purpose.
Changing your accounting method to de-You can deduct expenses for the rental use of Income and Expenses, later.
duct unclaimed depreciation. To changethe unit under the rules explained in How To  Your deductible rental expenses can be
your accounting method, you must file FormFigure Rental Income and Deductions, later. more than your gross rental income. However, 3115, Application for Change in Accounting When dividing your expenses, follow these see Limits on Rental Losses, later. Method, to get the consent of the IRS. In somerules.
instances, that consent is automatic. For more• Any day that the unit is rented at a fair information, see chapter 1 of Publication 946.rental price is a day of rental use even if Property Used as a Home
you used the unit for personal purposes Land. You can never depreciate the cost ofIf you use a dwelling unit as a home during thethat day. This rule does not apply when land because land does not wear out, becomeyear (see Dwelling Unit Used as Home, earlier),determining whether you used the unit as obsolete, or get used up. The costs of clearing,how you figure your rental income and deduc-a home. grading, planting, and landscaping are usuallytions depends on how many days the unit was• Any day that the unit is available for rent all part of the cost of land and cannot be depreci-
rented at a fair rental price.but not actually rented is not a day of ated.
rental use.
More information. See Publication 527 forRented fewer than 15 days. If you use a
more information about depreciating rentaldwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewerExample. Your beach cottage was avail- property and see Publication 946, How To De-than 15 days during the year, do not include anyable for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92 preciate Property, for more information aboutrental income in your income. Also, you cannotdays). Your family uses the cottage during the depreciation.deduct any expenses as rental expenses.last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unable
to find a renter for the first week in August (7
Rented 15 days or more. If you use a dwell- Other Rules Aboutdays). The person who rented the cottage for
ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or moreJuly allowed you to use it over a weekend (2 Depreciable Propertyduring the year, you include all your rental in-days) without any reduction in or refund of rent.
come in your income. See How To ReportThe cottage was not used at all before May 17 or In addition to the rules about what methods you
after August 31. Rental Income and Expenses, later. If you had a can use, there are other rules you should be
net profit from the rental property for the yearYou figure the part of the cottage expenses aware of with respect to depreciable property.
(that is, if your rental income is more than theto treat as rental expenses as follows.
Gain from disposition. If you dispose oftotal of your rental expenses, including depreci-1. The cottage was used for rental a total of depreciable property at a gain, you may have toation), deduct all of your rental expenses. How-85 days (92 − 7). The days it was available report, as ordinary income, all or part of the gain.ever, if you had a net loss, your deduction forfor rent but not rented (7 days) are not See Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-certain rental expenses is limited.days of rental use. The July weekend (2 tions of Assets.To figure your deductible rental expensesdays) you used it is rental use because
and any carryover to next year, use Worksheetyou received a fair rental price for the Alternative minimum tax. If you use acceler-
9-1.weekend. ated depreciation, you may have to file Form
Page 68 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 71 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6251. Accelerated depreciation can be deter- credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex- you normally report your rental i ncome and ex-
mined under MACRS, ACRS, and any other cess loss or credit is carried forward to the next penses on Form 1040, Schedule E, Part I. How-
method that allows you to deduct more depreci- tax year. ever, do not use that schedule to report a
ation than you could deduct using a straight line not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented for Profit,For a detailed discussion of these rules, see
method. earlier.Publication 925.
You may have to complete Form 8582 to    If you provide significant services that are
figure the amount of any passive activity loss for primarily for your tenant’s convenience, such as
the current tax year for all activities and the regular cleaning, changing linen, or maid serv-
amount of the passive activity loss allowed onLimits on ice, you report your rental income and expenses
your tax return. on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From
Rental Losses Business or Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit From
Business (Sole Proprietorship). Significant serv-Exception for real estate professionals.
Rental real estate activities are generally con- Rental activities in which you materially partici- ices do not include the furnishing of heat and
sidered passive activities, and the amount of pated during the year are not passive activities light, cleaning of public areas, trash collection,
loss you can deduct is limited. Generally, you if, for that year, you were a real estate profes- etc. For information, see Publication 334, Tax
cannot deduct losses from rental real estate sional. For a detailed discussion of the require- Guide for Small Business (For Individuals Who
activities unless you have income from other ments, see Publication 527. For a detailed Use Schedule C or C-EZ). You also may have topassive activities. However, you may be able to discussion of material participation, see Publica- pay self-employment tax on your rental income.deduct rental losses without regard to whether tion 925.
you have income from other passive activities if
Form 1098. If you paid $600 or more of mort-you “materially” or “actively” participated in your
gage interest on your rental property to any onerental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later. Losses From Rental Real Estate
person, you should receive a Form 1098, Mort-Losses from passive activities are first sub- Activities gage Interest Statement, or similar statementject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit the
showing the interest you paid for the year. If youamount of deductible losses from holding most If you or your spouse actively participated in a
and at least one other person (other than yourreal property placed in service after 1986. passive rental real estate activity, you can de-
spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for,duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity from
and paid interest on the mortgage, and the otheryour nonpassive income. This special allowanceException. If your rental losses are less than
is an exception to the general rule disallowing person received the Form 1098, report your$25,000 and you actively participated in the
losses in excess of income from passive activi- share of the interest on Form 1040, Schedule E,rental activity, the passive activity limits probably
ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from the line 13. Attach a statement to your return show-do not apply to you. See Losses From Rental
activity against the tax on up to $25,000 of ing the name and address of the other person. InReal Estate Activities, later.
nonpassive income after taking into account any the left margin of Schedule E (Form 1040), next
losses allowed under this exception. to line 13, enter “See attached.”Property used as a home. If you used the
If you are married, filing a separate return,rental property as a home during the year, the
and lived apart from your spouse for the entirepassive activity rules do not apply to that home. Schedule E (Form 1040)tax year, your special allowance cannot be moreInstead, you must follow the rules explained
than $12,500. If you lived with your spouse atearlier under Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (In- Use Form 1040, Schedule E, Part I, to report
any time during the year and are filing a sepa-cluding Vacation Home). your rental income and expenses. List your totalrate return, you cannot use the special allow- income, expenses, and depreciation for eachance to reduce your nonpassive income or tax rental property. Be sure to answer the questionAt-Risk Rules on nonpassive income. on line 2.
The maximum amount of the special allow- The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount you If you have more than three rental or royaltyance is reduced if your modified adjusted grosscan deduct as losses from activities often de- properties, complete and attach as manyincome is more than $100,000 ($50,000 if mar-scribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding real Schedules E as are needed to list the properties.ried filing separately).property (other than mineral property) placed in Complete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How-
service before 1987 are not subject to the at-risk ever, fill in the “Totals” column on only oneActive participation. You actively partici-rules. Schedule E. The figures in the “Totals” columnpated in a rental real estate activity if you (andGenerally, any loss from an activity subject on that Schedule E should be the combinedyour spouse) owned at least 10% of the rentalto the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of totals of all Schedules E.property and you made management decisionsthe total amount you have at risk in the activity at Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in-in a significant and bona fide sense. Manage-the end of the tax year. You are considered at come or loss from partnerships, S corporations,ment decisions include approving new tenants,risk in an activity to the extent of cash and the
estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-deciding on rental terms, approving expendi-adjusted basis of other property you contributed
ment conduits. If you need to use Schedule E,tures, and similar decisions.to the activity and certain amounts borrowed for
page 2, use page 2 of the same Schedule E youuse in the activity. See Publication 925 for more
used to enter the combined totals in Part I.information. More information. See Publication 925 for
more information on the passive loss limits, in- On Schedule E, page 1, line 20, enter the
cluding information on the treatment of unused depreciation you are claiming. You must com-Passive Activity Limits disallowed passive losses and credits and the plete and attach Form 4562 for rental activities
treatment of gains and losses realized on the only if you are claiming:In general, all rental activities (except those
disposition of a passive activity. • Depreciation on property placed in servicemeeting the exception for real estate profession-
als, later) are passive activities. For this pur- during 2006,
pose, a rental activity is an activity from which
• Depreciation on listed property (such as a
you receive income mainly for the use of tangi- car), regardless of when it was placed in
ble property, rather than for services. service, orHow To Report
• Any car expenses reported on a form
Limits on passive activity deductions and Rental Income other than Schedule C or C-EZ (Form
credits.  Deductions for losses from passive 1040) or Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ.
activities are limited. You generally cannot offset and Expenses Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your ownincome, other than passive income, with losses worksheet. You do not have to attach thesefrom passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and
computations to your return.on income, other than passive income, with provide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

Page 72 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reach minimum retirement age. Minimum retire-
ment age generally is the age at which you canIntroduction first receive a pension or annuity if you are not
10. disabled.This chapter discusses the tax treatment of dis-
tributions you receive from: You may be entitled to a tax credit if
• An employee pension or annuity from a you were permanently and totally dis-
qualified plan, abled when you retired. For informa-
TIP
Retirement • A disability retirement, and tion on this credit, see chapter 33.
• A purchased commercial annuity. Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
mum retirement age, payments you receive arePlans, Pensions,
taxable as a pension or annuity. Report theWhat is not covered in this chapter. The
payments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b, orfollowing topics are not discussed in this chap-and Annuities on Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b.ter.
Disability payments for injuries in-The General Rule. This is the method gen-
curred as a direct result of a terroristerally used to determine the tax treatment of attack directed against the United
TIP
What’s New pension and annuity income from nonqualified States (or its allies) are not included in income.plans (including commercial annuities). For a For more information about payments to survi-qualified plan, you generally cannot use theDesignated Roth accounts. For tax years vors of terrorist attacks, see Publication 3920,General Rule unless your annuity starting datebeginning after 2005, a 401(k) or 403(b) plan Tax Relief for Victims of Terrorist Attacks.is before November 19, 1996. For more informa-can include a qualified Roth contribution pro- For more information on how to report disa-tion about the General Rule, see Publicationgram. Under that program, designated Roth bility pensions, including military and certain939.contributions are treated as elective deferrals, government disability pensions, see chapter 5.except that the contributions are included in in- Civil service retirement benefits. If you More than one program. If you receive bene-come. See Designated Roth accounts, later, for are retired from the federal government (either fits from more than one program under a singlemore information. regular or disability retirement), see Publication trust or plan of your employer, such as a pension721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service RetirementQualified reservist distributions. The addi- plan and a profit-sharing plan, you may have toBenefits. Publication 721 also covers the infor-tional 10% tax on early distributions does not figure the taxable part of each separately. Yourmation that you need if you are the survivor orapply to a qualified reservist distribution. See former employer or the plan administratorbeneficiary of a federal employee or retiree whoQualified reservist distributions  later, for more should be able to tell you if you have more thandied.information. one pension or annuity contract.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). Designated Roth accounts. A designatedPublic safety employees. After August 17, Information on the tax treatment of amounts you Roth account is a separate account created2006, the additional 10% tax on early distribu- receive from an IRA is in chapter 17. under a qualified Roth contribution program totions does not apply to distributions from quali-
which participants may elect to have part or all offied governmental plans, if you were a public
Useful Items their elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b) plansafety employee who separated from service
designated as Roth contributions. Elective de-You may want to see:after you reached age 50. See Publication 575 ferrals that are designated as Roth contributionsfor more information. are included in your income. However, qualifiedPublication
distributions are not included in your income.Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary. For ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income See Publication 575, Pension and Annuity In-distributions after 2006, a nonspouse desig-
come, for more information.❏ 721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Servicenated beneficiary may have a distribution from
Retirement Benefitsan eligible retirement plan of a deceased em- Railroad retirement benefits. Part of the rail-
ployee directly transferred (trustee-to-trustee) to road retirement benefits you receive is treated❏ 939 General Rule for Pensions andhis or her own IRA set up to receive the distribu- for tax purposes like social security benefits, andAnnuitiestion. The transfer will be treated as an eligible part is treated like an employee pension. For
rollover distribution and the receiving plan will be information about railroad retirement benefitsForm (and Instructions)
treated as an inherited IRA. See Rollovers by treated as social security benefits, see Publica-❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pensionnonspouse beneficiary later, for more informa- tion 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-
or Annuity Paymentstion. road Retirement Benefits. For information about
railroad retirement benefits treated as an em-❏ 1099-R Distributions From Pensions,Retired public safety officers. For distribu- ployee pension, see Railroad Retirement inAnnuities, Retirement ortions after 2006, an eligible retired public safety Publication 575.Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs,officer can elect to exclude from income distribu- Insurance Contracts, etc. Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If youtions of up to $3,000 made directly from a gov-
receive a pension or annuity, you may be able toernmental retirement plan to the providers of ❏ 4972 Tax on Lump-Sum Distributions
take the credit for the elderly or the disabled.accident, health, or long-term care insurance. ❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans See chapter 33.See Publication 575 for more information. (Including IRAs) and Other
Withholding and estimated tax. The payerTax-Favored Accounts
of your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, an-
nuity, or deferred compensation plan will with-
hold income tax on the taxable parts of amountsReminder paid to you. You can choose not to have tax
withheld unless they are eligible rollover distri-
General InformationHurricane tax relief. Special rules apply to butions. See Eligible rollover distributions under
the use of retirement funds by qualified individu- Rollovers, later. You make this choice by filing
als who suffered an economic loss as a result of Disability pensions. If you retired on disabil- Form W-4P.
Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma. See Hurri- ity, you generally must include in income any For payments other than eligible rollover dis-
cane-Related Relief, in Publication 575, or Pub- disability pension you receive under a plan that tributions, you can tell the payer how to withhold
lication 4492, Information for Taxpayers is paid for by your employer. You must report by filing Form W-4P. If you receive an eligible
Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma, your taxable disability payments as wages on rollover distribution, 20% will generally be with-
for information on these special rules. line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A until you held. There is no withholding on a direct rollover
Page 70 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 73 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of an eligible rollover distribution. See Direct Tax-free exchange. You do not recognize apply in determining your cost. See Publication
rollover option under Rollovers, later. If you gain or loss on an exchange of an annuity con- 575.
choose not to have tax withheld or you do not tract for another annuity contract if the insured or
have enough tax withheld, you may have to pay annuitant remains the same. However, if an an-
estimated tax. nuity contract is exchanged for a life insurance
or endowment contract, any gain due to interestFor more information, see Pensions and An- Taxation of Periodicaccumulated on the contract is ordinary income.nuities under Withholding in chapter 4.
See Transfers of Annuity Contracts in Publica- Paymentstion 575 for more information about exchangesLoans. If you borrow money from your quali-
of annuity contracts.fied pension or annuity plan, tax-sheltered annu- Fully taxable payments. Generally, if you didity program, government plan, or contract not pay any part of the cost of your employeepurchased under any of these plans, you may How To Report pension or annuity and your employer did nothave to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu- withhold part of the cost from your pay while yoution unless certain exceptions apply. This If you file Form 1040, report your total annuity on worked, the amounts you receive each year aremeans that you must include in income all or line 16a and the taxable part on line 16b. If your fully taxable. You must report them on yourpart of the amount borrowed. Even if you do not pension or annuity is fully taxable, enter it on line income tax return.have to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu- 16b; do not make an entry on line 16a.
tion, you may not be able to deduct the interest If you file Form 1040A, report your total an- Partly taxable payments. If you paid part ofon the loan in some situations. For details, see nuity on line 12a and the taxable part on line the cost of your annuity, you are not taxed on theLoans Treated as Distributions in Publication 12b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxable, part of the annuity you receive that represents a575. For information on the deductibility of inter- enter it on line 12b; do not make an entry on line return of your cost. The rest of the amount youest, see chapter 23. 12a. receive is taxable. Your annuity starting date
determines which method you must or may use.More than one annuity. If you receive moreQualified plans for self-employed individu- If you contributed to your pension or annuitythan one annuity and at least one of them is notals. Qualified plans set up by self-employed plan, you figure the tax-free and the taxablefully taxable, enter the total amount receivedindividuals are sometimes called Keogh or H.R. parts of your annuity payments under either thefrom all annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, or10 plans. Qualified plans can be set up by sole Simplified Method or the General Rule. If yourForm 1040A, line 12a, and enter the taxable partproprietors, partnerships (but not a partner), and annuity starting date is after November 18,on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, linecorporations. They can cover self-employed 1996, and your payments are from a qualified12b. If all the annuities you receive are fullypersons, such as the sole proprietor or partners, plan, you must use the Simplified Method. Gen-taxable, enter the total of all of them on Formas well as regular (common-law) employees. erally, you must use the General Rule only for1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.Distributions from a qualified plan are usually nonqualified plans.
fully taxable because most recipients have no If you had more than one partly taxable pen-Joint return. If you file a joint return and youcost basis. If you have an investment (cost) in sion or annuity, figure the tax-free part and theand your spouse each receive one or more pen-the plan, however, your pension or annuity pay- taxable part of each separately.sions or annuities, report the total of the pen-ments from a qualified plan are taxed under the If your annuity is paid under a qualified plansions and annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, orSimplified Method. For more information about and your annuity starting date is after July 1,Form 1040A, line 12a, and report the taxablequalified plans, see Publication 560, Retirement 1986, and before November 19, 1996, you couldpart on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, linePlans for Small Business. have chosen to use either the General Rule or12b.
the Simplified Method.
Section 457 deferred compensation plans.
If you work for a state or local government or for
Simplified Methoda tax-exempt organization, you may be able to
Cost (Investment in theparticipate in a section 457 deferred compensa- Under the Simplified Method, you figure thetion plan. If your plan is an eligible plan, you are tax-free part of each annuity payment by divid-Contract)not taxed currently on pay that is deferred under ing your cost by the total number of anticipatedthe plan or on any earnings from the plan’s monthly payments. For an annuity that is pay-Before you can figure how much, if any, of ainvestment of the deferred pay. You are taxed able for the lives of the annuitants, this numberdistribution from your pension or annuity plan ison amounts deferred in an eligible state or local is based on the annuitants’ ages on the annuitytaxable, you must determine your cost (yourgovernment plan only when they are distributed starting date and is determined from a table. Forinvestment in the contract) in the pension orfrom the plan. You are taxed on amounts de- any other annuity, this number is the number ofannuity. Your total cost in the plan includes eve-ferred in an eligible tax-exempt organization monthly annuity payments under the contract.rything that you paid. It also includes amountsplan when they are distributed or otherwise
your employer paid that were taxable to youmade available to you. Who must use the Simplified Method. Youwhen paid. Cost does not include any amountsThis chapter covers the tax treatment of ben- must use the Simplified Method if your annuityyou deducted or excluded from income.efits under eligible section 457 plans, but it does starting date is after November 18, 1996, andFrom this total cost, subtract any refunds ofnot cover the treatment of deferrals. For infor- you receive pension or annuity payments from apremiums, rebates, dividends, unrepaid loans,mation on deferrals under section 457 plans, qualified plan or annuity, unless you were ator other tax-free amounts you received by thesee Retirement Plan Contributions under Em- least 75 years old and entitled to annuity pay-later of the annuity starting date or the date onployee Compensation in Publication 525. ments from a qualified plan that are guaranteedwhich you received your first payment.For general information on these deferred for 5 years or more.Your annuity starting date is the later of thecompensation plans, see Section 457 Deferred first day of the first period for which you receivedCompensation Plans in Publication 575. Guaranteed payments. Your annuity contracta payment, or the date the plan’s obligations
provides guaranteed payments if a minimumbecame fixed.
Purchased annuities. If you receive pension number of payments or a minimum amount (for
or annuity payments from a privately purchased example, the amount of your investment) is pay-Designated Roth accounts. Your cost in
annuity contract from a commercial organiza- able even if you and any survivor annuitant dothese accounts is your designated Roth contri-
tion, such as an insurance company, you gener- not live to receive the minimum. If the minimumbutions that were included in your income as
ally must use the General Rule to figure the amount is less than the total amount of thewages subject to applicable withholding require-
tax-free part of each annuity payment. For more payments you are to receive, barring death, dur-ments.
information about the General Rule, get Publica- ing the first 5 years after payments begin (fig-
tion 939. Also, see Variable Annuities in Publica- Foreign employment contributions. If you ured by ignoring any payment increases), you
tion 575 for the special provisions that apply to worked in a foreign country and contributions are entitled to less than 5 years  of guaranteed
these annuity contracts. were made to your retirement plan, special rules payments.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 71

Page 74 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Who must use the General Rule. You must • A qualified plan if you are age 75 or older Annuity starting before November 19,
on your annuity starting date and your an- 1996. If your annuity starting date is after Julyuse the General Rule if you receive pension or
nuity payments are guaranteed for at least 1, 1986, and before November 19, 1996, youannuity payments from:
5 years. had to use the General Rule for either circum-• A nonqualified plan (such as a private an-
stance described earlier. You also had to use itnuity, a purchased commercial annuity, or for any fixed-period annuity. If you did not havea nonqualified employee plan), or to use the General Rule, you could have chosen
to use it. If your annuity starting date is beforeWorksheet 10-A. Simplified Method Worksheet for Bill Smith July 2, 1986, you had to use the General Rule
unless you could use the Three-Year Rule.1. Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this year. If you had to use the General Rule (or choseAlso, add this amount to the total for Form 1040, line 16a, or Form to use it), you must continue to use it each year1040A, line 12a .................................... 1. 14,400 that you recover your cost.2. Enter your cost in the plan (contract) at the
Who cannot use the General Rule. You can-annuity starting date plus any death benefit
not use the General Rule if you receive yourexclusion* .......................... 2. 31,000
pension or annuity from a qualified plan andNote: If your annuity starting date was before
none of the circumstances described in the pre-this year and you completed this worksheet
ceding discussions apply to you. See Who mustlast year, skip line 3 and enter the amount from
use the Simplified Method, earlier.line 4 of last year’s worksheet on line 4 below.
Otherwise, go to line 3. More information. For complete information
3. Enter the appropriate number from Table 1 on using the General Rule, including the actua-
below. But if your annuity starting date was rial tables you need, see Publication 939.
after 1997 and the payments are for your life
Exclusion limit. Your annuity starting dateand that of your beneficiary, enter the
determines the total amount that you can ex-appropriate number from Table 2 below ..... 3. 310
clude from your taxable income over the years.4. Divide line 2 by the number on line 3 ....... 4. 100
5. Multiply line 4 by the number of months for Exclusion limited to cost. If your annuity
which this year’s payments were made. If your starting date is after 1986, the total amount of
annuity starting date was before 1987, enter annuity income that you can exclude over the
this amount on line 8 below and skip lines 6, 7, years as a recovery of the cost cannot exceed
10, and 11. Otherwise, go to line 6 ......... 5. 1,200 your total cost. Any unrecovered cost at your (or
the last annuitant’s) death is allowed as a mis-6. Enter any amounts previously recovered tax
cellaneous itemized deduction on the final returnfree in years after 1986. This is the amount
of the decedent. This deduction is not subject toshown on line 10 of your worksheet for last
the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.year .............................. 6. -0-
7. Subtract line 6 from line 2 ............... 7. 31,000 Exclusion not limited to cost. If your an-8. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 7 ....................... 8. 1,200 nuity starting date is before 1987, you can con-
9. Taxable amount for year. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter the tinue to take your monthly exclusion for as long
result, but not less than zero. Also, add this amount to the total for as you receive your annuity. If you chose a joint
Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b ............... 9. 13,200 and survivor annuity, your survivor can continue
Note: If your Form 1099-R shows a larger taxable amount, use the to take the survivor’s exclusion figured as of the
amount on line 9 instead. annuity starting date. The total exclusion may be
10. Was your annuity starting date before 1987? more than your cost.
❏ Yes. STOP. Do not complete the rest of this worksheet. How to use the Simplified Method. Com-❏ No. Add lines 6 and 8. This is the amount you have recovered plete the Simplified Method Worksheet in Publi-tax free through 2006. You will need this number if you need to fill cation 575 to figure your taxable annuity forout this worksheet next year ........................... 10. 1,200 2006. If the annuity is payable only over your life,11. Balance of cost to be recovered. Subtract line 10 from line 2. If use your age at the annuity starting date tozero, you will not have to complete this worksheet next year. The determine the total number of expected monthlypayments you receive next year will be fully taxable ........... 11. 29,800 payments for your annuity. For annuity starting
dates beginning in 1998, if your annuity is pay-TABLE 1 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE able over your life and the lives of other individu-AND your annuity starting date was— als, use the combined ages of you and theIF the age at annuity before November 19, after November 18, youngest survivor annuitant at the annuity start-starting date was... 1996, enter on line 3... 1996, enter on line 3... ing date. However, if your annuity starting date55 or under 300 360 began before January 1, 1998, the total number56–60 260 310 of monthly annuity payments expected to be61–65 240 260 received is based on the primary annuitant’s age
66–70 170 210 at the annuity starting date.
71 or older 120 160
Be sure to keep a copy of the com-
pleted worksheet; it will help you figureTABLE 2 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE
your taxable annuity in later years.
TIP
IF the combined ages
at annuity starting THEN enter
date were... on line 3... Example. Bill Smith, age 65, began receiv-
110 or under 410 ing retirement benefits in 2006, under a joint and
111–120 360 survivor annuity. Bill’s annuity starting date is
121–130 310 January 1, 2006. The benefits are to be paid for
131–140 260 the joint lives of Bill and his wife Kathy, age 65.
141 or older 210 Bill had contributed $31,000 to a qualified plan
and had received no distributions before the
annuity starting date. Bill is to receive a retire-* A death benefit exclusion (up to $5,000) applied to certain benefits received by employees who
ment benefit of $1,200 a month, and Kathy is todied before August 21, 1996.
Page 72 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 75 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
receive a monthly survivor benefit of $600 upon If you receive a nonperiodic distribution to figure the tax on the part from partici-
Bill’s death. pation after 1973 (if you qualify).before the annuity starting date from a qualified
Bill must use the Simplified Method to figure retirement plan, you generally can allocate only • Use the 10-year tax option to figure the tax
his taxable annuity because his payments are part of it to the cost of the contract. You exclude on the total taxable amount (if you qualify).
from a qualified plan and he is under age 75. from your gross income the part that you allo- • Roll over all or part of the distribution. See
Because his annuity is payable over the lives of cate to the cost. You include the remainder in Rollovers, later. No tax is currently due on
more than one annuitant, he uses his and your gross income. the part rolled over. Report any part not
Kathy’s combined ages and Table 2 at the bot- If you receive a nonperiodic distribution rolled over as ordinary income.
tom of the worksheet in completing line 3 of the before the annuity starting date from a plan other • Report the entire taxable part of the distri-worksheet. His completed worksheet is shown than a qualified retirement plan, it is generally bution as ordinary income on your tax re-in Worksheet 10-A. allocated first to earnings (the taxable part) and turn.
Bill’s tax-free monthly amount is $100 then to the cost of the contract (the tax-free
($31,000 ÷ 310 as shown on line 4 of the work- part). This allocation rule applies, for example, The first three options are explained in the
sheet). Upon Bill’s death, if Bill has not recov- to a commercial annuity contract you bought following discussions.
ered the full $31,000 investment, Kathy will also directly from the issuer. Electing optional lump-sum treatment. Youexclude $100 from her $600 monthly payment. For more information, see Figuring the Tax- can choose to use the 10-year tax option orThe full amount of any annuity payments re- able Amount , under Taxation of Nonperiodic capital gain treatment only once after 1986 forceived after 310 payments are paid must be Payments, in Publication 575. any plan participant. If you make this choice, youincluded in gross income.
cannot use either of these optional treatmentsIf Bill and Kathy die before 310 payments are
for any future distributions for the participant.Lump-Sum Distributionsmade, a miscellaneous itemized deduction will
be allowed for the unrecovered cost on the final Taxable and tax-free parts of the distribution.A lump-sum distribution is the distribution orincome tax return of the last to die. This deduc- The taxable part of a lump-sum distribution is thepayment in 1 tax year of a plan participant’stion is not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted employer’s contributions and income earned onentire balance from all of the employer’s quali-gross-income limit. your account. You may recover your cost in thefied plans of one kind (for example, pension, lump sum and any net unrealized appreciationHad Bill’s retirement annuity payments profit-sharing, or stock bonus plans). A distribu- (NUA) in employer securities tax free.been from a nonqualified plan, he tion from a nonqualified plan (such as a privately
would have used the General Rule. He
TIP
purchased commercial annuity or a section 457 Cost. In general, your cost is the total of:uses the Simplified Method Worksheet because deferred compensation plan of a state or local • The plan participant’s nondeductible con-his annuity payments are from a qualified plan. government or tax-exempt organization) cannot tributions to the plan,
qualify as a lump-sum distribution. • The plan participant’s taxable costs of any
The participant’s entire balance from a plan life insurance contract distributed,
does not include certain forfeited amounts. It • Any employer contributions that were tax-
also does not include any deductible voluntaryTaxation of able to the plan participant, and
employee contributions allowed by the plan after • Repayments of any loans that were tax-
1981 and before 1987. For more informationNonperiodic Payments able to the plan participant.
about distributions that do not qualify as
You must reduce this cost by amounts previ-lump-sum distributions, see Distributions that doNonperiodic distributions are also known as
ously distributed tax free.not qualify  under Lump-Sum Distributions  inamounts not received as an annuity. They in-
Publication 575.clude all payments other than periodic payments Net unrealized appreciation (NUA). The
and corrective distributions. If you receive a lump-sum distribution from a NUA in employer securities (box 6 of Form
qualified employee plan or qualified employee 1099-R) received as part of a lump-sum distribu-
Corrective distributions of excess plan con- annuity and the plan participant was born before tion is generally tax free until you sell or ex-
tributions. Generally, if the contributions January 2, 1936, you may be able to elect op- change the securities. (For more information,
made for you during the year to certain retire- tional methods of figuring the tax on the distribu- see Distributions of employer securities under
ment plans exceed certain limits, the excess is tion. The part from active participation in the plan Taxation of Nonperiodic Payments  in Publica-
taxable to you. To correct an excess, your plan before 1974 may qualify as capital gain subject tion 575.)
may distribute it to you (along with any income to a 20% tax rate. The part from participation
earned on the excess). For information on plan after 1973 (and any part from participation
contribution limits and how to report corrective before 1974 that you do not report as capital Capital Gain Treatmentdistributions of excess contributions, see Retire- gain) is ordinary income. You may be able to use
ment Plan Contributions under Employee Com- Capital gain treatment applies only to the tax-the 10-year tax option, discussed later, to figure
pensation in Publication 525. able part of a lump-sum distribution resultingtax on the ordinary income part.
from participation in the plan before 1974. TheUse Form 4972 to figure the separate tax onFiguring the taxable amount of nonperiodic amount treated as capital gain is taxed at a 20%a lump-sum distribution using the optional meth-payments. How you figure the taxable rate. You can elect this treatment only once forods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is added toamount of a nonperiodic distribution depends on any plan participant, and only if the plan partici-the regular tax figured on your other income.whether it is made before the annuity starting pant was born before January 2, 1936.This may result in a smaller tax than you woulddate or on or after the annuity starting date. The Complete Part II of Form 4972 to choose thepay by including the taxable amount of the distri-annuity starting date is either the first day of the 20% capital gain election. For more information,bution as ordinary income in figuring your regu-first period for which you receive an annuity see Capital Gain Treatment under Lump-Sumlar tax.payment under the contract or the date on which Distributions in Publication 575.
the obligation under the contract becomes fixed,
How to treat the distribution. If you receivewhichever is later. If it is made before the annuity
a lump-sum distribution, you may have the fol-starting date, its tax treatment also depends on 10-Year Tax Optionlowing options for how you treat the taxablewhether it is made under a qualified or nonquali-
part.fied plan and, if it is made under a nonqualified The 10-year tax option is a special formula used
• Report the part of the distribution from par-plan, whether it fully discharges the contract or is to figure a separate tax on the ordinary income
ticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (ifallocable to an investment you made before part of a lump-sum distribution. You pay the tax
you qualify) and the part from participationAugust 14, 1982. only once, for the year in which you receive the
after 1973 as ordinary income.If you receive a nonperiodic payment from distribution, not over the next 10 years. You can
• Report the part of the distribution from par-your annuity contract on or after the annuity elect this treatment only once for any plan par-
ticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (ifstarting date, you generally must include all of ticipant, and only if the plan participant was born
you qualify) and use the 10-year tax optionthe payment in gross income. before January 2, 1936.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 73

Page 76 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The ordinary income part of the distribution is amount (or any portion) to a Roth IRA. For more plan as discussed in Publication 590. For more
the amount shown in box 2a of the Form 1099-R information on rollovers from designated Roth information on the rules for rolling over distribu-
given to you by the payer, minus the amount, if accounts, see Publication 575 tions, see Publication 575.
any, shown in box 3. You also can treat the Direct rollover option. You can choose tocapital gain part of the distribution (box 3 of have any part or all of an eligible rollover distri-Form 1099-R) as ordinary income for the bution paid directly to another qualified plan (if10-year tax option if you do not choose capital Special Additionalpermitted) or to a traditional IRA. If you decidegain treatment for that part. on a rollover, it is generally to your advantage toComplete Part III of Form 4972 to choose the choose this direct rollover option. Under this Taxes10-year tax option. You must use the special tax option, the plan administrator would not withholdrates shown in the instructions for Part III to To discourage the use of pension funds fortax from any part of the distribution that is di-figure the tax. Publication 575 illustrates how to rectly paid to the other plan. purposes other than normal retirement, the lawcomplete Form 4972 to figure the separate tax. imposes additional taxes on early distributionsWithholding tax. If you choose to have all or of those funds and on failures to withdraw theany part of the distribution paid to you, it is funds timely. Ordinarily, you will not be subjecttaxable in the year distributed unless you roll it to these taxes if you roll over all early distribu-over to another qualified plan or to a traditionalRollovers tions you receive, as explained earlier, and be-IRA within 60 days. The plan administrator must gin drawing out the funds at a normalwithhold income tax of 20% from the amount ofIf you withdraw cash or other assets from a retirement age, in reasonable amounts overthe distribution paid to you. (See Pensions andqualified retirement plan in an eligible rollover your life expectancy. These special additionalAnnuities under Withholding in chapter 4.)distribution, you can defer tax on the distribution taxes are the taxes on:
by rolling it over to another qualified retirement If you decide to roll over an amount • Early distributions, andplan or a traditional IRA. equal to the distribution before with- • Excess accumulation (not receiving mini-For this purpose, the following plans are holding, your contribution to the newCAUTION
!
mum distributions).qualified retirement plans. plan or IRA must include other money (for exam-
These taxes are discussed in the following sec-• A qualified employee plan. ple, from savings or amounts borrowed) to re-
tions.• A qualified employee annuity. place the amount withheld.
• A tax-sheltered annuity plan (403(b) plan). The administrator must give you a written If you must pay either of these taxes, report
• An eligible state or local government sec- explanation of your distribution options within a them on Form 5329. However, you do not have
tion 457 deferred compensation plan. reasonable period of time before making an eli- to file Form 5329 if you owe only the tax on early
gible rollover distribution. distributions and your Form 1099-R correctly
shows a “1” in box 7. Instead, enter 10% of theTime for making rollover. You generally Rollover by surviving spouse. You may be taxable part of the distribution on Form 1040,must complete the rollover by the 60th day fol- able to roll over tax free all or part of a distribu- line 60 and write “No” under the heading “Otherlowing the day on which you receive the distribu- tion from a qualified retirement plan you receive Taxes” to the left of line 60.tion from your employer’s plan. (This 60-day as the surviving spouse of a deceased em-
Even if you do not owe any of these taxes,period is extended for the period during which ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if you
you may have to complete Form 5329 and at-the distribution is in a frozen deposit in a finan- were the employee. You can roll over a distribu-
tach it to your Form 1040. This applies if youcial institution.) For all rollovers to an IRA, you tion into a qualified retirement plan or a tradi-
meet an exception to the tax on early distribu-must irrevocably elect rollover treatment by writ- tional IRA.
tions but box 7 of your Form 1099-R does notten notice to the trustee or issuer of the IRA. Before 2007, a beneficiary other than the
indicate an exception.employee’s surviving spouse could not roll overThe IRS may waive the 60-day require- a distribution.ment where the failure to do so would
Tax on Early Distributionsbe against equity or good conscience, Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary. After
TIP
such as in the event of a casualty, disaster, or 2006, you may be able to roll over tax free all or Most distributions (both periodic and nonperi-other event beyond your reasonable control. a portion of a distribution you receive from an odic) from qualified retirement plans and non-eligible retirement plan of a deceased em- qualified annuity contracts made to you beforeEligible rollover distributions. Generally, an ployee. You must be the designated beneficiary you reach age 591/2 are subject to an additionaleligible rollover distribution is any distribution of of the employee, but you cannot be the surviving tax of 10%. This tax applies to the part of theall or the balance to your credit in a qualified spouse. The distribution must be a direct trus- distribution that you must include in gross in-retirement plan. For information about excep- tee-to-trustee transfer to your IRA that was set come.tions to eligible rollover distributions, see Publi- up to receive the distribution. The transfer will be
cation 575. For this purpose, a qualified retirement plantreated as an eligible rollover distribution and the
is:receiving plan will be treated as an inheritedRollover of nontaxable amounts. You may • A qualified employee plan,IRA. For information on inherited IRAs, see Pub-be able to roll over the nontaxable part of a lication 590. • A qualified employee annuity plan,distribution (such as your after-tax contributions)
• A tax-sheltered annuity plan, ormade to another qualified retirement plan or Qualified domestic relations order (QDRO).
traditional IRA. The transfer must be made ei- You may be able to roll over tax free all or part of • An eligible state or local government sec-
ther through a direct rollover to a qualified plan a distribution from a qualified retirement plan tion 457 deferred compensation plan (to
that separately accounts for the taxable and that you receive under a QDRO. If you receive the extent that any distribution is attributa-
nontaxable parts of the rollover or through a the distribution as an employee’s spouse or for- ble to amounts the plan received in a di-
rollover to a traditional IRA. mer spouse (not as a nonspousal beneficiary), rect transfer or rollover from one of the
If you roll over only part of a distribution that the rollover rules apply to you as if you were the other plans listed here).
includes both taxable and nontaxable amounts, employee. You can roll over the distribution from
the amount you roll over is treated as coming the plan into a traditional IRA or to another 5% rate on certain early distributions fromfirst from the taxable part of the distribution. eligible retirement plan. See Publication 575 for deferred annuity contracts. If an early with-more information on benefits received under a drawal from a deferred annuity is otherwise sub-Designated Roth accounts. You can roll QDRO. ject to the 10% additional tax, a 5% rate mayover an eligible distribution from a designated
apply instead. A 5% rate applies to distributionsRoth account only into another designated Roth Retirement bonds. If you redeem a retire-
under a written election providing a specificaccount or a Roth IRA. If you want to roll over the ment bond purchased under a qualified bond
schedule for the distribution of your interest inpart of the distribution that is not included in purchase plan, you can defer the tax on the
the contract if, as of March 1, 1986, you hadincome, you must make a direct rollover of the amount received that exceeds your basis by
begun receiving payments under the election.entire distribution or you can roll over the entire rolling it over to an IRA or qualified employer
Page 74 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 77 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
On line 4 of Form 5329, multiply by 5% instead additional tax on early distributions. A qualified For example, if you are retired  and your 70th
of 10%. Attach an explanation to your return. reservist distribution is a distribution (a) from birthday was on June 30, 2006, yo u were age
elective deferrals under a section 401(k) or 70 1/2 on December 30, 2006. If your 70th birth-
Exceptions to tax. Certain early distributions 403(b) plan, (b) to an individual ordered or called day was on July 1, 2006, you reached age 70 1/2
are excepted from the early distribution tax. If to active duty (because he or she is a member of on January 1, 2007.
the payer knows that an exception applies to a reserve component) for a period of more than 5% owners. If you are a 5% owner of theyour early distribution, distribution code “2,” “3,” 179 days or for an indefinite period, and (c) company maintaining your qualified retirementor “4” should be shown in box 7 of your Form made during the period beginning on the date of plan, you must begin to receive distributions by1099-R and you do not have to report the distri- the order or call and ending at the close of the April 1 of the calendar year that follows the yearbution on Form 5329. If an exception applies but active duty period. You must be ordered or in which you reach age 701/2, regardless of whendistribution code “1” (early distribution, no called to active duty after September 11, 2001, you retire.known exception) is shown in box 7, you must and before December 31, 2007. For more infor-
file Form 5329. Enter the taxable amount of the mation, see Publication 575. Required distributions. By the required be-distribution shown in box 2a of your Form
ginning date, as explained earlier, you mustAdditional exceptions for nonqualified1099-R on line 1 of Form 5329. On line 2, enter
either:annuity contracts. The tax does not apply tothe amount that can be excluded and the excep-
distributions that are: • Receive your entire interest in the plan (fortion number shown in the Form 5329 instruc-
a tax-sheltered annuity, your entire benefit• From a deferred annuity contract to thetions.
accruing after 1986), orextent allocable to investment in the con-If distribution code “1” is incorrectly tract before August 14, 1982, • Begin receiving periodic distributions inshown on your Form 1099-R for a dis- annual amounts calculated to distribute• From a deferred annuity contract under atribution received when you were age
TIP
your entire interest (for a tax-sheltered an-qualified personal injury settlement,591/2 or older, include that distribution on Form nuity, your entire benefit accruing after• From a deferred annuity contract pur-5329. Enter exception number “12” on line 2. 1986) over your life or life expectancy orchased by your employer upon termination
over the joint lives or joint life expectan-of a qualified employee plan or qualifiedGeneral exceptions. The tax does not ap-
cies of you and a designated beneficiaryemployee annuity plan and held by yourply to distributions that are:
(or over a shorter period).employer until your separation from serv-• Made as part of a series of substantially
ice, orequal periodic payments (made at least Additional information. For more informa-• From an immediate annuity contract (aannually) for your life (or life expectancy) tion on this rule, see Tax on Excess Accumula-single premium contract providing sub-or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) tion in Publication 575.stantially equal annuity payments that startof you and your designated beneficiary (if
within one year from the date of purchasefrom a qualified retirement plan, the pay- Required distributions not made. If the
and are paid at least annually).ments must begin after your separation actual distributions to you in any year are less
from service), than the required minimum distribution, you are
subject to an additional excise tax. The tax• Made because you are totally and perma-
Tax on Excess equals 50% of the part of the required minimumnently disabled, or
distribution that was not distributed. You can get• Made on or after the death of the plan Accumulations
this excise tax waived if you establish that theparticipant or contract holder.
shortfall in distributions was due to reasonableTo make sure that most of your retirement bene-
error and that you are taking reasonable steps toAdditional exceptions for qualified retire- fits are paid to you during your lifetime, rather
remedy the shortfall.ment plans. The tax does not apply to distri- than to your beneficiaries after your death, the
butions that are: payments that you receive from qualified retire- State insurer delinquency proceedings.ment plans must begin no later than on your• From a qualified retirement plan (other You might not receive the minimum distributionrequired beginning date (defined next). The pay-than an IRA) after your separation from because of state insurer delinquency proceed-ments each year cannot be less than the re-service in or after the year you reached ings for an insurance company. If your pay-quired minimum distribution.age 55 (age 50 for qualified public safety ments are reduced below the minimum due to
employees), these proceedings, you should contact your planRequired beginning date. Unless the rule• From a qualified retirement plan (other administrator. Under certain conditions, you willfor 5% owners applies, you must begin to re-than an IRA) to an alternate payee under not have to pay the excise tax.ceive distributions from your qualified retire-a qualified domestic relations order, ment plan by April 1 of the year that follows the Form 5329. You must file a Form 5329 if• From a qualified retirement plan to the ex- later of: you owe a tax because you did not receive atent you have deductible medical ex- • The calendar year in which you reach age minimum required distribution from your quali-penses (medical expenses that exceed 701/2, or fied retirement plan.7.5% of your adjusted gross income), • The calendar year in which you retire fromwhether or not you itemize your deduc- employment with the employer maintain-tions for the year, ing the plan.• From an employer plan under a written
However, your plan may require you to begin to Survivorselection that provides a specific schedule
receive distributions by April 1 of the year thatfor distribution of your entire interest if, as
follows the year in which you reach age 70 1/2, If you receive a survivor annuity because of theof March 1, 1986, you had separated from
even if you have not retired. death of a retiree who had reported the annuityservice and had begun receiving pay-
under the Three-Year Rule, include the totalments under the election, For this purpose, a qualified retirement plan received in income.• From an employee stock ownership plan includes a:for dividends on employer securities held If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-1. Qualified employee plan,by the plan, ments under the General Rule, you must apply
2. Qualified employee annuity plan, the same exclusion percentage to your initial• From a qualified retirement plan due to an
3. Section 457 deferred compensation plan, survivor annuity payment called for in the con-IRS levy of the plan, or
or tract. The resulting tax-free amount will then• From elective deferral accounts under
remain fixed. Any increases in the survivor an-4. Tax-sheltered annuity plan (for benefits ac-401(k) or 403(b) plans or similar arrange-
nuity are fully taxable.cruing after 1986).ments that are qualified reservist distribu-
If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-tions.
Age 701/2. You reach age 701/2 on the date that ments under the Simplified Method, the part of
Qualified reservist distributions. A quali- is 6 calendar months after the date of your 70th each payment that is tax free is the same as the
fied reservist distribution is not subject to the birthday. tax-free amount figured by the retiree at the
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 75

Page 78 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
annuity starting date. See Simplified Method, Social security benefits include monthly survi-
earlier. vor and disability benefits. They do not include
Are Any of Yoursupplemental security income (SSI) payments,In any case, if the annuity starting date is
which are not taxable.after 1986, the total exclusion over the years
Benefits Taxable?Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefitscannot be more than the cost.
are the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroadIf you are the survivor of an employee, or
To find out whether any of your benefits mayemployee or beneficiary would have been enti-former employee, who died before becoming
be taxable, compare the base amount for yourtled to receive under the social security system.entitled to any annuity payments, you must fig-
filing status with the total of:They are commonly called the social securityure the taxable and tax-free parts of your annuity
equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene-payments using the method that applies as if 1. One-half of your benefits, plus
fits.you were the employee. 2. All your other income, includingIf you received these benefits during 2006, tax-exempt interest.you should have received a Form SSA-1099,
Estate tax. If your annuity was a joint and When making this comparison, do not re-Social Security Benefit Statement, or Form
survivor annuity that was included in the dece- duce your other income by any exclusions for:RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire-
dent’s estate, an estate tax may have been paid • Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,ment Board, (Form SSA-1042S, Social Security
on it. You can deduct, as a miscellaneous item- Benefit Statement, or Form RRB-1042S, State- • Employer-provided adoption benefits,ized deduction, the part of the total estate tax ment for Nonresident Alien Recipients of: Pay- • Foreign earned income or foreign housing,that was based on the annuity. This deduction is ments by the Railroad Retirement Board, if you ornot subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income are a nonresident alien). These forms show the • Income earned by bona fide residents oflimit. The deceased annuitant must have died amounts received and repaid, and taxes with- American Samoa or Puerto Rico.after the annuity starting date. (For details, see held for the year. You may receive more than
section 1.691(d)-1 of the regulations.) This one of these forms for the same year. You
amount cannot be deducted in 1 year. It must be Figuring total income. To figure the total ofshould add the amounts shown on all forms you
deducted in equal amounts over your remaining one-half of your benefits plus your other income,receive for the year to determine the “total”
life expectancy. use the worksheet later in this discussion. If theamounts received and repaid, and taxes with-
If the decedent died before the annuity start- total is more than your base amount, part of yourheld for that year. See the Appendix at the end
ing date of a deferred annuity contract and you benefits may be taxable.of Publication 915 for more information.
receive a death benefit under that contract, the If you are married and file a joint return foramount you receive (either in a lump sum or as Note. When the term “benefits” is used in 2006, you and your spouse must combine yourperiodic payments) in excess of the decedent’s this chapter, it applies to both social security incomes and your benefits to figure whether anycost is included in your gross income as income benefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad of your combined benefits are taxable. Even ifin respect of a decedent for which you may be retirement benefits. your spouse did not receive any benefits, youable to claim an estate tax deduction. must add your spouse’s income to yours to fig-What is not covered in this chapter. ThisSee Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, ure whether any of your benefits are taxable.chapter does not cover the tax rules for theand Administrators, for more information on the following railroad retirement benefits. If the only income you received duringestate tax deduction.
• Non-social security equivalent benefit 2006 was your social security or the
(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits. SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire-
TIP
• Tier 2 benefits. ment benefits, your benefits generally are not
• Vested dual benefits. taxable and you probably do not have to file a
return. If you have income in addition to your• Supplemental annuity benefits.
benefits, you may have to file a return even ifFor information on these benefits, see Publica- none of your benefits are taxable.11. tion 575, Pension and Annuity Income.
This chapter also does not cover the tax rules
Base amount. Your base amount is:for foreign social security benefits. These bene-
• $25,000 if you are single, head of house-Social Security fits are taxable as annuities, unless they are
hold, or qualifying widow(er),exempt from U.S. tax or treated as a U.S. social
• $25,000 if you are married filing separatelysecurity benefit under a tax treaty.and Equivalent and lived apart from your spouse for all of
2006,Useful Items • $32,000 if you are married filing jointly, orRailroad You may want to see:
• $-0- if you are married filing separately
and lived with your spouse at any timePublicationRetirement during 2006.❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income
❏ 590 Individual Retirement ArrangementsBenefits Worksheet.   You can use the follow-(IRAs) ing worksheet to figure the amount of
income to compare with your base❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalent
amount. This is a quick way to check whetherRailroad Retirement BenefitsIntroduction some of your benefits may be taxable.
This chapter explains the federal income tax Forms (and Instructions)
rules for social security benefits and equivalent A. Enter the amount from box 5 of all❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individualstier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains your Forms SSA-1099 andthe following topics. ❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request RRB-1099. Include the full amount
• How to figure whether your benefits are of any lump-sum benefit payments
received in 2006, for 2006 andtaxable.
earlier years. (If you received more• How to use the social security benefits than one form, combine theworksheet (with examples). amounts from box 5 and enter the• How to report your taxable benefits. total.) .................. A .
• How to treat repayments that are more Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop
than the benefits you received during the here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.
year.
Page 76 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 79 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Who is taxed. The person who has the legal of the word “benefits” on Form 1040, line 20a, orB. Enter one-half of the amount on
right to receive the benefits must determine Form 1040A, line 14a.line A ................... B .
whether the benefits are taxable. For example, if
C. Enter your taxable pensions, you and your child receive benefits, but the How Much Is Taxable?wages, interest, dividends, and check for your child is made out in your name,other taxable income ......... C . you must use only your part of the benefits to If part of your benefits are taxable, how much isD. Enter any tax-exempt interest see whether any benefits are taxable to you. taxable depends on the total amount of yourincome (such as interest on One-half of the part that belongs to your child benefits and other income. Generally, the highermunicipal bonds) plus any must be added to your child’s other income to that total amount, the greater the taxable part ofexclusions from income (listed see whether any of those benefits are taxable to your benefits.earlier). ................. D . your child.
E. Add lines B, C, and D ........ E . Maximum taxable part. Generally, up toRepayment of benefits. Any repayment ofNote. Compare the amount on line E to your base 50% of your benefits will be taxable. However,benefits you made during 2006 must be sub-amount for your filing status. If the amount on line up to 85% of your benefits can be taxable iftracted from the gross benefits you received inE equals or is less than the base amount for your either of the following situations applies to you.filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this 2006. It does not matter whether the repayment
• The total of one-half of your benefits andyear. If the amount on line E is more than your was for a benefit you received in 2006 or in an
base amount, some of your benefits may be all your other income is more thanearlier year. If you repaid more than the grosstaxable. You need to complete Worksheet 1 in $34,000 ($44,000 if you are married filingbenefits you received in 2006, see RepaymentsPublication 915 (or the Social Security Benefits jointly).More Than Gross Benefits, later.Worksheet in your tax form instruction booklet). • You are married filing separately and livedYour gross benefits are shown in box 3 of
with your spouse at any time during 2006.Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099. Your repay-
ments are shown in box 4. The amount in box 5Example. You and your spouse (both over shows your net benefits for 2006 (box 3 minus Which worksheet to use. A worksheet to65) are filing a joint return for 2006 and you both box 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figure figure your taxable benefits is in the instruc-received social security benefits during the year. whether any of your benefits are taxable. tions for your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. YouIn January 2007, you received a Form can use either that worksheet or Worksheet 1Tax withholding and estimated tax. You canSSA-1099 showing net benefits of $7,500 in box in Publication 915, unless any of the followingchoose to have federal income tax withheld from5. Your spouse received a Form SSA-1099 situations applies to you.your social security benefits and/or the SSEBshowing net benefits of $3,500 in box 5. You portion of your tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. 1. You contributed to a traditional individualalso received a taxable pension of $19,000 and If you choose to do this, you must complete a retirement arrangement (IRA) and you orinterest income of $500. You did not have any Form W-4V. You can choose withholding at 7%, your spouse is covered by a retirementtax-exempt interest income. Your benefits are 10%, 15%, or 25% of your total benefit payment. plan at work. In this situation, you mustnot taxable for 2006 because your income, as If you do not choose to have income tax use the special worksheets in Appendix Bfigured in the following worksheet, is not more withheld, you may have to request additional of Publication 590 to figure both your IRA
than your base amount ($32,000) for married withholding from other income or pay estimated deduction and your taxable benefits.
filing jointly. tax during the year. For details, get Publication 2. Situation (1) does not apply and you take
505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, or theEven though none of your benefits are tax- an exclusion for interest from qualified U.S.
instructions for Form 1040-ES. savings bonds (Form 8815), for adoptionable, you must file a return for 2006 because
benefits (Form 8839), for foreign earnedyour taxable gross income ($19,500) exceeds
income or housing (Form 2555 or Formthe minimum filing requirement amount for your
2555-EZ), or for income earned in Ameri-filing status.
can Samoa (Form 4563) or Puerto Rico byHow To Report
bona fide residents. In this situation, you
A. Enter the amount from box 5 of must use Worksheet 1 in Publication 915Your Benefits
all your Forms SSA-1099 and to figure your taxable benefits.
RRB-1099. Include the full If part of your benefits are taxable, you must use 3. You received a lump-sum payment for anamount of any lump-sum benefit Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use earlier year. In this situation, also completepayments received in 2006, for Form 1040EZ. Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub-2006 and earlier years. (If you
lication 915. See Lump-sum election.received more than one form, Reporting on Form 1040. Report your net
combine the amounts from box 5 benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Formand enter the total.) ........ A . $  11,000 Lump-sum election. You must include theSSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 20a andNote. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop taxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive) pay-the taxable part on line 20b. If you are marriedhere; none of your benefits are taxable this year. ment of benefits received in 2006 in your 2006filing separately and you lived apart from your
B. Enter one-half of the amount on income, even if the payment includes benefitsspouse for all of 2006, also enter “D” to the right
line A ................. B . 5,500 for an earlier year.of the word “benefits” on line 20a.
C. Enter your taxable pensions, This type of lump-sum benefit paymentReporting on Form 1040A. Report your netwages, interest, dividends, and should not be confused with thebenefits (the amount in box 5 of your Formother taxable income ....... C .  19,500 lump-sum death benefit that both theSSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 14a and
TIP
D. Enter any tax-exempt interest SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficiaries.the taxable part on line 14b. If you are married
income (such as interest on No part of the lump-sum death benefit is subjectfiling separately and you lived apart from yourmunicipal bonds) plus any to tax.spouse for all of 2006, also enter “D” to the rightexclusions from income (listed of the word “benefits” on line 14a. Generally, you use your 2006 income to fig-earlier). ................ D . - 0 -
ure the taxable part of the total benefits receivedBenefits not taxable. If you are filing FormE. Add lines B, C, and D ....... E . $25,000 in 2006. However, you may be able to figure the1040EZ, do not report any benefits on your taxNote. Compare the amount on line E to your base taxable part of a lump-sum payment for an ear-return. If you are filing Form 1040 or Formamount for your filing status. If the amount on line lier year separately, using your income for theE equals or is less than the base amount for your 1040A, report your net benefits (the amount in earlier year. You can elect this method if it low-filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this box 5 of your Form SSA-1099 or Form ers your taxable benefits.year. If the amount on line E is more than your RRB-1099) on Form 1040, line 20a, or Form
base amount, some of your benefits may be 1040A, line 14a. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line Making the election. If you received ataxable. You then need to complete Worksheet 1 20b, or Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are married lump-sum benefit payment in 2006 that includesin Publication 915 (or the Social Security Benefits filing separately and you lived apart from your benefits for one or more earlier years, follow theWorksheet in your tax form instruction booklet). spouse for all of 2006, also enter “D” to the right instructions in Publication 915 under Lump-Sum
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 77

Page 80 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8. If you are: Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10,Election to see whether making the election will
11b, 12b, and 13 .............. 29,750• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000lower your taxable benefits. That discussion 4. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any• Single, head of household, qualifyingalso explains how to make the election. exclusions/adjustments for:widow(er), or married filing separately
• Qualified U.S. savings bondand you lived apart from your spouseBecause the earlier year’s taxable ben-
 interest (Form 8815, line 14),for all of 2006, enter $25,000. ..... 25,000efits are included in your 2006 income, • Adoption benefits (Form 8839, lineNote. If you are married filing separatelyno adjustment is made to the earlierCAUTION
!
 30),and you lived with your spouse at any timeyear’s return. Do not file an amended return for • Foreign earned income or housingin 2006, skip lines 8 through 15; multiply
the earlier year.  (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, orline 7 by 85% (.85) and enter the result on
 Form 2555-EZ, line 18), andline 16. Then go to line 17.
• Certain income of bona fide9. Is the amount on line 8 less than the
 residents of Americanamount on line 7?
 Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)
 or Puerto RicoExamples Form 1040A filers: Enter the total ofNo.
STOP
None of your benefits are any exclusion for qualified U.S. savingstaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b,The following are a few examples you can use bond interest (Form 8815, line 14) or foror on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are adoption benefits ( Form 8839, line 30). -0-as a guide to figure the taxable part of your married filing separately and you lived 5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4 ............. 32,550benefits. apart from your spouse for all of 2006, be 6. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount fromsure you entered “D” to the right of the Form 1040, line 36, minus any amounts onword “benefits” on Form 1040, line 20a, orExample 1. George White is single and files Form 1040, lines 33, 34, and 35on Form 1040A, line 14a.Form 1040 for 2006. He received the following Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount fromYes. Subtract line 8 from line 7 ...... 6,980 Form 1040A, line 20, minus any amountsincome in 2006: 10.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; on Form 1040A, lines 18 and 19. ...... 1,000$9,000 if single, head of household, 7. Is the amount on line 6 less than theFully taxable pension ............. $18,600 qualifying widow(er), or married filing amount on line 5?Wages from part-time job ..........  9,400 separately and you lived apart from your
Taxable interest income ........... 9 9 0 spouse for all of 2006 ............. 9,000 No.
STOP
None of your benefits are taxable. EnterTotal ....................... $28,990 11.Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line
enter -0- ..................... - 0 - 14b.
George also received social security benefits 12.Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10 .... 6,980 Yes. Subtract line 6 from line 5 ...... 31,550
during 2006. The Form SSA-1099 he received in 8. If you are:
13.Enter one-half of line 12 ........... 3,490January 2007 shows $5,980 in box 5. To figure • Married filing jointly, enter $32,000
14.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13 .... 2,990his taxable benefits, George completes the • Single, head of household, qualifying15.Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line 11 is widow(er), or married filing separatelyworksheet shown here. zero, enter -0- .................. - 0 - and you lived apart from your spouse
16.Add lines 14 and 15 .............. 2,990 for all of 2006, enter $25,000. ..... 32,000Worksheet 1. 17.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ......... 5,083 Note. If you are married filing separatelyFiguring Your Taxable Benefits 18.Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of and you lived with your spouse at any time
line 16 or line 17. Also enter this amount in 2006, skip lines 8 through 15; multiply1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line 7 by 85% (.85) and enter the result onyour Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. line 14b ..................... $2,990 line 16. Then go to line 17.Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line
9. Is the amount on line 8 less than the20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ........ $5,980
amount on line 7?2. Enter one-half of line 1 ............ 2,990 The amount on line 18 of George’s worksheet3. Enter the total of the amounts from: shows that $2,990 of his social security benefits No.
STOP
None of your benefits areForm 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10 taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b,is taxable. On line 20a of his Form 1040, Georgethrough 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you areenters his net benefits of $5,980. On line 20b, heand 21. married filing separately and you livedForm 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10, enters his taxable benefits of $2,990. apart from your spouse for all of 2006, be11b, 12b, and 13 .............. 28,990 sure you entered “D” to the right of the4. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any Example 2. Ray and Alice Hopkins file a word “benefits” on Form 1040, line 20a, orexclusions/adjustments for: on Form 1040A, line 14a.joint return on Form 1040A for 2006. Ray is• Qualified U.S. savings bond Yes. Subtract line 8 from line 7 ......retired and received a fully taxable pension of interest (Form 8815, line 14), 10. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly;$15,500. He also received social security bene-• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line $9,000 if single, head of household,fits, and his Form SSA-1099 for 2006 shows net 30), qualifying widow(er), or married filingbenefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice worked during• Foreign earned income or housing separately and you lived apart from your
 (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or the year and had wages of $14,000. She made a spouse for all of 2006 .............
 Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and deductible payment to her IRA account of 11. Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less,
• Certain income of bona fide enter -0- .....................$1,000. Ray and Alice have two savings ac- residents of American 12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10 ....counts with a total of $250 in interest income. Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) 13. Enter one-half of line 12 ...........They complete Worksheet 1 and find that none or Puerto Rico 14. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13 ....of Ray’s social security benefits are taxable. OnForm 1040A filers: Enter the total of 15. Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line 11 isany exclusions for qualified U.S. line 3 of the worksheet, they enter $29,750 zero, enter -0- .................savings bond interest ( Form 8815, line ($15,500 + $14,000 + $250). On Form 1040A, 16. Add lines 14 and 15 ..............14) or for adoption benefits ( Form they enter $5,600 on line 14a and -0- on line 17. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) .........8839, line 30). ................ - 0 - 14b. 18. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of line5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4 ............. 31,980
16 or line 17. Also enter this amount on6. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from Worksheet 1. Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, lineForm 1040, line 36, minus any amounts 1 4 b........................Figuring Your Taxable Benefitson Form 1040, lines 33 and 35
Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount 1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALLfrom Form 1040A, line 20, minus any your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. Example 3. Joe and Betty Johnson file aamount on Form 1040A, line 18 ....... - 0 - Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line joint return on Form 1040 for 2006. Joe is a7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the 20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ........ $5,600 retired railroad worker and in 2006 received theamount on line 5? 2. Enter one-half of line 1 ............ 2,800 social security equivalent benefit (SSEB) portionNo.
STOP
None of your social security benefits are 3. Enter the total of the amounts from: of tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. Joe’s Formtaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10
RRB-1099 shows $10,000 in box 5. Betty is a1040A, line 14b. through 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and
retired government worker and receives a fullyYes. Subtract line 6 from line 5 ...... 31,980 21.
taxable pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 in
Page 78 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 81 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
11. Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero orinterest income plus interest of $200 on a quali- Joint return. If you and your spouse file a joint
less, enter -0- ................. 1,500fied U.S. savings bond. The savings bond inter- return, and your Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10 . . . 12,000est qualified for the exclusion. They figure their has a negative figure in box 5, but your spouse’s13. Enter one-half of line 12 .......... 6,000taxable benefits by completing Worksheet 1. On does not, subtract the amount in box 5 of your14. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13 . . . 5,000line 3 of the worksheet, they enter $40,300 form from the amount in box 5 of your spouse’s15. Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line 11 is
($38,000 + $2,300). form. You do this to get your net benefits whenzero, enter -0- ................ 1,275
figuring if your combined benefits are taxable.16. Add lines 14 and 15 ............. 6,275
Worksheet 1. 17. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ........ 8,500
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits 18. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of Example. John and Mary file a joint return
line 16 or line 17. Also enter this amount for 2006. John received Form SSA-1099 show-1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Formyour Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. line 14b .................... $6,275 SSA-1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500).Also enter this amount on Form 1040,
line 20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a .... $10,000 John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minus
2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... 5,000 $500) as the amount of their net benefits whenMore than 50% of Joe’s net benefits are tax-
3. Enter the total of the amounts from: figuring if any of their combined benefits areable because the income on line 7 of the work-
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10 taxable.sheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. Joe andthrough 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19,
Betty enter $10,000 on Form 1040, line 20a, andand 21. Repayment of benefits received in an earlier$6,275 on Form 1040, line 20b.Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10, year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of all
11b, 12b, and 13 ............. 40,300 of your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 is a4. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any negative figure, you can take an itemized deduc-exclusions/adjustments for:
tion for the part of this negative figure that repre-• Qualified U.S. savings bond
sents benefits you included in gross income in interest (Form 8815, line 14), Deductions Related to an earlier year.• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line
 30), Your Benefits Deduction $3,000 or less. If this deduction• Foreign earned income or housing
is $3,000 or less, it is subject to the (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or
You may be entitled to deduct certain amounts Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
related to the benefits you receive.• Certain income of bona fide to certain miscellaneous itemized deductions.
 residents of American Claim it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22.
 Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)
 or Puerto Rico Disability payments. You may have received Deduction more than $3,000. If this de-
Form 1040A filers: Enter the total of disability payments from your employer or an duction is more than $3,000, you should figure
any exclusions for qualified U.S. your tax two ways:insurance company that you included as incomesavings bond interest (Form 8815, line on your tax return in an earlier year. If you 1. Figure your tax for 2006 with the itemized14) or for adoption benefits (Form
received a lump-sum payment from SSA or8839, line 30). ............... 2 0 0 deduction included on Schedule A, line 27.
RRB, and you had to repay the employer or5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4 ............ 45,500 2. Figure your tax for 2006 in the following6. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from insurance company for the disability payments, steps.Form 1040, line 36, minus any amounts you can take an itemized deduction for the parton Form 1040, lines 33, 34, and 35 a. Figure the tax without the itemized de-of the payments you included in gross income inForm 1040A filers: Enter the amount duction included on Schedule A, linethe earlier year. If the amount you repay is morefrom Form 1040A, line 20, minus any 27.than $3,000, you may be able to claim a taxamounts on Form 1040A, lines 18 and
b. For each year after 1983 for which part1 9 . ....................... - 0 - credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit in of the negative figure represents a re-7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the the same way explained under Repayments
amount on line 5? payment of benefits, refigure your tax-More Than Gross Benefits, later. able benefits as if your total benefits forNo.
STOP
None of your benefits are taxable. Enter the year were reduced by that part of-0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line
Legal expenses. You can usually deduct le- the negative figure. Then refigure the14b.
tax for that year.gal expenses that you pay or incur to produce orYes. Subtract line 6 from line 5 ..... 45,500
8.  . If you are: collect taxable income or in connection with the c. Subtract the total of the refigured tax
• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000 determination, collection, or refund of any tax. amounts in (b) from the total of your
• Single, head of household, qualifying actual tax amounts.Legal expenses for collecting the taxablewidow(er), or married filing d. Subtract the result in (c) from the resultpart of your benefits are deductible as a miscel-separately and you lived apart from
in (a).laneous itemized deduction on Schedule Ayour spouse for all of 2006, enter
$25,000 ................. 32,000 (Form 1040), line 22.
Compare the tax figured in methods (1) andNote. If you are married filing separately
and you lived with your spouse at any (2). Your tax for 2006 is the smaller of the two
time in 2006, skip lines 8 through 15; Repayments More Than amounts. If method (1) results in less tax, takemultiply line 7 by 85% (.85) and enter the the itemized deduction on Schedule A (FormGross Benefitsresult on line 16. Then go to line 17
1040), line 27. If method (2) results in less tax,9. Is the amount on line 8 less than the
claim a credit for the amount from step 2(c)In some situations, your Form SSA-1099 oramount on line 7?
above on Form 1040, line 70, and enter “I.R.C.Form RRB-1099 will show that the total benefits
No.
STOP
None of your benefits are 1341” in the margin to the left of line 70. If bothyou repaid (box 4) are more than the grosstaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line methods produce the same tax, deduct the re-benefits (box 3) you received. If this occurred,20b, or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you payment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27.your net benefits in box 5 will be a negativeare married filing separately and you
lived apart from your spouse for all of figure (a figure in parentheses) and none of your
2006, be sure you entered “D” to the right benefits will be taxable. Do not use a worksheetof the word “benefits” on Form 1040, line in this case. If you receive more than one form, a20a, or on Form 1040A, line 14a.
negative figure in box 5 of one form is used toYes. Subtract line 8 from line 7 ..... 13,500
offset a positive figure in box 5 of another form10. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly;
$9,000 if single, head of household, for that same year.
qualifying widow(er), or married filing If you have any questions about this negativeseparately and you lived apart from your
figure, contact your local SSA office or your localspouse for all of 2006 ............ 12,000
RRB field office.
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 79

Page 82 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
includes any indebtedness for which you are
liable or which attaches to property you hold.Bartering If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the
canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a12. Bartering is an exchange of property or services. business debt, report the amount on Schedule CYou must include in your income, at the time or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedulereceived, the fair market value of property or F, Profit or Loss From Farming (Form 1040), ifservices you receive in bartering. If you ex- the debt is farm debt and you are a farmer).change services with another person and youOther Income
both have agreed ahead of time as to the value Form 1099-C. If a Federal Government
of the services, that value will be accepted as agency, financial institution, or credit union
cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 orfair market value unless the value can be shown
more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-to be otherwise.What’s New
tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt isGenerally, you report this income on Sched-
shown in box 2.ule C, Profit or Loss From Business, or ScheduleKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005
C-EZ, Net Profit From Business (Form 1040). Interest included in canceled debt. If anyand Gulf Opportunity Zone Act of 2005.
However, if the barter involves an exchange of interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofThese Acts provide tax relief for persons af- something other than services, such as in Ex- canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interestfected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. ample 3 below, you may have to use another also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not youYou may be able to exclude from income can- form or schedule instead. must include the interest portion of the canceledceled nonbusiness debt. See Publication 4492, debt in your income depends on whether theInformation for Taxpayers Affected by Hurri- Example 1. You are a self-employed attor- interest would be deductible if you paid it. Seecanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. ney who performs legal services for a client, a Deductible debt, under Exceptions, later.
small corporation. The corporation gives you If the interest would not be deductible (such
shares of its stock as payment for your services. as interest on a personal loan), include in your
You must include the fair market value of the income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. If
shares in your income on Schedule C or Sched- the interest would be deductible (such as on aIntroduction ule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive business loan), include in your income the net
them.You must include on your return all income you amount of the canceled debt (the amount shown
in box 2 less the interest amount shown in boxreceive in the form of money, property, and
Example 2. You are self-employed and a 3).services unless the tax law states that you do
member of a barter club. The club uses “creditnot include them. Some items, however, are Discounted mortgage loan. If your financialunits” as a means of exchange. It adds creditonly partly excluded from income. This chapter institution offers a discount for the early paymentunits to your account for goods or services youdiscusses many kinds of income and explains of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-provide to members, which you can use towhether they are taxable or nontaxable. count is canceled debt. You must include thepurchase goods or services offered by other• Income that is taxable must be reported canceled amount in your income.members of the barter club. The club subtracts
on your tax return and is subject to tax. credit units from your account when you receive Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-• Income that is nontaxable may have to be goods or services from other members. You tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgageshown on your tax return but is not tax- must include in your income the value of the (recourse debt), and you are relieved of the
able. credit units that are added to your account, even mortgage when you dispose of the property, you
though you may not actually receive goods or may realize gain or loss up to the fair marketThis chapter begins with discussions of the services from other members until a later tax value of the property. To the extent the mort-
year.following income items. gage discharge exceeds the fair market value of
• Bartering. the property, it is income from discharge of in-
Example 3. You own a small apartment• Canceled debts. debtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion
building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of under Excluded debt, later. Report any income• Host or Hostess. an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness• Life insurance proceeds. she created. You must report as rental income debt that does not qualify for exclusion as other• Partnership income. on Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss income on Form 1040, line 21.• S Corporation income. (Form 1040), the fair market value of the art- If you are not personally liable for a mortgage• Recoveries (including state income tax re- work, and the artist must report as income on (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved of thefunds). Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) the mortgage when you dispose of the property
• Rents from personal property. fair rental value of the apartment. (such as through foreclosure or repossession),
• Repayments. that relief is included in the amount you realize.
Form 1099-B from barter exchange. If you• Royalties. You may have a taxable gain if the amount you
exchanged property or services through a barter realize exceeds your adjusted basis in the prop-• Unemployment benefits.
exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker erty. Report any gain on nonbusiness property• Welfare and other public assistance bene-
and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similar as a capital gain.fits.
statement from the barter exchange should be See Foreclosures and Repossessions  in
These discussions are followed by brief discus- sent to you by January 31, 2007. It should show Publication 544 for more information.
sions of other income items arranged in alpha- the value of cash, property, services, credits, or Stockholder debt. If you are a stockholder inbetical order. scrip you received from exchanges during 2006. a corporation and the corporation cancels orThe IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B. forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is aUseful Items constructive distribution that is generally divi-
dend income to you. For more information, seeYou may want to see:
Publication 542, Corporations.
Canceled Debts If you are a stockholder in a corporation andPublication
you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled or tion, you generally do not realize income. This is
forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you because the canceled debt is considered as a❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of must include the canceled amount in your in- contribution to the capital of the corporationAssets come. You have no income from the canceled equal to the amount of debt principal that you
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt canceled.
Page 80 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 83 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Repayment of canceled debt. If you included Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) or not specified, you include in your income the
a canceled amount in your income and later pay a state education loan repayment program eligi- benefit payments that are more than the present
the debt, you may be able to file a claim for ble for funds under the Public Health Service Act value of the payments at the time of death.
refund for the year the amount was included in are not taxable if you agree to provide primary
income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if health services in health professional shortage Proceeds received in installments. If you re-
the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still areas. For more information, see Publication ceive life insurance proceeds in installments,
open. The statute of limitations generally does 970, Tax Benefits for Education. you can exclude part of each installment from
not end until 3 years after the due date of your your income.
Price reduced after purchase. Generally, iforiginal return. To determine the excluded part, divide thethe seller reduces the amount of debt you owe amount held by the insurance company (gener-for property you purchased, you do not have ally the total lump sum payable at the death ofExceptions income from the reduction. The reduction of the the insured person) by the number of install-debt is treated as a purchase price adjustmentThere are several exceptions to the inclusion of ments to be paid. Include anything over thisand reduces your basis in the property.canceled debt in income. These are explained excluded part in your income as interest.
next. Excluded debt. Do not include a canceled Surviving spouse. If your spouse died
debt in your gross income in the following situ- before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-Debt canceled as a result of Hurricane Ka- ations. ceeds paid to you because of the death of yourtrina.  If your main home was in the Hurricane
• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case spouse are received in installments, you canKatrina disaster area on August 25, 2005, you
under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi- exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-may be able to exclude from income a nonbusi-
cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. cluded in the installments. If you remarry, youness debt canceled after August 24, 2005, and
can continue to take the exclusion.• The debt is canceled when you are insol-before January 1, 2007. For more information,
vent. However, you cannot exclude anysee Publication 525. More information. For more information,amount of canceled debt that is more than see Life Insurance Proceeds in Publication 525.the amount by which you are insolvent.Student loans. Certain student loans contain
See Publication 908.a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren-attend the qualified educational institution will be • The debt is qualified farm debt and is can- der a life insurance policy for cash, you mustcanceled if you work for a certain period of time celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 include in income any proceeds that are morein certain professions for any of a broad class of of Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide. than the cost of the life insurance policy. Inemployers. • The debt is qualified real property busi- general, your cost (or investment in the contract)You do not have income if your student ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publication is the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeloan is canceled after you agreed to this provi- 334. insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,sion and then performed the services required. • The cancellation is intended as a gift. rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that wereTo qualify, the loan must have been made by: not included in your income.
1. The Federal Government, a state or local  You should receive a Form 1099-R showing
government, or an instrumentality, agency, the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report
or subdivision thereof, these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of FormHost or Hostess2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation 1040 or lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
that has assumed control of a state,
If you host a party at which sales are made, anycounty, or municipal hospital, and whose Endowment Contractgift you receive for giving the party is a paymentemployees are considered public employ-
for helping a direct seller make sales. You mustees under state law, or Proceedsreport it as income at its fair market value.3. An educational institution:
Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub- An endowment contract is a policy under whicha. Under an agreement with an entity de- ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment you are paid a specified amount of money on ascribed in (1) or (2) that provided the expenses. These expenses are deductible as certain date unless you die before that date, infunds to the institution to make the loan, miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to which case, the money is paid to your desig-or the 2% of AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid inb. As part of a program of the institution but only up to the amount of income you receive a lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifdesigned to encourage students to for giving the party. the proceeds are more than the cost of theserve in occupations or areas with un- For more information about the 50% limit for policy. To determine your cost, subtract anymet needs and under which the serv- meal and entertainment expenses, see 50% amount that you previously received under theices provided are for or under the Limit in Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment, contract and excluded from your income fromdirection of a governmental unit or a Gift, and Car Expenses. the total premiums (or other consideration) paidtax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza- for the contract. Include the part of the lump sumtion. payment that is more than your cost in your
income.Section 501(c)(3) organizations are defined
Life Insurancein Publication 525.
Accelerated DeathA loan to refinance a qualified student loan Proceedsalso will qualify if it was made by an educational Benefits
institution or a tax-exempt 501(a) organization Life insurance proceeds paid to you because ofunder its program designed as described in Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-the death of the insured person are not taxable(3)(b) above. efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalunless the policy was turned over to you for a
settlement before the insured’s death are ex-price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidDeductible debt. You do not have income cluded from income if the insured is terminally orunder an accident or health insurance policy orfrom the cancellation of a debt if your payment of chronically ill.an endowment contract.the debt would be deductible. This exception
applies only if you use the cash method of ac- Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-Proceeds not received in installments. Ifcounting. For more information, see chapter 5 of ment of any part of the death benefit under a lifedeath benefits are paid to you in a lump sum orPublication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business. insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-other than at regular intervals, include in your
vider. A viatical settlement provider is a personEducation loan repayment assistance. income only the benefits that are more than the
who regularly engages in the business of buyingEducation loan repayments made to you by the amount payable to you at the time of the insured
or taking assignment of life insurance contractsNational Health Service Corps Loan Repayment person’s death. If the benefit payable at death is
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 81

Page 84 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on the lives of insured individuals who are termi- Partnership Income, and send Schedule K-1 payer should send Form 1099-G, Certa in Gov-
nally or chronically ill and who meets the require- (Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, the ernment Payments, to you by Jan uary 31, 2007.
ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal partnership will send each partner a copy of the The IRS also will receive a copy o f the Form
Revenue Code. Partner’s Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1099-G. Use the State and Local Income Tax
1065) to help each partner report his or her Refund worksheet in the 2006 Form 1040 in-Exclusion for terminal illness.   Accelerated share of the partnership’s income, deductions, structions for line 10 to figure the amount (if any)death benefits are fully excludable if the insured credits, and tax preference items. to include in your income. See Publication 525is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who for when you must use another worksheet.Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) forhas been certified by a physician as having an After 2003, you could choose to deduct foryour records. Do not attach it to yourillness or physical condition that can reasonably a tax year either:Form 1040.be expected to result in death within 24 months RECORDS
• State and local income taxes, orfrom the date of the certification. For more information on partnerships, see • State and local general sales taxes.
Publication 541, Partnerships.Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insured
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminally For 2006, the maximum refund that you may
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis have to include in income is limited to the excess
of costs incurred for qualified long-term care of the tax you chose to deduct for that year over
services are fully excludable. Accelerated death the tax you did not choose to deduct for thatS Corporation Income
benefits paid on a per diem  or other periodic year. For examples, see Publication 525.
basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit In general, an S corporation does not pay tax on Mortgage interest refund. If you received aapplies to the total of the accelerated death its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc- refund or credit in 2006 of mortgage interest paidbenefits and any periodic payments received tions, and credits of the corporation are passed in an earlier year, the amount should be shownfrom long-term care insurance contracts. For through to the shareholders based on each in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interestinformation on the limit and the definitions of shareholder’s pro rata share. Statement. Do not subtract the refund amountchronically ill individual, qualified long-term care
from the interest you paid in 2006. You maySchedule K-1 (Form 1120S). An S corpora-services, and long-term care insurance con-
have to include it in your income under the rulestion must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S.tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con-
explained in the following discussions.Income Tax Return for an S Corporation, andtracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits in
send Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) to eachPublication 525. Interest on recovery. Interest on any of theshareholder. In addition, the S corporation will amounts you recover must be reported as inter-Exception. The exclusion does not apply to send each shareholder a copy of the Share- est income in the year received. For example,any amount paid to a person (other than the holder’s Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form report any interest you received on state or localinsured) who has an insurable interest in the 1120S) to help each shareholder report his or income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a.life of the insured because the insured: her share of the S corporation’s income, losses,
• Is a director, officer, or employee of the credits, and deductions. Recovery and expense in same year. If theperson, or refund or other recovery and the expense occurKeep Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) for• Has a financial interest in the person’s in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-your records. Do not attach it to yourbusiness. duction or credit and is not reported as income.Form 1040.RECORDS
For more information on S corporations and Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receiveForm 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler- their shareholders, see Instructions for Form a refund or other recovery that is for amountsated death benefits made on a per diem or other 1120S. you paid in 2 or more separate years, you mustperiodic basis, you must file Form 8853, Archer allocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recoveredMSAs and Long-term Care Insurance Con- amount between the years in which you paid it.tracts, with your return. You do not have to file This allocation is necessary to determine theForm 8853 to exclude accelerated death bene- amount of recovery from any earlier years and toRecoveriesfits paid on the basis of actual expenses in- determine the amount, if any, of your allowablecurred. deduction for this item for the current year. ForA recovery is a return of an amount you de- information on how to compute the allocation,ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. ThePublic Safety Officer Killed see Recoveries in Publication 525.most common recoveries are refunds, reim-
bursements, and rebates of deductions itemizedin the Line of Duty
on Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may have Itemized Deduction
If you are a survivor of a public safety officer who recoveries of non-itemized deductions (such as Recoverieswas killed in the line of duty, you may be able to payments on previously deducted bad debts)
exclude from income certain amounts you re- and recoveries of items for which you previously If you recover any amount that you deducted inceive. claimed a tax credit. an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you   For this purpose, the term public safety generally must include the full amount of theTax benefit rule. You must include a recoveryofficer includes law enforcement officers, recovery in your income in the year you receivein your income in the year you receive it up to thefirefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad and it.amount by which the deduction or credit youambulance crew members. For more informa-
took for the recovered amount reduced your taxtion, see Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, Where to report. Enter your state or local in-in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-and Administrators. come tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and thecrease to an amount carried over to the current total of all other recoveries as other income onyear that resulted from the deduction or credit is Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form 1040Aconsidered to have reduced your tax in the ear- or Form 1040EZ.lier year. For more information, see PublicationPartnership Income 525. Standard deduction limit. You generally are
allowed to claim the standard deduction if youFederal income tax refund. Refunds of fed-A partnership generally is not a taxable entity. do not itemize your deductions. Only your item-eral income taxes are not included in your in-The income, gains, losses, deductions, and ized deductions that are more than your stan-come because they are never allowed as acredits of a partnership are passed through to dard deduction are subject to the recovery rulededuction from income.the partners based on each partner’s distributive (unless you are required to itemize your deduc-share of these items. State tax refund. If you received a state or tions). If your total deductions on the earlier
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). Although a part- local income tax refund (or credit or offset) in year return were not more than your income for
nership generally pays no tax, it must file an 2006, you generally must include it in income if that year, include in your income  this year the
information return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The lesser of:
Page 82 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 85 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your recoveries, or Other recoveries. See Recoveries in Publi- the same form or schedule on which you previ-
cation 525 if: ously reported it as income. For example, if you• The amount by which your itemized de-
reported it as self-employment income, deduct it• You have recoveries of items other thanductions exceeded the standard deduc-
as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-itemized deductions, ortion.
ule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form• You received a recovery for an item for
1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deductwhich you claimed a tax credit (other thanExample. For 2005, you filed a joint return. it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). Ifinvestment credit or foreign tax credit) in aYour taxable income was $60,000 and you were you reported it as wages, unemployment com-prior year.not entitled to any tax credits. Your standard pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deductdeduction was $10,000, and you had itemized it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction ondeductions of $11,000. In 2006, you received Schedule A (Form 1040).
the following recoveries for amounts deducted
on your 2005 return: Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amountRents from Personal
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from
Medical expenses .............. $200 your income in the year you repaid it. If you mustPropertyState and local income tax refund .... 4 0 0 deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,Refund of mortgage interest ........ 3 2 5 enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22.If you rent out personal property, such as
Total recoveries ................ $925 equipment or vehicles, how you report your Repayment over $3,000. If the amount youincome and expenses is generally determinedNone of the recoveries were more than the de- repaid was more than $3,000, you can deductby:ductions taken for 2005. The difference between the repayment (as explained under Type of de-• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-the state and local income tax you deducted and duction, earlier). However, you can choose in-ness, andyour local general sales tax was more than stead to take a tax credit for the year of
• Whether or not the rental activity is con-$400. repayment if you included the income under a
ducted for profit. claim of right. This means that at the time youYour total recoveries are less than the
included the income, it appeared that you had anamount by which your itemized deductions ex- Generally, if your primary purpose is income or
unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for thisceeded the standard deduction ($11,000 − profit and you are involved in the rental activity
choice, figure your tax under both methods and10,000 = $1,000), so you must include your total with continuity and regularity, your rental activity
compare the results. Use the method (deductionrecoveries in your income for 2006. Report the is a business. See Publication 535, Business
or credit) that results in less tax.state and local income tax refund of $400 on Expenses, for details on deducting expenses for
Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your both business and not-for-profit activities. Method 1. Figure your tax for 2006 claiming
recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21. a deduction for the repaid amount. If you must
Reporting business income and expenses. deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,
If you are in the business of renting personalStandard deduction for earlier years. To de- enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27.
property, report your income and expenses ontermine if amounts recovered in 2006 must be Method 2. Figure your tax for 2006 claim-Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). Theincluded in your income, you must know the ing a credit for the repaid amount. Follow theseform instructions have information on how tostandard deduction for your filing status for the steps.complete them.year the deduction was claimed. Standard de-
1. Figure your tax for 2006 without deductingduction amounts for 2005, 2004, and 2003, are
Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are the repaid amount.in Publication 525.
not in the business of renting personal property, 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearreport your rental income on Form 1040, line 21.Example. You filed a joint return for 2005 without including in income the amountList the type and amount of the income on thewith taxable income of $45,000. Your itemized you repaid in 2006.dotted line next to line 21.deductions were $10,350. The standard deduc- 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown
tion that you could have claimed was $10,000. In on your return for the earlier year. This isReporting nonbusiness expenses. If you2006, you recovered $2,100 of your 2005 item- the credit.rent personal property for profit, include yourized deductions. None of the recoveries were 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forrental expenses in the total amount you enter onmore than the actual deductions for 2005. In- 2006 figured without the deduction (StepForm 1040, line 36. Also enter the amount andclude $350 of the recoveries in your 2006 in- 1).“PPR” on the dotted line next to line 36.come. This is the smaller of your recoveries If you do not rent personal property for profit, If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the($2,100) or the amount by which your itemized your deductions are limited and you cannot re- amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,deductions were more than the standard deduc- port a loss to offset other income. See  Activity claim the credit figured in (3) above on Formtion ($10,350 − 10,000 = $350). not for profit, under Other Income, later. 1040, line 70, and enter “I.R.C. 1341” in the
column to the right of line 70.Recovery limited to deduction. You do not An example of this computation can be foundinclude in your income any amount of your in Publication 525.recovery that is more than the amount you de-
Repaymentsducted in the earlier year. The amount you Repaid social security benefits. If you re-include in your income is limited to the smaller paid social security benefits, see Repayment ofIf you had to repay an amount that you includedof: benefits in chapter 11.in your income in an earlier year, you may be• The amount deducted on Schedule A
able to deduct the amount repaid from your(Form 1040), or
income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if• The amount recovered. the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you
Royaltiesmay be able to take a credit against your tax for
Example. During 2005 you paid $1,700 for the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you
medical expenses. From this amount you sub- Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-
tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted and mineral properties are taxable as ordinaryment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in
gross income. Your actual medical expense de- income.your trade or business or in a for-profit transac-
duction was $200. In 2006, you received a $500 You generally report royalties in Part I oftion.
reimbursement from your medical insurance for Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you hold
your 2005 expenses. The only amount of the Type of deduction. The type of deduction you an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are in
$500 reimbursement that must be included in are allowed in the year of repayment depends business as a self-employed writer, inventor,
your income for 2006 is $200—the amount ac- on the type of income you included in the earlier artist, etc., report your income and expenses on
tually deducted. year. You generally deduct the repayment on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 83

Page 86 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Copyrights and patents. Royalties from 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form Repayment of benefits. You may have to
copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, 1040EZ. repay some of your supplemental unemploy-
and similar property, or from patents on inven- ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustmentTypes of unemployment compensation.tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If youUnemployment compensation generally in-your work over a specified period of time. Royal- repay supplemental unemployment benefits includes any amount received under an unem-ties generally are based on the number of units the same year you receive them, reduce theployment compensation law of the Unitedsold, such as the number of books, tickets to a total benefits by the amount you repay. If youStates or of a state. It includes the followingperformance, or machines sold. repay the benefits in a later year, you mustbenefits. include the full amount of the benefits received
• Benefits paid by a state or the District of in your income for the year you received them.Oil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from Columbia from the Federal Unemployment Deduct the repayment in the later year as anoil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount Trust Fund. adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (Youyou receive when natural resources are ex- • State unemployment insurance benefits. cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In-tracted from your property. The royalties are • Railroad unemployment compensation clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, andbased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and benefits. enter “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on theare paid to you by a person or company who • Disability payments from a government dotted line next to line 36. If the amount youleases the property from you. program paid as a substitute for unem- repay in a later year is more than $3,000, you
Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco- ployment compensation. (Amounts re- may be able to take a credit against your tax for
nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas ceived as workers’ compensation for the later year instead of deducting the amount
wells, you can recover your investment through injuries or illness are not unemployment repaid. For more information on this, see Repay-
the depletion allowance. For information on this compensation. See chapter 5 for more in- ments, earlier.
subject, see chapter 10 of Publication 535. formation.)
Private unemployment fund. Unemploy-• Trade readjustment allowances under theCoal and iron ore. Under certain circum- ment benefit payments from a private (nonun-Trade Act of 1974.stances, you can treat amounts you receive ion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute arefrom the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay- • Unemployment assistance under the Dis- taxable only if the amounts you receive are morements from the sale of a capital asset, rather aster Relief and Emergency Assistance than your total payments into the fund. Reportthan as royalty income. For information about Act. the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,
see Publication 544. Governmental program. If you contribute Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you as
to a governmental unemployment compensa-Sale of property interest. If you sell your an unemployed member of a union from regular
tion program and your contributions are not de-complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, union dues are included in your income on Form
ductible, amounts you receive under thethe amount you receive is considered payment 1040, line 21. However, if you contribute to a
program are not included as unemploymentfor the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty special union fund and your payments to the
compensation until you recover your contribu-income. Under certain circumstances, the sale fund are not deductible, the unemployment ben-
tions.is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on efits you receive from the fund are includible in
Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information your income only to the extent they are moreRepayment of unemployment compensa-on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 than your contributions.tion. If you repaid in 2006 unemploymentof Publication 544. compensation you received in 2006, subtract Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, the amount you repaid from the total amount you ceive from your employer during periods of un-or a net profit interest in a mineral property for received and enter the difference on line 19 of employment, under a union agreement thatthe life of the property, you have made a lease or Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of guarantees you full pay during the year, area sublease, and any cash you receive for the Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofassignment of other interests in the property is entry enter “Repaid” and the amount you repaid. Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formordinary income subject to a depletion allow- If you repaid unemployment compensation in 1040EZ.ance. 2006 that you included in income in an earlier
year, you can deduct the amount repaid onPart of future production sold. If you own State employees. Payments similar to aSchedule A (Form 1040), line 22, if you itemizemineral property but sell part of the future pro- state’s unemployment compensation may bedeductions. If the amount is more than $3,000,duction, you generally treat the money you re- made by the state to its employees who are notsee  Repayments, earlier.ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a covered by the state’s unemployment compen-loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-Tax withholding. You can choose to haveincome or take depletion based on it. able, do not report them as unemploymentfederal income tax withheld from your unem-When production begins, you include all the compensation. Report these payments on Formployment compensation. To make this choice,proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- 1040, line 21.complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholdingtion expenses, and deduct depletion from that Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax willamount to arrive at your taxable income from the be withheld at 10% of your payment.property.
If you do not choose to have tax with-
Welfare and Otherheld from your unemployment com-
pensation, you may be liable forCAUTION
!
Public Assistanceestimated tax. For more information on esti-Unemployment mated tax, see chapter 4.
BenefitsBenefits Supplemental unemployment benefits.
Benefits received from an employer-financed Do not include in your income governmentalThe tax treatment of unemployment benefits you fund (to which the employees did not contribute) benefit payments from a public welfare fundreceive depends on the type of program paying are not unemployment compensation. They are based upon need, such as payments due tothe benefits. taxable as wages and are subject to withholding blindness. Payments from a state fund for the
for income tax. They may be subject to social victims of crime should not be included in the
Unemployment compensation. You must in- security and Medicare taxes. For more informa- victims’ incomes if they are in the nature of
clude in your income all unemployment compen- tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefits welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-
sation you receive. You should receive a Form in section 5 of Publication 15-A, Employer’s penses that are reimbursed by such a f und. You
1099-G, Certain Government Payments, show- Supplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay- must include in your income any welfare pay-
ing the amount paid to you. Generally, you enter ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or ments that are compensation for se rvices or that
unemployment compensation on line 19 of Form on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. are obtained fraudulently.
Page 84 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 87 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alternative trade adjustment assistance other event, which is determined to be cat-
(ATAA) payments. Payments you receive astrophic by the Secretary of the Treasury Other Incomefrom a state agency under the Demonstration or his or her delegate.
Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis- The following brief discussions are arranged inFor amounts paid under item (4), a disaster istance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in- alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-qualified if it is determined by an applicablecluded in your income. The state must send you cussed in greater detail in another publicationfederal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount you include a reference to that publication.tance from the federal, state, or local govern-should include in income. The amount should be
ment, agency, or instrumentality.reported on Form 1040, line 21. Activity not for profit. You must include on
your return income from an activity from which
Disaster mitigation payments. You also can you do not expect to make a profit. An examplePersons with disabilities. If you have a disa- exclude from income any amount you receive of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm youbility, you must include in income compensation that is a qualified disaster mitigation payment. operate mostly for recreation and pleasure.you receive for services you perform unless the Like qualified disaster relief payments, qualified Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-compensation is otherwise excluded. However, disaster mitigation payments are also most com- tions for expenses related to the activity areyou do not include in income the value of goods, monly paid to you in the period immediately limited. They cannot total more than the incomeservices, and cash that you receive, not in return following damage to property as a result of a you report and can be taken only if you itemizefor your services, but for your training and reha- natural disaster. However, disaster mitigation deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Seebilitation because you have a disability. Excluda- payments are grants you use to mitigate (reduce Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica-ble amounts include payments for transportation the severity of) potential damage from future tion 535 for information on whether an activity isand attendant care, such as interpreter services natural disasters. They are paid to you through considered carried on for a profit.for the deaf, reader services for the blind, and state and local governments based on the provi-services to help mentally retarded persons do sions of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relieftheir work. Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you re-and Emergency Assistance Act or the National ceived a payment from Alaska’s mineral incomeFlood Insurance Act. fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), reportDisaster relief grants. Do not include You cannot increase the basis or adjusted it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 ofpost-disaster grants received under the Disaster basis of your property for improvements made Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. TheRelief and Emergency Assistance Act in your with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments. state of Alaska sends each recipient a documentincome if the grant payments are made to help If in a previous year you filed a tax return that shows the amount of the payment with theyou meet necessary expenses or serious needs reporting disaster mitigation payments as tax- check. The amount also is reported to IRS.for medical, dental, housing, personal property, able income, you should file Form 1040X to
transportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de- claim a refund. You must file an amended return Alimony. Include in your income on Formduct casualty losses or medical expenses that for tax years that are not closed by the statute of 1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-are specifically reimbursed by these disaster limitations. The statute of limitations generally ceive. Amounts you receive for child support arerelief grants. Unemployment assistance pay- does not end until 3 years after the due date of not income to you. Alimony and child supportments under the Act are taxable unemployment your original return. payments are discussed in chapter 18.compensation. See Unemployment compensa-
tion under Unemployment Benefits, earlier. Mortgage assistance payments. Payments Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in yourmade under section 235 of the National Housing income.Act for mortgage assistance are not included inDisaster relief payments. You can exclude
the homeowner’s income. Interest paid for thefrom income any amount you receive that is a Campaign contributions. These contribu-homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified tions are not income to a candidate unless theygram cannot be deducted.disaster relief payment is an amount paid to are diverted to his or her personal use. To beyou: exempt from tax, the contributions must beMedicare. Medicare benefits received under1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundtitle XVIII of the Social Security Act are notessary personal, family, living, or funeral for use in future campaigns. However, interestincludible in the gross income of the individualsexpenses that result from a qualified disas- earned on bank deposits, dividends received onfor whom they are paid. This includes basic (partter, contributed securities, and net gains realized onA (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged)) sales of contributed securities are taxable and2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- and supplementary (part B (Supplementary must be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In-essary expenses incurred for the repair or Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)). come Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza-rehabilitation of your home or repair or re-
tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to anplacement of its contents to the extent it is
Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance office account must be included in the office-due to a qualified disaster,
benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under holder’s income on Form 1040, line 21, in the3. By a person engaged in the furnishing or section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act year transferred.sale of transportation as a common carrier are not includible in the gross income of thebecause of the death or personal physical individuals to whom they are paid. This applies Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive frominjuries incurred as a result of a qualified to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isdisaster, or benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows, not income, but you must reduce your basis by4. By a federal, state, or local government, or widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, as the amount of the rebate.agency, or instrumentality in connection well as the lump-sum death payment.with a qualified disaster in order to pro-
Example. You buy a new car for $9,000mote the general welfare.
Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food cash and receive a $400 rebate check from the
You can exclude this amount only to the extent benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro- manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.
any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur- gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre- Your basis in the car is $8,600. This is your basis
ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not apply pare and serve free meals for the program, on which you figure gain or loss if you sell the
if you were a participant or conspirator in a include in your income as wages the cash pay car, and depreciation if you use it for business.
terrorist action or his or her representative. you receive, even if you are also eligible for food
A qualified disaster is: benefits. Casualty insurance and other reimburse-
• A disaster which results from a terrorist or ments. You generally should not report these
military action, Payments to reduce cost of winter energy. reimbursements on your return, unless you are
• A Presidentially declared disaster, or Payments made by a state to qualified people to figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft.
• A disaster which results from an accident reduce their cost of winter energy use are not See Publication 547, Casualties, Disaste rs, and
involving a common carrier, or from any taxable. Thefts, for more information.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 85

Page 88 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Child support payments. You should not re- Down payment assistance. If you purchase Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-
port these payments on your return. See Publi- a home and receive assistance from a nonprofit ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.
cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals, corporation to make the down payment, that Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantorfor more information. assistance is not included in your income. If the trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-corporation qualifies as a tax-exempt charitable ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overCourt awards and damages. To determine organization, the assistance is treated as a gift the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferredif settlement amounts you receive by compro- and is included in your basis of the house. If the property to the trust.) This rule applies if themise or judgment must be included in your corporation does not qualify, the assistance is property (or income from the property) put intoincome, you must consider the item that the treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase the trust will or may revert (be returned) to thesettlement replaces. Include the following as price and is not included in your basis. grantor or the grantor’s spouse.ordinary income.
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if theEmployment agency fees. If you get a job1. Interest on any award. grantor has a reversionary interest valued (atthrough an employment agency, and the fee is2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits the date of transfer) at more than 5% of thepaid by your employer, the fee is not includible inin most cases. value of the transferred property.your income if you are not liable for it. However,3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does if you pay it and your employer reimburses younot matter if they relate to a physical injury Expenses paid by another. If your personalfor it, it is includible in your income.or physical sickness. expenses are paid for by another person, such
as a corporation, the payment may be taxable to4. Amounts received in settlement of pension Energy conservation subsidies. You can
you depending upon your relationship with thatrights (if you did not contribute to the plan). exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-
person and the nature of the payment. But if thevided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-5. Damages for:
payment makes up for a loss caused by thatties for the purchase or installation of an energya. Patent or copyright infringement, person, and only restores you to the position youconservation measure for a dwelling unit.b. Breach of contract, or were in before the loss, the payment is notEnergy conservation measure. This in-c. Interference with business operations. includible in your income.cludes installations or modifications that are pri-
6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis- marily designed to reduce consumption of Fees for services. Include all fees for yourtress received to satisfy a claim under Title electricity or natural gas, or improve the man- services in your income. Examples of theseVII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. agement of energy demand. fees are amounts you receive for services you
7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin- perform as:Dwelling unit. This includes a house, apart-
gent fees) where the underlying recovery • A corporate director,ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-
is included in gross income. lar property. If a building or structure contains • An executor, administrator, or personal
both dwelling and other units, any subsidy must representative of an estate,Do not include in your income compensatory
be properly allocated. • A notary public, ordamages for personal physical injury or physical
sickness (whether received in a lump sum or • An election precinct official.Estate and trust income.     An estate or trust,installments).
unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal Nonemployee compensation. If you areEmotional distress. Emotional distress it- income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estate not an employee and the fees for your servicesself is not a physical injury or physical sickness, or trust, you may be taxed on your share of its from the same payer total $600 or more for thebut damages you receive for emotional distress income distributed or required to be distributed year, you may receive a Form 1099-MISC. Youdue to a physical injury or sickness are treated to you. However, there is never a double tax. may need to report your fees asas received for the physical injury or sickness. Estates and trusts file their returns on Form self-employment income. See Self-EmployedDo not include them in your income. 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and Persons, in chapter 1, for a discussion of whenIf the emotional distress is due to a personal Trusts, and your share of the income is reported you are considered self-employed.injury that is not due to a physical injury or to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041).
Corporate director. Corporate directorsickness (for example, employment discrimina- Current income required to be distributed. fees are self-employment income. Report thesetion or injury to reputation), you must include the If you are the beneficiary of an estate or trust payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZdamages in your income, except for any dam- that must distribute all of its current income, you (Form 1040).ages you receive for medical care due to that must report your share of the distributable netemotional distress. Emotional distress includes Personal representatives. All personalincome, whether or not you actually received it.physical symptoms that result from emotional representatives must include in their gross in-distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and Current income not required to be distrib- come fees paid to them from an estate. If youstomach disorders. uted.  If you are the beneficiary of an estate are not in the trade or business of being anor trust and the fiduciary has the choice of executor (for instance, you are the executor of aDeduction for costs involved in unlawful whether to distribute all or part of the current friend’s or relative’s estate), report these fees ondiscrimination suits. You may be able to de- income, you must report: Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade orduct attorney fees and court costs paid to re-
• All income that is required to be distributed business of being an executor, report these feescover a judgment or settlement for a claim of
to you, whether or not it is actually distrib- as self-employment income on Schedule C orunlawful discrimination under various provisions
uted, plus Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is notof federal, state, and local law listed in Internal
• All other amounts actually paid or credited includible in income if it is waived.Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim against
to you,the United States government, or a claim under Notary public.  Report payments for thesesection 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act. up to the amount of your share of distributable services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZFor more information, see Publication 525. net income. (Form 1040). These payments are not subject to
self-employment tax. (See the separate instruc-How to report. Treat each item of incomeCredit card insurance. Generally, if you re- tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.)the same way that the estate or trust would treatceive benefits under a credit card disability or
it. For example, if a trust’s dividend income isunemployment insurance plan, the benefits are Election precinct official. You should re-
distributed to you, you report the distribution astaxable to you. These plans make the minimum ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-
dividend income on your return. The same rulemonthly payment on your credit card account if ices performed as an election official or election
applies to distributions of tax-exempt interestyou cannot make the payment due to injury, worker. Report these payments on line 7 of
and capital gains.illness, disability, or unemployment. Report on Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form
Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits you The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell 1040EZ.
received during the year that is more than the you the type of items making up your share of
Foster-care providers. Payments you re-amount of the premiums you paid during the the estate or trust income and any credits you
ceive from a state, political subdivision, or ayear. are allowed on your individual income tax return.
Page 86 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 89 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
qualified foster care placement agency for pro- income the fair market value of bonds, cars, Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 10 40) if
viding care to qualified foster individuals in your houses, and other noncash prizes. from your self-employment activity.
home generally are not included in your income. If you win a state lottery prize payable Indian fishing rights. If you are a member ofHowever, you must include in your income pay- in installments, see Publication 525 for a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightsments received for the care of more than 5 more information.
TIP
secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofindividuals age 19 or older and certain diffi-
Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeculty-of-care payments. Form W-2G. You may have received a in your income amounts you receive from activi-A qualified foster individual is a person who: Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show- ties related to those fishing rights. The income is1. Is living in a foster family home, and ing the amount of your gambling winnings and not subject to income tax, self-employment tax,
2. Was placed there by: any tax taken out of them. Include the amount or employment taxes.
from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include thea. An agency of a state or one of its politi- amount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 64, Interest on frozen deposits. In general, youcal subdivisions, or as federal income tax withheld. exclude from your income the amount of interestb. A qualified foster care placement earned on a frozen deposit. See  Interest incomeagency. Gifts and inheritances. Generally, property on frozen deposits in chapter 7.
you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is
Interest on qualified savings bonds. Younot included in your income. However, if prop-Difficulty-of-care payments. These are
may be able to exclude from income the interesterty you receive this way later produces incomeadditional payments that are designated by the
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem ifsuch as interest, dividends, or rents, that incomepayer as compensation for providing the addi-
you pay qualified higher educational expensesis taxable to you. If property is given to a trusttional care that is required for physically, men-
in the same year. For more information on thisand the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster
exclusion, see Education Savings Bond Pro-tributed to you, that income is also taxable toindividuals. A state must determine that the ad-
gram under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 7.you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is theditional compensation is needed, and the care
income from the property, that income is taxablefor which the payments are made must be pro- Job interview expenses. If a prospective em-to you.vided in your home. ployer asks you to appear for an interview andYou must include in your income diffi- Inherited pension or IRA. If you inherited a either pays you an allowance or reimburses youculty-of-care payments received for more than: pension or an individual retirement arrangement for your transportation and other travel ex-• 10 qualified foster individuals under age (IRA), you may have to include part of the inher- penses, the amount you receive is generally not19, or ited amount in your income. See chapter 10 if taxable. You include in income only the amount• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or you inherited a pension. See chapter 17 if you you receive that is more than your actual ex-older. inherited an IRA. penses.
Maintaining space in home. If you are paid Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are not Jury duty.   Jury duty pay you receive must be
to maintain space in your home for emergency deductible from other income. A hobby is an included in your income on Form 1040, line 21,
foster care, you must include the payment in activity from which you do not expect to make a or Form 1040A, line 13. If you must give the pay
your income. profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier. to your employer because your employer contin-
ues to pay your salary while you serve on theReporting taxable payments.  If you re- If you collect stamps, coins, or other jury, you can deduct the amount turned over toceive payments that you must include in your items as a hobby for recreation and your employer as an adjustment to your income.income, you are in business as a foster-care pleasure, and you sell any of the items,CAUTION
!
Enter the amount you repay your employer onprovider and you are self-employed. Report the your gain is taxable as a capital gain. (See Form 1040, line 34, or Form 1040A, line 19.payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ chapter 16.) However, if you sell items from your
(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Business collection at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss. Kickbacks.   You must include kickbacks, sideUse of Your Home (Including Use by Daycare commissions, push money, or similar paymentsProviders), to help you determine the amount Holocaust victims restitution. Restitution you receive in your income on Form 1040, lineyou can deduct for the use of your home. payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formthe heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest 1040), if from your self-employment activity.Found property. If you find and keep property earned on the payments, including interest
that does not belong to you that has been lost or earned on amounts held in certain escrow ac- Example. You sell cars and help arrangeabandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to you counts or funds, are not taxable. You also do not car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers payat its fair market value in the first year it is your include them in any computations in which you back part of their commissions to you for refer-undisputed possession. would ordinarily add excludable income to your ring customers to them. You must include the
adjusted gross income, such as the computation kickbacks in your income.Free tour. If you received a free tour from a to determine the taxable part of social securitytravel agency for organizing a group of tourists, benefits. If the payments are made in property, Medical savings accounts (MSAs). Youyou must include its value in your income. Re- your basis in the property is its fair market value generally do not include in income amounts youport the fair market value of the tour on Form when you receive it. withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade or Excludable restitution payments are pay- Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay forbusiness of organizing tours. You cannot deduct ments or distributions made by any country or qualified medical expenses. Generally, qualifiedyour expenses in serving as the voluntary leader any other entity because of persecution of an medical expenses are those you can deduct onof the group at the group’s request. If you organ- individual on the basis of race, religion, physical Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions.ize tours as a trade or business, report the tour’s or mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazi For more information about qualified medicalvalue on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form Germany, any other Axis regime, or any other expenses, see chapter 21. For more information1040). Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whether about Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage
the payments are made under a law or as a MSAs, see Publication 969, Health Savings Ac-Gambling winnings. You must include your result of a legal action. They include compensa- counts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.gambling winnings in income on Form 1040, line tion or reparation for property losses resulting21. If you itemize your deductions on Schedule Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in afrom Nazi persecution, including proceedsA (Form 1040), you can deduct gambling losses lucky number drawing, television or radio quizunder insurance policies issued before and dur-you had during the year, but only up to the program, beauty contest, or other event, youing World War II by European insurance compa-amount of your winnings. See chapter 28 for must include it in your income. For example, ifnies.information on recordkeeping. you win a $50 prize in a photography contest,
Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lotter- Illegal income. Illegal income, such as money you must report this income on Form 1040, line
ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi- from dealing illegal drugs, must be included in 21. If you refuse to accept a pri ze, do not include
tion to cash winnings, you must include in your your income on Form 1040, line 21, or on its value in your income.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 87

Page 90 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Prizes and awards in goods or services must • Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are employees and their families by an educational
be included in your income at their fair market more than the social security equivalent institution, see Publication 970.
value. benefit. VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-
• Tier 2 benefits.Employee awards or bonuses. Cash partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in
• Vested dual benefits.awards or bonuses given to you by your em- your income. These allowances are not consid-
ployer for good work or suggestions generally ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
must be included in your income as wages. Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestHowever, certain noncash employee achieve- information, include it in your income. are not scholarships or fellowships if you do notment awards can be excluded from income. See have to use the prizes for educational purposes.Sale of home. You may be able to excludeBonuses and awards in chapter 5. You must include these amounts in your incomefrom income all or part of any gain from the sale
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you useor exchange of a personal residence. See chap-
were awarded a prize in recognition of accom- the amounts for educational purposes.ter 15.
plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar- Stolen property. If you steal property, youSale of personal items. If you sold an itemtistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you must report its fair market value in your incomeyou owned for personal use, such as a car,generally must include the value of the prize in in the year you steal it unless in the same year,refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, oryour income. However, you do not include this you return it to its rightful owner.silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.prize in your income if you meet all of the
Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can- Transporting school children. Do not in-following requirements.
not deduct a loss. clude in your income a school board mileage
• You were selected without any action on However, if you sold an item you held for allowance for taking children to and from schoolyour part to enter the contest or proceed- investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins, if you are not in the business of taking children toing. or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain school. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-• You are not required to perform substan- and any loss is deductible as a capital loss. ing this transportation.tial future services as a condition to receiv-
ing the prize or award. Union benefits and dues. Amounts deductedExample. You sold a painting on an online• The prize or award is transferred by the from your pay for union dues, assessments,auction website for $100. You bought the paint-payer directly to a governmental unit or contributions, or other payments to a union can-ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Reporttax-exempt charitable organization as des- not be excluded from your income.your gain as a capital gain on Schedule D (Formignated by you. You may be able to deduct some of these1040).
payments as a miscellaneous deduction subjectSee Publication 525 for more information about Scholarships and fellowships. A candidate to the 2% of AGI limit if they are related to yourthe conditions that apply to the transfer. for a degree can exclude amounts received as job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule A
a qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified (Form 1040). For more information, see  UnionQualified tuition programs (QTPs). A quali- scholarship or fellowship is any amount you Dues and Expenses in chapter 28.fied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro- receive that is for:gram) is a program set up to allow you to either Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits paid• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend anprepay or contribute to an account established to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,educational institution, orfor paying a student’s qualified higher education including both cash and the fair market value of• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-expenses at an eligible educational institution. A other property, are usually included in your in-quired for courses at the educational insti-program can be established and maintained by come as compensation. You can exclude thesetution.a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, benefits from your income only when the facts
or an eligible educational institution. Amounts used for room and board do not qualify clearly show that the union intended them as
The part of a distribution representing the for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for more gifts to you.
amount paid or contributed to a QTP is not information on qualified scholarships and fellow- Utility rebates. If you are a customer of anincluded in income. This is a return of the invest- ship grants. electric utility company and you participate inment in the program. Payment for services. Generally, you must the utility’s energy conservation program, youThe beneficiary generally does not include in include in income the part of any scholarship or may receive on your monthly electric bill either:income any earnings distributed from a QTP if fellowship that represents payment for past, • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-the total distribution is less than or equal to present, or future teaching, research, or other tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), oradjusted qualified higher education expenses. services. This applies even if all candidates for a • A nonrefundable credit against theSee Publication 970 for more information. degree must perform the services to receive the purchase price of the electricity.Railroad retirement annuities. The follow- degree.
The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-ing types of payments are treated as pension For information about the rules that apply to
able credit is not included in your income.or annuity income and are taxable under the a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to
rules explained in chapter 11.
Page 88 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 91 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Three.
The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses, includingGains and how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or trading stocks, bonds,
or other investment property may be taxed or it may be tax free, at least in part. ALosses loss may or may not be deductible. These chapters also discuss gains from
selling property you personally use — including the special rules for selling your
home. Nonbusiness casualty and theft losses are discussed in chapter 25 in
Part Five.
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses lump sum by a fraction. The numerator is the
FMV of that asset and the denominator is the❏ 551 Basis of Assets FMV of the whole property at the time of
13. ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions purchase.
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property If you are not certain of the FMVs of the
land and buildings, you can allocate
Basis of the basis according to their assessed
TIP
values for real estate tax purposes.
Property Fair market value (FMV). FMV is the priceCost Basis
at which the property would change hands be-
tween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neitherThe basis of property you buy is usually its
having to buy or sell, and both having reasona-cost. The cost is the amount you pay in cash,Introduction ble knowledge of all the necessary facts. Salesdebt obligations, other property, or services.This chapter discusses how to figure your ba- of similar property on or about the same dateYour cost also includes amounts you pay forsis in property. It is divided into the following may be helpful in figuring the FMV of the prop-the following items:sections. erty.• Sales tax,• Cost basis. • Freight, Assumption of mortgage. If you buy prop-• Adjusted basis. • Installation and testing, erty and assume (or buy the property subject to)• Basis other than cost. • Excise taxes, an existing mortgage on the property, your basis
includes the amount you pay for the property• Legal and accounting fees (when theyYour basis is the amount of your investment in
plus the amount to be paid on the mortgage.must be capitalized),property for tax purposes. Use the basis to figure
• Revenue stamps,gain or loss on the sale, exchange, or other Settlement costs. Your basis includes thedisposition of property. Also use it to figure de- • Recording fees, and settlement fees and closing costs you paid forductions for depreciation, amortization, deple- • Real estate taxes (if you assume liability buying the property. (A fee for buying property istion, and casualty losses. for the seller). a cost that must be paid even if you buy theIf you use property for both business or in- property for cash.) Do not include fees and costsIn addition, the basis of real estate and businessvestment purposes and for personal purposes, for getting a loan on the property in your basis.assets may include other items.you must allocate the basis based on the use.
The following are some of the settlementOnly the basis allocated to the business or in-
fees or closing costs you can include in theLoans with low or no interest.  If you buyvestment use of the property can be depreci-
basis of your property.property on a time-payment plan that chargesated.
• Abstract fees (abstract of title fees).little or no interest, the basis of your property isYour original basis in property is adjusted
your stated purchase price minus any amount(increased or decreased) by certain events. For • Charges for installing utility services.
considered to be unstated interest. You gener-example, if you make improvements to the prop- • Legal fees (including fees for the title
ally have unstated interest if your interest rate iserty, increase your basis. If you take deductions search and preparation of the sales con-
less than the applicable federal rate.for depreciation or casualty losses, or claim cer- tract and deed).
tain credits, reduce your basis. For more information, see Unstated Interest • Recording fees.
and Original Issue Discount (OID) in PublicationKeep accurate records of all items that • Survey fees.537.affect the basis of your property. For • Transfer taxes.
more information on keeping records,RECORDS
• Owner’s title insurance.see chapter 1. Real Property • Any amounts the seller owes that you
agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-Real property, also called real estate, is land andUseful Items est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesgenerally anything built on, growing on, or at-You may want to see: for improvements or repairs, and salestached to land. commissions.If you buy real property, certain fees andPublication other expenses you pay are part of your cost Settlement costs do not include amounts❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe basis in the property. placed in escrow for the future payment of itemsBenefits such as taxes and insurance.Lump sum purchase. If you buy buildings❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income The following are some of the settlementand the land on which they stand for a lump fees and closing costs you cannot include insum, allocate the cost basis among the land and❏ 535 Business Expenses the basis of property.the buildings. Allocate the cost basis according❏ 537 Installment Sales • Casualty insurance premiums.to the respective fair market values (FMVs) of
• Rent for occupancy of the property before❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of the land and buildings at the time of purchase.
closing.Assets Figure the basis of each asset by multiplying the
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 89

Page 92 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Charges for utilities or other services re- Table 13-1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
lated to occupancy of the property before
closing. Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis• Charges connected with getting a loan,
• Capital improvements: • Exclusion from income ofsuch as points (discount points, loan origi-
nation fees), mortgage insurance premi- Putting an addition on your home subsidies for energy conservation
ums, loan assumption fees, cost of a Replacing an entire roof measures
credit report, and fees for an appraisal re- Paving your driveway
quired by a lender. Installing central air conditioning • Casualty or theft loss deductions
• Fees for refinancing a mortgage. Rewiring your home and insurance reimbursements
• Assessments for local improvements: • Qualified electric vehicle creditReal estate taxes. If you pay real estate taxes
Water connections (Form 8834)the seller owed on real property you bought, and
Extending utility service lines to the • Postponed gain from the sale of a homethe seller did not reimburse you, treat those
propertytaxes as part of your basis. You cannot deduct
Sidewalks • Alternative motor vehicle creditthem as an expense.
(Form 8910)If you reimburse the seller for taxes the seller
Roadspaid for you, you can usually deduct that amount
• Alternative fuel vehicle refuelingas an expense in the year of purchase. Do not
property credit (Form 8911)include that amount in the basis of your property.
If you did not reimburse the seller, you must
reduce your basis by the amount of those taxes. •
 Residential energy credits (Form 5695)
Points. If you pay points to get a loan (includ- • Casualty losses: • Depreciation and section 179 deduction
ing a mortgage, second mortgage, line of credit, Restoring damaged property
or a home equity loan), do not add the points to • Nontaxable corporate distributions
the basis of the related property. Generally, you • Legal fees:
deduct the points over the term of the loan. For Cost of defending and perfecting a title • Certain canceled debt excluded from
more information on how to deduct points, see Fees for getting a reduction of an incomechapter 23. assessment
Points on home mortgage. Special rules
may apply to points you and the seller pay when • Zoning costs • Easements
you get a mortgage to buy your main home. If
certain requirements are met, you can deduct • Adoption tax benefits
the points in full for the year in which they are
paid. Reduce the basis of your home by any
seller-paid points. you can deduct as taxes assessments for main- and the depreciation you deducted, or could
tenance or repairs, or for meeting interest have deducted (including any special deprecia-
charges related to the improvements. tion allowance), on your tax returns under the
method of depreciation you selected.
Example. Your city changes the street in For more information about depreciation andAdjusted Basis
front of your store into an enclosed pedestrian the section 179 deduction, see Publication 946
mall and assesses you and other affected prop- and the Instructions for Form 4562.Before figuring gain or loss on a sale, exchange,
erty owners for the cost of the conversion. Addor other disposition of property or figuring allow- the assessment to your property’s basis. In this Example. You owned a duplex used asable depreciation, depletion, or amortization, example, the assessment is a depreciable as- rental property that cost you $40,000, of whichyou must usually make certain adjustments (in- set. $35,000 was allocated to the building andcreases and decreases) to the cost of the prop-
$5,000 to the land. You added an improvementerty. The result is the adjusted basis. to the duplex that cost $10,000. In February lastDecreases to Basis year, the duplex was damaged by fire. Up to that
Increases to Basis time, you had been allowed depreciation ofDecrease the basis of any property by all items
$23,000. You sold some salvaged material forthat represent a return of capital for the periodIncrease the basis of any property by all items $1,300 and collected $19,700 from your insur-during which you held the property. Examples ofproperly added to a capital account. Examples ance company. You deducted a casualty loss ofitems that decrease basis are shown in Tableof items that increase basis are shown in Table $1,000 on your income tax return for last year.13-1. These include the items discussed below.13-1. These include the items discussed below. You spent $19,000 of the insurance proceeds
Casualty and theft losses. If you have a for restoration of the duplex, which was com-
Improvements. Add to your basis in property casualty or theft loss, decrease the basis in your pleted this year. You must use the duplex’s
the cost of improvements having a useful life of property by any insurance proceeds or other adjusted basis after the restoration to determine
more than 1 year, that increase the value of the reimbursement and by any deductible loss not depreciation for the rest of the property’s recov-
property, lengthen its life, or adapt it to a differ- covered by insurance. ery period. Figure the adjusted basis of the du-
ent use. For example, improvements include You must increase your basis in the property plex as follows:
putting a recreation room in your unfinished by the amount you spend on repairs that sub-
basement, adding another bathroom or bed- stantially prolong the life of the property, in- Original cost of duplex ......... $35,000
Addition to duplex ............ 10,000crease its value, or adapt it to a different use. Toroom, putting up a fence, putting in new plumb-
Total cost of duplex ........... $45,000make this determination, compare the repaireding or wiring, installing a new roof, or paving your
Minus: Depreciation .......... 23,000property to the property before the casualty.driveway.
Adjusted basis before casualty .... $22,000For more information on casualty and theftAssessments for local improvements. Minus: Insurancelosses, see chapter 25.Add to the basis of property assessments for proceeds ...... $19,700
improvements such as streets and sidewalks if Depreciation and section 179 deduction. Deducted casualty
they increase the value of the property as- Decrease the basis of your qualifying business loss .......... 1,000
sessed. Do not deduct them as taxes. However, Salvage proceeds  1,300  22,000property by any section 179 deduction you take
Page 90 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 93 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Adjusted basis after casualty ..... $-0- Cost of replacement property ...... $29,000compensation for services, you buy goods or
Add: Cost of restoring duplex ..... 19,000 Minus: Gain not recognized ....... 3,000other property at less than FMV, include the
Adjusted basis after restoration $19,000 Basis of replacement property ... $26,000difference between the purchase price and the
property’s FMV in your income. Your basis in the
Allocating the basis. If you buy more thanproperty is its FMV (your purchase price plus theNote. Your basis in the land is its original one piece of replacement property, allocate youramount you include in income).cost of $5,000. basis among the properties based on their re- If the difference between your purchase
Easements. The amount you receive for spective costs.price and the FMV is a qualified employee dis-
granting an easement is generally considered to count, do not include the difference in income. Basis for depreciation. Special rules apply inbe proceeds from the sale of an interest in real However, your basis in the property is still its determining and depreciating the basis ofproperty. It reduces the basis of the affected part FMV. See Employee Discounts in Publication MACRS property acquired in an involuntary con-of the property. If the amount received is more 15-B. version. For information, see What Is the Basisthan the basis of the part of the property affected of Your Depreciable Property?  in chapter 1 ofby the easement, reduce your basis in that part Publication 946.Taxable Exchangesto zero and treat the excess as a recognized
gain. A taxable exchange is one in which the gain isIf the gain is on a capital asset, see chapter Nontaxable Exchangestaxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable gain16 for information about how to report it. If the or deductible loss also is known as a recognized A nontaxable exchange is an exchange in whichgain is on property used in a trade or business, gain or loss. If you receive property in exchange you are not taxed on any gain and you cannotsee Publication 544 for information about how to for other property in a taxable exchange, the deduct any loss. If you receive property in areport it. basis of the property you receive is usually its nontaxable exchange, its basis is generally theFMV at the time of the exchange.Exclusion of subsidies for energy conserva- same as the basis of the property you trans-tion measures. You can exclude from gross ferred. See Nontaxable Trades in chapter 14.income any subsidy you received from a public Involuntary Conversionsutility company for the purchase or installation of
an energy conservation measure for a dwelling If you receive replacement property as a result Like-Kind Exchangesunit. Reduce the basis of the property for which of an involuntary conversion, such as a casualty,
you received the subsidy by the excluded The exchange of property for the same kind oftheft, or condemnation, figure the basis of the
amount. For more information about this sub- property is the most common type of nontaxablereplacement property using the basis of the con-
sidy, see chapter 12. exchange. To qualify as a like-kind exchange,verted property.
the property traded and the property receivedPostponed gain from sale of home. If you Similar or related property. If you receive must be both of the following.postponed gain from the sale of your main home replacement property similar or related in serv-under rules in effect before May 7, 1997, you • Qualifying property.ice or use to the converted property, the replace-must reduce the basis of the home you acquired ment property’s basis is the same as the • Like-kind property.as a replacement by the amount of the post- converted property’s basis on the date of theponed gain. For more information on the rules conversion, with the following adjustments. The basis of the property you receive is gener-for the sale of a home, see chapter 15. ally the same as the adjusted basis of the prop-1. Decrease the basis by the following. erty you gave up. If you trade property in a
like-kind exchange and also pay money, thea. Any loss you recognize on the involun-
basis of the property received is the adjustedtary conversion.Basis Other Than Cost basis of the property you gave up increased by
b. Any money you receive that you do not the money you paid.
There are many times when you cannot use cost spend on similar property.
Qualifying property. In a like-kind exchange,as basis. In these cases, the fair market value or
you must hold for investment or for productive2. Increase the basis by the following.the adjusted basis of the property can be used.
use in your trade or business both the propertyFair market value (FMV) and adjusted basis
a. Any gain you recognize on the involun- you give up and the property you receive.were discussed earlier.
tary conversion. Like-kind property. There must be an ex-
b. Any cost of acquiring the replacement change of like-kind property. Like-kind proper-Property Received
property. ties are properties of the same nature orfor Services character, even if they differ in grade or quality.
The exchange of real estate for real estate andIf you receive property for your services, include Money or property not similar or related.  If personal property for similar personal propertyits FMV in income. The amount you include in you receive money or property not similar or are exchanges of like-kind property.income becomes your basis. If the services related in service or use to the converted prop-
were performed for a price agreed on before- erty, and you buy replacement property similar Example. You trade in an old truck used inhand, it will be accepted as the FMV of the or related in service or use to the converted your business with an adjusted basis of $1,700property if there is no evidence to the contrary. property, the basis of the replacement property for a new one costing $6,800. The dealer allowsis its cost decreased by the gain not recognized you $2,000 on the old truck, and you pay $4,800.Restricted property. If you receive prop- on the conversion. This is a like-kind exchange. The basis of theerty for your services and the property is subject
new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of the oldto certain restrictions, your basis in the property Example. The state condemned your prop- one, $1,700, plus the amount you paid, $4,800).is its FMV when it becomes substantially vested. erty. The adjusted basis of the property was If you sell your old truck to a third party forHowever, this rule does not apply if you make an $26,000 and the state paid you $31,000 for it. $2,000 instead of trading it in and then buy aelection to include in income the FMV of the You realized a gain of $5,000 ($31,000 − new one from the dealer, you have a taxableproperty at the time it is transferred to you, less $26,000). You bought replacement property gain of $300 on the sale (the $2,000 sale priceany amount you paid for it. Property is substan- similar in use to the converted property for minus the $1,700 adjusted basis). The basis oftially vested when it is transferable or when it is $29,000. You recognize a gain of $2,000 the new truck is the price you pay the dealer.not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture (you ($31,000 − $29,000), the unspent part of thedo not have a good chance of losing it). For payment from the state. Your unrecognized gain Partially nontaxable exchanges. A partiallymore information, see Restricted Property in is $3,000, the difference between the $5,000 nontaxable exchange is an exchange in whichPublication 525. realized gain and the $2,000 recognized gain. you receive unlike property or money in addition
Bargain purchases. A bargain purchase is The basis of the replacement property is figured to like-kind property. The basis of the property
a purchase of an item for less than its FMV. If, as as follows: you receive is the same as the adjusted basis of
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 91

Page 94 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the property you gave up, with the following donor just before it was given to you, its FMV at exclusion). She paid a gift tax of  $9,000 on the
adjustments. the time it was given to you, and any gift tax paid property. Your basis is $27,110, figured as fol-
on it. lows:
1. Decrease the basis by the following
amounts. FMV less than donor’s adjusted basis. If the Fair market value .............. $50,000
FMV of the property at the time of the gift is less Minus: Adjusted basis ........... −20,000a. Any money you receive. than the donor’s adjusted basis, your basis de- Net increase in value ........... $30,000
pends on whether you have a gain or a lossb. Any loss you recognize on the ex-
Gift tax paid ................. $9,000when you dispose of the property. Your basis forchange.
Multiplied by ($30,000 ÷ $38,000) . . . × .79figuring gain is the same as the donor’s adjusted
Gift tax due to net increase in value $7,110basis plus or minus any required adjustments to2. Increase the basis by the following Adjusted basis of property to yourbasis while you held the property. Your basis foramounts. mother ..................... +20,000figuring loss is its FMV when you received the
Your basis in the property ....... $27,110a. Any additional costs you incur. gift plus or minus any required adjustments to
basis while you held the property. See Adjustedb. Any gain you recognize on the ex- Basis, earlier. Note.  If you received a gift before 1977,change.
your basis in the gift (the donor’s adjusted basis)
Example. You received an acre of land as a includes any gift tax paid on it. However, yourIf the other party to the exchange assumes gift. At the time of the gift, the land had an FMV basis cannot exceed the FMV of the gift at theyour liabilities, treat the debt assumption as of $8,000. The donor’s adjusted basis was time it was given to you.money you received in the exchange. $10,000. After you received the property, no
Allocation of basis. If you receive like-kind events occurred to increase or decrease your
Inherited Propertyand unlike properties in the exchange, allocate basis. If you later sell the property for $12,000,
the basis first to the unlike property, other than you will have a $2,000 gain because you must Your basis in property you inherit from a dece-money, up to its FMV on the date of the ex- use the donor’s adjusted basis at the time of the dent is generally one of the following.change. The rest is the basis of the like-kind gift ($10,000) as your basis to figure gain. If you
property. sell the property for $7,000, you will have a • The FMV of the property at the date of the
$1,000 loss because you must use the FMV at decedent’s death.
More information. See Like-Kind Exchanges the time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis to • The FMV on the alternate valuation date ifin chapter 1 of Publication 544 for more informa- figure loss. the personal representative for the estatetion. If the sales price is between $8,000 and elects to use alternate valuation.$10,000, you have neither gain nor loss.Basis for depreciation. Special rules apply in • The value under the special-use valuationBusiness property. If you hold the gift asdetermining and depreciating the basis of method for real property used in farmingbusiness property, your basis for figuring anyMACRS property acquired in a like-kind ex- or a closely held business if elected fordepreciation, depletion, or amortization deduc-change. For information, see What Is the Basis estate tax purposes.tions is the same as the donor’s adjusted basisof Your Depreciable Property?  in chapter 1 of
plus or minus any required adjustments to basis • The decedent’s adjusted basis in land toPublication 946.
while you hold the property. the extent of the value excluded from the
decedent’s taxable estate as a qualifiedProperty Transferred FMV equal to or greater than donor’s ad- conservation easement.
justed basis. If the FMV of the property isFrom a Spouse
equal to or greater than the donor’s adjusted If a federal estate tax return does not have to
basis, your basis is the donor’s adjusted basis atThe basis of property transferred to you or trans- be filed, your basis in the inherited property is its
the time you received the gift. Increase yourferred in trust for your benefit by your spouse is appraised value at the date of death for state
basis by all or part of any gift tax paid, dependingthe same as your spouse’s adjusted basis. The inheritance or transmission taxes.
on the date of the gift, explained later.same rule applies to a transfer by your former For more information, see the instructions toAlso, for figuring gain or loss from a sale orspouse that is incident to divorce. However, for Form 706, United States Estate (and Genera-other disposition or for figuring depreciation, de-property transferred in trust, adjust your basis tion-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return.pletion, or amortization deductions on businessfor any gain recognized by your spouse or for-
property, you must increase or decrease yourmer spouse if the liabilities assumed, plus the Community property. In community propertybasis (the donor’s adjusted basis) by any re-liabilities to which the property is subject, are states (Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana,quired adjustments to basis while you held themore than the adjusted basis of the property Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, andproperty. See Adjusted Basis, earlier.transferred. Wisconsin), husband and wife are each usually
If you received a gift during the tax year, considered to own half the community property.
increase your basis in the gift (the donor’s ad-If the property transferred to you is a series When either spouse dies, the total value of the
justed basis) by the part of the gift tax paid on itE, series EE, or series I U.S. savings bond, the community property, even the part belonging to
due to the net increase in value of the gift. Figuretransferor must include in income the interest the surviving spouse, generally becomes the
the increase by multiplying the gift tax paid by aaccrued to the date of transfer. Your basis in the basis of the entire property. For this rule to
fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the netbond immediately after the transfer is equal to apply, at least half the value of the community
increase in value of the gift and the denominatorthe transferor’s basis increased by the interest property interest must be includible in the dece-
is the amount of the gift.income includible in the transferor’s income. For dent’s gross estate, whether or not the estate
The net increase in value of the gift is themore information on these bonds, see chapter 7. must file a return.
FMV of the gift minus the donor’s adjusted basis.At the time of the transfer, the transferor Example. You and your spouse ownedThe amount of the gift is its value for gift taxmust give you the records needed to determine community property that had a basis of $80,000.purposes after reduction by any annual exclu-the adjusted basis and holding period of the When your spouse died, half the FMV of thesion and marital or charitable deduction thatproperty as of the date of the transfer. community interest was includible in yourapplies to the gift. For information on the gift tax,For more information about the transfer of spouse’s estate. The FMV of the communitysee Publication 950, Introduction to Estate andproperty from a spouse, see chapter 14. interest was $100,000. The basis of your half ofGift Taxes.
the property after the death of your spouse is
Property Received $50,000 (half of the $100,000 FMV). The basisExample. In 2006, you received a gift of
of the other half to your spouse’s heirs is alsoproperty from your mother that had an FMV ofas a Gift
$50,000.$50,000. Her adjusted basis was $20,000. The
To figure the basis of property you receive as a amount of the gift for gift tax purposes was For more information about communit y prop-
gift, you must know its adjusted basis to the $38,000 ($50,000 minus the $12,000 annual erty, see Publication 555, Community Prop erty.
Page 92 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 95 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
obligation issued after September 3, 1982, andProperty Changed From Stocks and Bonds acquired after March 1, 1984, you must accrue
Personal to Business or OID on the obligation to determine its adjustedThe basis of stocks or bonds you buy generally basis. The accrued OID is added to the basis ofis the purchase price plus any costs of purchase,Rental Use the obligation to determine your gain or loss.such as commissions and recording or transfer See chapter 4 of Publication 550.If you hold property for personal use and then fees. If you get stocks or bonds other than by
change it to business use or use it to produce purchase, your basis is usually determined by
rent, you can begin to depreciate the property at the FMV or the previous owner’s adjusted basis,
the time of the change. To do so, you must figure as discussed earlier.
its basis for depreciation. An example of chang- You must adjust the basis of stocks for cer-
ing property held for personal use to business or tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-
rental use would be renting out your former ple, if you receive additional stock from
14.personal residence. nontaxable stock dividends or stock splits, re-
duce your basis for each share of stock by divid-Basis for depreciation. The basis for depre- ing the adjusted basis of the old stock by theciation is the lesser of the following amounts. number of shares of old and new stock. This rule Sale of Propertyapplies only when the additional stock received• The FMV of the property on the date of the
is identical to the stock held. Also reduce yourchange.
basis when you receive nontaxable distribu-• Your adjusted basis on the date of the tions. They are a return of capital. Reminderchange.
Example. In 2004 you bought 100 shares of Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen whoXYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a share. In 2005Example. Several years ago, you paid sells property located outside the United States,you bought 100 shares of XYZ stock for $1,600$160,000 to have your house built on a lot that you must report all gains and losses from theor $16 a share. In 2006 XYZ declared a 2-for-1cost $25,000. You paid $20,000 for permanent sale of that property on your tax return unless itstock split. You now have 200 shares of stockimprovements to the house and claimed a is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether youwith a basis of $5 a share and 200 shares with a$2,000 casualty loss deduction for damage to reside inside or outside the United States andbasis of $8 a share.the house before changing the property to rental whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from theuse last year. Because land is not depreciable, payer.Other basis. There are other ways to figureyou include only the cost of the house when the basis of stocks or bonds depending on howfiguring the basis for depreciation. you acquired them. For detailed information, seeYour adjusted basis in the house when you Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investmentchanged its use was $178,000 ($160,000 + Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550. Introduction$20,000 − $2,000). On the same date, your
property had an FMV of $180,000, of which Identifying stocks or bonds sold. If you can This chapter discusses the tax consequences of$15,000 was for the land and $165,000 was for adequately identify the shares of stock or the selling or trading investment property. It explainsthe house. The basis for figuring depreciation on bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other the following.the house is its FMV on the date of the change basis of the particular shares of stocks or bonds.
• What a sale or trade is.($165,000) because it is less than your adjusted If you buy and sell securities at various times in
basis ($178,000). varying quantities and you cannot adequately • Figuring gain or loss.
identify the shares you sell, the basis of theSale of property. If you later sell or dispose of • Nontaxable trades.securities you sell is the basis of the securitiesproperty changed to business or rental use, the you acquired first. For more information about • Related party transactions.basis you use will depend on whether you are identifying securities you sell, see Stocks andfiguring gain or loss. • Capital gains or losses.Bonds under Basis of Investment Property  in
Gain. The basis for figuring a gain is your chapter 4 of Publication 550. • Capital assets and noncapital assets.
adjusted basis in the property when you sell the
Mutual fund shares. If you sell mutual fund • Holding period.property.
shares you acquired at various times and prices • Rollover of gain from publicly traded se-and left on deposit in an account kept by aExample. Assume the same facts as in the curities.custodian or agent, you can elect to use anprevious example except that you sell the prop-
average basis. For more information, see Publi-erty at a gain after being allowed depreciation
cation 564. Other property transactions. Certain trans-deductions of $37,500. Your adjusted basis for
fers of property are not discussed here. They arefiguring gain is $165,500 ($178,000 + $25,000 Bond premium. If you buy a taxable bond at a discussed in other IRS publications. These in-(land) − $37,500). premium and elect to amortize the premium, clude the following.reduce the basis of the bond by the amortizedLoss. Figure the basis for a loss starting
• Installment sales, covered in Publicationpremium you deduct each year. See Bond Pre-with the smaller of your adjusted basis or the
537, Installment Sales.mium Amortization in chapter 3 of PublicationFMV of the property at the time of the change to
550 for more information. Although you cannotbusiness or rental use. Then make adjustments • Transfers of property at death, covered indeduct the premium on a tax-exempt bond, you(increases and decreases) for the period after Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, andmust amortize the premium each year and re-the change in the property’s use, as discussed Administrators.duce your basis in the bond by the amortizedearlier under Adjusted Basis.
amount. • Transactions involving business property,
covered in Publication 544, Sales andExample. Assume the same facts as in the Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru- Other Dispositions of Assets.previous example, except that you sell the prop- ments. You must increase your basis in anerty at a loss after being allowed depreciation • Dispositions of an interest in a passive ac-OID debt instrument by the OID you include indeductions of $37,500. In this case, you would tivity, covered in Publication 925, Passiveincome for that instrument. See Original Issuestart with the FMV on the date of the change to Activity and At-Risk Rules.Discount (OID)  in chapter 7 and Publicationrental use ($180,000), because it is less than the 1212, Guide To Original Issue Discount (OID)adjusted basis of $203,000 ($178,000 + • Sales of a main home, covered in chapterInstruments.$25,000 (land)) on that date. Reduce that 15.
amount ($180,000) by the depreciation deduc- Tax-exempt obligations. OID on
tions ($37,500). The basis for loss is $142,500 tax-exempt obligations is generally not taxable. Publication 550, Investment Inco me and Ex-
($180,000 − $37,500). However, when you dispose of a tax-exempt penses (Including Capital Gains and Losses),
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 93

Page 96 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
provides a more detailed discussion about sales • There is a substantially disproportionate certain items. See chapter 13 for more informa-
and trades of investment property. Publication redemption of stock, tion about determining the adjusted basis of
550 includes information about the rules cover- property.
• There is a complete redemption of all theing nonbusiness bad debts, straddles, section stock of the corporation owned by the Amount realized. The amount you realize1256 contracts, puts and calls, commodity fu- shareholder, or from a sale or trade of property is everything youtures, short sales, and wash sales. It also dis-
receive for the property. This includes the• The redemption is a distribution in partialcusses investment-related expenses.
money you receive plus the fair market value ofliquidation of a corporation.
any property or services you receive. If youUseful Items received a note or other debt instrument for the
You may want to see: Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re- property, see How To Figure Gain or Loss  in
demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their chapter 4 of Publication 550 to figure the amount
Publication maturity is generally treated as a sale or trade. realized.
  If you finance the buyer’s purchase of your❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a property and the debt instrument does not pro-dominant shareholder who retains control of the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions vide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedcorporation is treated as a contribution to capital interest that you must report as ordinary incomerather than as an immediate loss deductibleForm (and Instructions) will reduce the amount realized from the sale.from taxable income. The surrendering share- For more information, see Publication 537.❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains holder must reallocate his or her basis in theand Losses Fair market value. Fair market value is thesurrendered shares to the shares he or she
price at which the property would change handsretains.❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges
between a buyer and a seller, neither being
forced to buy or sell and both having reasonableWorthless securities. Stocks, stock rights,
knowledge of all the relevant facts.and bonds (other than those held for sale by a
securities dealer) that became worthless during
Example. You trade A Company stock withthe tax year are treated as though they wereSales and Trades
an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Companysold on the last day of the tax year. This affects
stock with a fair market value of $10,000, whichwhether your capital loss is long-term orIf you sold property such as stocks, bonds, or
is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000short-term. See Holding Period, later.certain commodities through a broker during the
($10,000 − $7,000).year, you should receive, for each sale, a Form If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make
1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex- payments on a negotiable promissory note that Debt paid off. A debt against the property,
change Transactions, or an equivalent state- you issued for stock that became worthless, you or against you, that is paid off as a part of the
ment from the broker. You should receive the can deduct these payments as losses in the transaction, or that is assumed by the buyer,
statement by January 31 of the next year. It will years you actually make the payments. Do not must be included in the amount realized. This is
show the gross proceeds from the sale. The IRS deduct them in the year the stock became worth- true even if neither you nor the buyer is person-
will also get a copy of Form 1099-B from the less. ally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or
broker. trade property that is subject to a nonrecourseHow to report loss. Report worthless se-Use Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state- loan, the amount you realize generally includescurities on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 orment received from your broker) to complete the full amount of the note assumed by the buyerline 8, whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d),Schedule D (Form 1040). even if the amount of the note is more than theenter “Worthless.” Enter the amount of your loss
fair market value of the property.in parentheses in column (f).
What Is a Sale or Trade? Filing a claim for refund. If you do not Example. You sell stock that you had
claim a loss for a worthless security on your pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.This section explains what is a sale or trade. It original return for the year it becomes worthless, Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyeralso explains certain transactions and events you can file a claim for a credit or refund due to pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 inthat are treated as sales or trades. the loss. You must use Form 1040X, Amended cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000A sale is generally a transfer of property for U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to amend + $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 −money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to your return for the year the security became $6,000).pay money. worthless. You must file it within 7 years from the
A trade is a transfer of property for other Payment of cash. If you trade property anddate your original return for that year had to be
property or services and may be taxed in the cash for other property, the amount you realizefiled, or 2 years from the date you paid the tax,
same way as a sale. is the fair market value of the property you re-whichever is later. For more information about
ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub-filing a claim, see Amended Returns and ClaimsSale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction tracting the cash you pay plus the adjusted basisfor Refund in chapter 1.is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property of the property you trade in from the amount you
for cash and immediately buy similar property to realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a
How To Figurereplace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa- gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a
rate transactions. But see Like-kind exchanges loss.Gain or Loss
under Nontaxable Trades, later.
No gain or loss. You may have to use a basisYou figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of for figuring gain that is different from the basisRedemption of stock. A redemption of stock property by comparing the amount you realize used for figuring loss. In this case, you may haveis treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the with the adjusted basis of the property. neither a gain nor a loss. See Basis Other Thancapital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
Cost in chapter 13.demption is a dividend or other distribution on Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale or
stock. trade is more than the adjusted basis of the
property you transfer, the difference is a gain. Nontaxable TradesDividend versus sale or trade. Whether a
redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend, Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you This section discusses trades that generally door other distribution depends on the circum- transfer is more than the amount you realize, the not result in a taxable gain or deductible loss.stances in each case. Both direct and indirect difference is a loss. For more information on nontaxable trades, seeownership of stock will be considered. The re-
chapter 1 of Publication 544.demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of prop-
• The redemption is not essentially erty is your original cost or other original basis Like-kind exchanges. If you trade business
equivalent to a dividend (see chapter 8), properly adjusted (increased or decreased) for or investment property for other busines s or
Page 94 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 97 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
investment property of a like kind, you do not Like property and unlike property trans- Insurance policies and annuities. You will
pay tax on any gain or deduct any loss until you ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi- not have a recognized gain or loss if the insured
sell or dispose of the property you receive. To be tion to the like property, you must recognize gain or annuitant is the same under both contracts
nontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the or loss on the unlike property you give up. The and you trade:
following conditions. gain or loss is the difference between the ad- • A life insurance contract for another lifejusted basis of the unlike property and its fair insurance contract or for an endowment or1. The property must be business or invest- market value. annuity contract,ment property. You must hold both the
property you trade and the property you Like property and money transferred. If • An endowment contract for an annuityreceive for productive use in your trade or conditions (1) – (6) are met, you have a nontax- contract or for another endowment con-business or for investment. Neither prop- able trade even if you pay money in addition to tract that provides for regular paymentserty may be property used for personal the like property. beginning at a date not later than the be-purposes, such as your home or family ginning date under the old contract, orcar. Basis of property received. To figure the ba-
• An annuity contract for another annuitysis of the property received, see Nontaxable2. The property must not be held primarily for contract.Exchanges in chapter 13.sale. The property you trade and the prop-
erty you receive must not be property you How to report.     You must report the trade of You also may not have to recognize gain orsell to customers, such as merchandise. like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog- loss on an exchange of a portion of an annuity
nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it on3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-
Schedule D (Form 1040), or on Form 4797,notes, choses in action, certificates of trust nue Ruling 2003-76 and Notice 2003-51 in Inter-
Sales of Business Property, whichever applies.or beneficial interest, or other securities or nal Revenue Bulletin 2003-33. This bulletin is
For information on using Form 4797, seeevidences of indebtedness or interest, in- available at
chapter 4 of Publication 544.cluding partnership interests. However, www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03-33.pdf.
you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo- Exchanges of contracts not included in thisCorporate stocks. The following trades ofrate stocks under a different rule, as dis- list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-corporate stocks generally do not result in acussed later. ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-taxable gain or a deductible loss. tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.4. There must be a trade of like property. The
Corporate reorganizations. In some in-trade of real estate for real estate, or per- Demutualization of life insurance compa-stances, a company will give you common stocksonal property for similar personal prop- nies. If you received stock in exchange forfor preferred stock, preferred stock for commonerty, is a trade of like property. The trade your equity interest as a policyholder or an annu-stock, or stock in one corporation for stock inof an apartment house for a store building, itant, you generally will not have a recognizedanother corporation. If this is a result of aor a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a gain or loss. See Demutualization of Life Insur-merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledtrade of like property. The trade of a piece ance Companies in Publication 550.corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-of machinery for a store building is not a
porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-trade of like property. Real property lo- U.S. Treasury notes or bonds. You can tradezation, you do not recognize gain or loss.cated in the United States and real prop- certain issues of U.S. Treasury obligations forerty located outside the United States are Stock for stock of the same corporation. other issues designated by the Secretary of thenot like property. Also, personal property You can exchange common stock for common Treasury, with no gain or loss recognized on theused predominantly within the United stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the trade.States and personal property used same corporation without having a recognizedpredominantly outside the United States gain or loss. This is true for a trade between twoare not like property. Transfers Betweenstockholders as well as a trade between a stock-
holder and the corporation.5. The property to be received must be identi- Spouses
fied in writing within 45 days after the date Convertible stocks and bonds. You gen- Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on ayou transfer the property given up in the erally will not have a recognized gain or loss if transfer of property from an individual to (or intrade. you convert bonds into stock or preferred stock trust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if incident tointo common stock of the same corporation ac-6. The property to be received must be re- a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognitioncording to a conversion privilege in the terms ofceived by the earlier of: rule does not apply in the following situations.the bond or the preferred stock certificate.
a. The 180th day after the date on which • The recipient spouse or former spouse isProperty for stock of a controlled corpora-you transfer the property given up in the a nonresident alien.tion. If you transfer property to a corporationtrade, or solely in exchange for stock in that corporation, • Property is transferred in trust. Gain must
b. The due date, including extensions, for and immediately after the trade you are in con- be recognized to the extent the amount ofyour tax return for the year in which the trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not the liabilities assumed by the trust, plustransfer of the property given up occurs. recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both any liabilities on the property, exceed the
to individuals and to groups who transfer prop- adjusted basis of the property.If you trade property with a related party in a erty to a corporation. It does not apply if the
For other situations, see Publication 550.like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply. corporation is an investment company.
See Related Party Transactions , later in this For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo- Any transfer of property to a spouse or formerchapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544 ration, you or your group of transferors must spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized isfor more information on exchanges of business own, immediately after the exchange, at least treated by the recipient as a gift and is notproperty and special rules for exchanges using 80% of the total combined voting power of all considered a sale or exchange. The recipient’squalified intermediaries or involving multiple classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80% basis in the property will be the same as theproperties. of the outstanding shares of each class of non- adjusted basis of the giver immediately beforevoting stock of the corporation. the transfer. This carryover basis rule appliesPartly nontaxable exchange. If you receive If this provision applies to you, you may have whether the adjusted basis of the transferredmoney or unlike property in addition to like prop- to attach to your return a complete statement of property is less than, equal to, or greater thanerty, and the above six conditions are met, you all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details, either its fair market value at the time of transferhave a partly nontaxable trade. You are taxed on see Temporary Regulations section 1.351-3T. or any consideration paid by the recipient. Thisany gain you realize, but only up to the amount
rule applies for purposes of determining loss asof the money and the fair market value of the Additional information. For more informa-
well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transferunlike property you receive. You cannot deduct tion on trades of stock, see Nontaxable Trades
in trust increases the basis.a loss. in chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 95

Page 98 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A transfer of property is incident to a divorce • A corporation and a partnership if the Property received from a related party. If
if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date same persons own more than 50% in you sell or trade at a gain property that you
on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is value of the outstanding stock of the cor- acquired from a related party, you recognize the
related to the ending of the marriage. poration and more than 50% of the capital gain only to the extent it is more than the loss
interest, or the profits interest, in the part- previously disallowed to the related party. This
nership. rule applies only if you are the original transfereeRelated Party Transactions
and you acquired the property by purchase or• Two S corporations if the same personsSpecial rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- exchange. This rule does not apply if the relatedown more than 50% in value of the out-erty between related parties. party’s loss was disallowed because of the washstanding stock of each corporation.
sale rules described in chapter 4 of Publication
Gain on sale or trade of depreciable prop- • Two corporations, one of which is an S 550 under Wash Sales.
erty. Your gain from the sale or trade of prop- corporation, if the same persons own If you sell or trade at a loss property that youerty to a related party may be ordinary income, more than 50% in value of the outstanding acquired from a related party, you cannot recog-rather than capital gain, if the property can be stock of each corporation. nize the loss that was not allowed to the relateddepreciated by the party receiving it. See chap- party.• An executor and a beneficiary of an estateter 3 of Publication 544 for more information.
(except in the case of a sale or trade to
Example 1. Your brother sells you stock forsatisfy a pecuniary bequest).Like-kind exchanges. Generally, if you trade $7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brotherbusiness or investment property for other busi- • Two corporations that are members of the cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sellness or investment property of a like kind, no same controlled group. (Under certain the same stock to an unrelated party forgain or loss is recognized. See Like-kind ex-
conditions, however, these losses are not $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-changes earlier under Nontaxable Trades.
disallowed but must be deferred.) able gain is $500 — the $2,900 gain minus theThis rule also applies to trades of property
$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.between related parties, defined next under • Two partnerships if the same persons
Losses on sales or trades of property. However, own, directly or indirectly, more than 50% Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold theif either you or the related party disposes of the of the capital interests or the profit inter- stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-like property within 2 years after the trade, you ests in both partnerships. nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minusboth must report any gain or loss not recognized
$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that wason the original trade on your return filed for the Multiple property sales or trades. If you not allowed to your brother.year in which the later disposition occurs. sell or trade to a related party a number of blocks
of stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youLosses on sales or trades of property. You must figure the gain or loss separately for eachcannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of block of stock or piece of property. The gain onproperty, other than a distribution in complete Capital Gainseach item may be taxable. However, you cannotliquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is
deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotdirectly or indirectly between you and the follow- and Lossesreduce gains from the sales of any of theseing related parties.
items by losses on the sales of any of the other
• Members of your family. This includes only This section discusses the tax treatment ofitems.your brothers and sisters, half-brothers gains and losses from different types of invest-
Indirect transactions. You cannot deductand half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par- ment transactions.    
your loss on the sale of stock through yourents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-
broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedscendants (children, grandchildren, etc.). Character of gain or loss. You need to clas-
party buys the same stock you had owned. This sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or• A partnership in which you directly or indi- does not apply to a trade between related par- capital gains or losses. You then need to classifyrectly own more than 50% of the capital ties through an exchange that is purely coinci- your capital gains and losses as either shortinterest or the profits interest. dental and is not prearranged. term or long term. If you have long-term gains• A corporation in which you directly or indi- and losses, you must identify your 28% rateConstructive ownership of stock. In de-rectly own more than 50% in value of the gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,termining whether a person directly or indirectlyoutstanding stock. (See Constructive own- you must also identify any unrecaptured sectionowns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-ership of stock, later.) 1250 gain.tion, the following rules apply.
• A tax-exempt charitable or educational or- The correct classification and identificationRule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byganization that is directly or indirectly con- helps you figure the limit on capital losses andor for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trusttrolled, in any manner or by any method, the correct tax on capital gains. Reporting capi-is considered owned proportionately by or for itsby you or by a member of your family, tal gains and losses is explained in chapter 16.shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.whether or not this control is legally en-
forceable. Rule 2. An individual is considered to own Capital or Ordinarythe stock that is directly or indirectly owned by or
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of Gain or Lossfor his or her family. Family includes only broth-
property is not deductible if the transaction is ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,directly or indirectly between the following re- If you have a taxable gain or a deductible lossspouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.lated parties. from a transaction, it may be either a capital gain
Rule 3. An individual owning, other than by or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on• A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade ofand beneficiary, of any trust. considered to own the stock that is directly or a capital asset (defined next) results in a capitalindirectly owned by or for his or her partner.• Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset
fiduciary and beneficiary of two different generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stocktrusts, if the same person is the grantor of pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss onconstructively owned by a person under rule 1 isboth trusts. a sale or trade of property used in a trade ortreated as actually owned by that person. But
business may be treated as either capital orstock constructively owned by an individual• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of which
ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. Inunder rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned bymore than 50% in value of the outstanding
some situations, part of your gain or loss may bethat individual for again applying either rule 2 orstock is directly or indirectly owned by or
rule 3 to make another person the constructive a capital gain or loss and part may be an ordi-for the trust, or by or for the grantor of the
owner of the stock. nary gain or loss.trust.
Page 96 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 99 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the bonds were issued after September 3,Investment PropertyCapital Assets and 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-
Investment property is a capital asset. Any gain crease the adjusted basis by your part of theNoncapital Assets
or loss from its sale or trade is generally a capital OID to figure gain or loss. For more information
For the most part, everything you own and use gain or loss. on the basis of these bonds, see Discounted
for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment Debt Instruments  in chapter 4 of Publication
is a capital asset. Some examples are: 550.Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.
These are capital assets except when they are Any gain from market discount is usually• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac- held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss you taxable on disposition or redemption ofcount, have from their sale or trade generally is a capi- tax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds
tal gain or loss. before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-• A house owned and used by you and your
count is capital gain. If you bought the bondsfamily,
after April 30, 1993, the gain is ordinary income.Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of these
(including stock received as a dividend) are cap-• Household furnishings, You figure the market discount by sub-
ital assets except when held for sale by a securi- tracting the price you paid for the bond from the
• A car used for pleasure or commuting, ties dealer. However, if you own small business sum of the original issue price of the bond and
stock, see Losses on Section 1244 (Small Busi- the amount of accumulated OID from the date of• Coin or stamp collections, ness) Stock and Losses on Small Business In- issue that represented interest to any earlier
vestment Company Stock  in chapter 4 of holders. For more information, see Market Dis-• Gems and jewelry, and Publication 550. count Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
A loss on the sale or other disposition of a• Gold, silver, or any other metal.
tax-exempt state or local government bond is
Personal Use Property deductible as a capital loss.Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-
cept the following noncapital assets. Redeemed before maturity. If a state orProperty held for personal use only, rather than
local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,for investment, is a capital asset, and you must1. Property held mainly for sale to customers is redeemed before it matures, the OID is notreport a gain from its sale as a capital gain.or property that will physically become a taxable to you.However, you cannot deduct a loss from sellingpart of the merchandise that is for sale to personal use property. If a state or local bond issued after June 8,customers. 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of
2. Depreciable property used in your trade or the OID that is earned while you hold the bond is
not taxable to you. However, you must report thebusiness, even if fully depreciated. Discounted Debt Instruments
unearned part of the OID as a capital gain.3. Real property used in your trade or busi- Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,
ness. or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument Example. On July 1, 1995, the date of is-
originally issued at a discount or bought at a sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic
discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex- for $800. The face amount of the bond wascomposition, a letter or memorandum, or
plained in the following discussions. $1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the timesimilar property:
the bond was issued, the issuer had no intention
a. Created by your personal efforts, Short-term government obligations. Treat of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was
gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov- callable at its face amount beginning 10 yearsb. Prepared or produced for you (in the ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli- after the issue date.case of a letter, memorandum, or simi- gations) as ordinary income up to your ratable The issuer redeemed the bond at the end oflar property), or share of the acquisition discount. This treatment 11 years (July 1, 2006) for its face amount of
applies to obligations that have a fixed maturityc. Acquired under circumstances (for ex- $1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The
date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.ample, by gift) entitling you to the basis OID earned during the time you held the bond,
Acquisition discount is the stated redemption $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annualof the person who created the property
price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga- interest also is not taxable. However, you mustor for whom it was prepared or pro-
tion. report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as aduced.
However, do not treat these gains as income capital gain.
to the extent you previously included the dis-5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in Long-term debt instruments issued aftercount in income. See Discount on Short-Termthe ordinary course of a trade or business 1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before JulyObligations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.for services rendered or from the sale of 2, 1982, if a government instrument). If you
property described in (1). sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of theseShort-term nongovernment obligations. debt instruments, the part of your gain that is not6. U.S. Government publications that you re- Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli- more than your ratable share of the OID at theceived from the government for free or for gations as ordinary income up to your ratable time of the sale or redemption is ordinary in-less than the normal sales price, or that share of original issue discount (OID). This treat- come. The rest of the gain is capital gain. If,ment applies to obligations that have a fixedyou acquired under circumstances entitling however, there was an intention to call the debtmaturity date of not more than 1 year from theyou to the basis of someone who received instrument before maturity, all of your gain that isdate of issue.the publications for free or for less than the not more than the entire OID is treated as ordi-However, to the extent you previously in-normal sales price. nary income at the time of the sale. This treat-cluded the discount in income, you do not have ment of taxable gain also applies to corporate7. Certain commodities derivative financial in- to include it in income again. See Discount on instruments issued after May 27, 1969, under astruments held by commodities derivatives Short-Term Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica- written commitment that was binding on May 27,dealers. tion 550. 1969, and at all times thereafter.
8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-
Tax-exempt state and local government Long-term debt instruments issued afteraction is clearly identified as a hedging
bonds. If these bonds were originally issued May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-transaction before the close of the day on
at a discount before September 4, 1982, or you ernment instrument). If you hold one of thesewhich it was acquired, originated, or en- acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your debt instruments, you must include a part of thetered into. part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure OID in your gross income each year that you
9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in-
consume in the ordinary course of your bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part strument is increased by the amount of OID that
trade or business. of the OID. you have included in your gross income. See
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 97

Page 100 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Original Issue Discount (OID)  in chapter 7 for or Bankrupt Financial Institution, in chapter 4 of January 4, 2007. You received payment of the
information about the OID that you must report sales price on that same day. Report your gainPublication 550.
on your tax return. on your 2006 return, even though you received
If you sell or trade the debt instrument before the payment in 2007. The gain is long term orSale of Annuity
maturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if short term depending on whether you held the
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityat the time the instrument was originally issued stock more than 1 year. Your holding period
contract before its maturity date that is based onthere was an intention to call it before its matur- ended on December 29. If you had sold the
ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the interest accumulated on the contract is ordinary stock at a loss, you would al so report it on your
extent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts 2006 return.income.
of OID previously includible in your income. In
Automatic investment service. In determin-this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.
ing your holding period for shares bought by theLosses on Section 1244 (SmallMarket discount bonds. If the debt instru- bank or other agent, full shares are consideredBusiness) Stockment has market discount and you chose to bought first and any fractional shares are con-include the discount in income as it accrued, sidered bought last. Your holding period starts You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanincrease your basis in the debt instrument by the on the day after the bank’s purchase date. If aas a capital loss, your loss on the sale, trade, oraccrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on share was bought over more than one purchaseworthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report theits disposition. If you did not choose to include date, your holding period for that share is a splitloss on Form 4797, line 10.the discount in income as it accrued, you must holding period. A part of the share is consideredAny gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalreport gain as ordinary interest income up to the to have been bought on each date that stockgain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.instrument’s accrued market discount. The rest was bought by the bank with the proceeds ofReport the gain on Schedule D (Form 1040).of the gain is capital gain. See Market Discount available funds.See Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business)Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.A different rule applies to market discount Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment
bonds issued before July 19, 1984, and pur- property in a trade for other investment property
chased by you before May 1, 1993. See Market and your basis for the new property is deter-Losses on Small Businessdiscount bonds under Discounted Debt Instru- mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the
ments in chapter 4 of Publication 550. Investment Company Stock old property, your holding period for the new
property begins on the day following the dateRetirement of debt instrument. Any See Losses on Small Business Investment you acquired the old property.amount that you receive on the retirement of a Company Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.
debt instrument is treated in the same way as if Property received as a gift. If you receive ayou had sold or traded that instrument. gift of property and your basis is determined byHolding Period
the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding periodNotes of individuals. If you hold an obligation
is considered to have started on the same dayof an individual that was issued with OID after If you sold or traded investment property, you
the donor’s holding period started.March 1, 1984, you generally must include the must determine your holding period for the prop-
If your basis is determined by the fair marketOID in your income currently, and your gain or erty. Your holding period determines whether
value of the property, your holding period startsloss on its sale or retirement is generally capital any capital gain or loss was a short-term or
on the day after the date of the gift.gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap- long-term capital gain or loss.
plies if the obligation is a loan between individu-
Inherited property. If you inherit investmentals and all of the following requirements are met. Long term or short term. If you hold invest- property, your capital gain or loss on any laterment property more than 1 year, any capital gain• The lender is not in the business of lend- disposition of that property is treated as aor loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If youing money. long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain gardless of how long you actually held the prop-• The amount of the loan, plus the amount or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss. erty.of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000 To determine how long you held the invest-or less. ment property, begin counting on the date after Real property bought. To figure how long
the day you acquired the property. The day you• Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin- you have held real property bought under an
disposed of the property is part of your holdingcipal purposes of the loan. unconditional contract, begin counting on the
period. day after you received title to it or on the day
If the exception applies, or the obligation was after you took possession of it and assumed the
Example. If you bought investment propertyissued before March 2, 1984, you do not include burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever
on February 5, 2005, and sold it on February 5,the OID in your income currently. When you sell happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-
2006, your holding period is not more than 1or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain session of real property under an option agree-
year and you have a short-term capital gain orthat is not more than your accrued share of the ment is not enough to start the holding period.
loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2006, yourOID at that time is ordinary income. The rest of The holding period cannot start until there is an
the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the holding period is more than 1 year and you will actual contract of sale. The holding period of the
sale or redemption is capital loss. have a long-term capital gain or loss. seller cannot end before that time.
Stock dividends. The holding period for stockSecurities traded on established market.
Deposit in Insolvent or Bankrupt you received as a taxable stock dividend beginsFor securities traded on an established securi-
on the date of distribution.ties market, your holding period begins the dayFinancial Institution
The holding period for new stock you re-after the trade date you bought the securities,
If you lose money you have on deposit in a ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onand ends on the trade date you sold them.
qualified financial institution that becomes insol- the same day as the holding period of the oldDo not confuse the trade date with thevent or bankrupt, you may be able to deduct stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired insettlement date, which is the date byyour loss in one of three ways. a “spin-off,” which is a distribution of stock orwhich the stock must be delivered andCAUTION
!
securities in a controlled corporation.• Ordinary loss. payment must be made.
Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding period• Casualty loss.
Example. You are a cash method, calendar for nontaxable stock rights begins on the same• Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De- day as the holding period of the underlyingloss). cember 29, 2006. According to the rules of the stock. The holding period for stock acquired
stock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery through the exercise of stock rights begins on
of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, onFor more information, see Deposit in Insolvent the date the right was exercised.
Page 98 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 101 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
subject to the limit described next. If this amountNonbusiness Bad Debts Wash Sales is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,
you must recognize the full amount of your gain.If someone owes you money that you cannot You cannot deduct losses from sales or trades
collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to of stock or securities in a wash sale. Limit on gain postponed. The amount of
deduct the amount owed to you when you figure gain you can postpone each year is limited to theA wash sale occurs when you sell or trade
your tax for the year the debt becomes worth- smaller of:stock or securities at a loss and within 30 days
less. before or after the sale you: • $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married andBad debts that did not come from operating file a separate return), or• Buy substantially identical stock or securi-your trade or business are nonbusiness bad
ties,debts and are deductible as short-term capital • $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married
losses. To be deductible, nonbusiness bad and file a separate return), minus the• Acquire substantially identical stock or se-
debts must be totally worthless. You cannot de- amount of gain you postponed for all ear-curities in a fully taxable trade, or
duct a partly worthless nonbusiness debt. lier years.• Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-
stantially identical stock or securities.Genuine debt required. A debt must be gen-
Basis of replacement property. You mustuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is genuine if
subtract the amount of postponed gain from theIf your loss was disallowed because of theit arises from a debtor-creditor relationship
basis of your replacement property.wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to thebased on a valid and enforceable obligation to
cost of the new stock or securities. The result isrepay a fixed or determinable sum of money.
How to report and postpone gain.  Seeyour basis in the new stock or securities. This
chapter 4 of Publication 550 for details on how toadjustment postpones the loss deduction untilBasis in bad debt required. To deduct a bad
report and postpone the gain.the disposition of the new stock or securities.debt, you must have a basis in it — that is, you
must have already included the amount in your For more information, see Wash Sales , in
income or loaned out your cash. For example, chapter 4 of Publication 550.
you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for
court-ordered child support not paid to you by Rollover of Gain Fromyour former spouse. If you are a cash method
taxpayer (as most individuals are), you generally
Publicly Traded Securities
cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid 15.
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainsalaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,
gains from the sale of publicly traded securities.and similar items.
This means that if you buy certain replacement
property and make the choice described in thisHow to report bad debts.  Deduct nonbusi- Selling Yoursection, you postpone part or all of your gain.ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on
Schedule D (Form 1040). You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis
On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the name Homeof the replacement property as described in Ba-
of the debtor and “statement attached” in col- sis of replacement property , later. This
umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in postpones your gain until the year you dispose
parentheses in column (f). Use a separate line of the replacement property.
for each bad debt. What’s NewYou qualify to make this choice if you meetFor each bad debt, attach a statement to all the following tests.your return that contains: Gulf Opportunity Zone Act of 2005 (Act).• You sell publicly traded securities at a This Act provides tax relief for persons affected• A description of the debt, including the gain. Publicly traded securities are securi- by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. Underamount, and the date it became due, ties traded on an established securities this Act, the rules for recapture of a federalmarket.• The name of the debtor, and any business mortgage subsidy have changed if you received
or family relationship between you and the a qualified home improvement loan (QHIL)• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.debtor, funded by a qualified mortgage bond that is a• During the 60-day period beginning on the qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone Bond or a QHIL• The efforts you made to collect the debt, date of the sale, you buy replacement for an owner-occupied home in the Gulf Oppor-and property. This replacement property must tunity Zone (GO Zone), Rita GO Zone, or Wilmabe either common stock or a partnership• Why you decided the debt was worthless. GO Zone. For more information, see Recaptur-interest in a specialized small business in-For example, you could show that the bor- ing (Paying Back) a Federal Mortgage Subsidy,vestment company (SSBIC). This is anyrower has declared bankruptcy, or that le- later.partnership or corporation licensed by thegal action to collect would probably not
Small Business Administration under sec-result in payment of any part of the debt. New credits affecting the basis of a home. If
tion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest- you claim the nonbusiness energy property
ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13,Filing a claim for refund.  If you do not credit or the residential energy efficient property
1993.deduct a bad debt on your original return for the credit in 2006, you must decrease the basis of
year it becomes worthless, you can file a claim your home by the amount of the credit claimed.
for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do See Adjusted Basis, later. For more informationAmount of gain recognized. If you make thethis, use Form 1040X to amend your return for about these credits, see also Form 5695, Resi-choice described in this section, you must rec-the year the debt became worthless. You must dential Energy Credits.ognize gain only up to the following amount.file it within 7 years from the date your original
• The amount realized on the sale, minusreturn for that year had to be filed, or 2 years
from the date you paid the tax, whichever is • The cost of any common stock or partner-later. For more information about filing a claim, ship interest in an SSBIC that you bought Reminderssee Amended Returns and Claims for Refund in during the 60-day period beginning on thechapter 1. date of sale (and did not previously take Change of address. If you change your mail-into account on an earlier sale of publicly ing address, be sure to notify the IRS usingAdditional information. For more informa- traded securities). Form 8822, Change of Address. Mail it to thetion, see Nonbusiness Bad Debts in Publication
Internal Revenue Service Center for your old550. For information on business bad debts, see
address. (Addresses for the Service Centers arechapter 10 of Publication 535, Business Ex- If this amount is less than the amount of your
on the back of the form.)penses. gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 99

Page 102 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Home sold with undeducted points. If you • Condominium. your selling expenses, do not include the pay-
have not deducted all the points you paid to ment as part of the selling price. Your employer
To exclude gain under the rules of this chap-secure a mortgage on your old home, you may will include it as wages in box 1 of your Form
ter, you generally must have owned and lived inbe able to deduct the remaining points in the W-2 and you will include it on Form 1040, line 7,
the property as your main home for at least 2year of the sale. See Mortgage ending early or on Form 1040NR, line 8.
years during the 5-year period ending on theunder Points in chapter 23. Option to buy. If you grant an option to buydate of sale. your home and the option is exercised, add the
amount you receive for the option to the sellingLand. If you sell the land on which your main
price of your home. If the option is not exercised,home is located, but not the house itself, you
Introduction you must report the amount as ordinary incomecannot exclude any gain you have from the sale
in the year the option expires. Report thisof the land.This chapter explains the tax rules that apply amount on Form 1040, line 21, or on Formwhen you sell your main home. Generally, your 1040NR, line 21.Example. On March 4, 2006, you sell themain home is the one in which you live most of
land on which your main home is located. Youthe time. Form 1099-S. If you received Form 1099-S,
buy another piece of land and move your house Proceeds From Real Estate Transactions, box 2If you sold your main home in 2006, you may
to it. This sale is not considered a sale of your (gross proceeds) should show the total amountbe able to exclude from income any gain up to a
main home, and you cannot exclude any gain on you received for your home.limit of $250,000 ($500,000 on a joint return in
the sale of the land. However, box 2 will not include the fair mar-most cases). See Excluding the Gain , later. If
ket value of any property other than cash oryou can exclude all of the gain, you do not need More than one home. If you have more than notes, or any services, you received or will re-to report the sale on your tax return. one home, you can exclude gain only from the ceive. Instead, box 4 will be checked to indicateIf you have gain that cannot be excluded, it is sale of your main home. You must include in your receipt or expected receipt of these items.taxable. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). income gain from the sale of any other home. If If you can exclude the entire gain, the personYou may also have to include Form 4797, Sales you have two homes and live in both of them, responsible for closing the sale generally will notof Business Property. See Reporting the Sale , your main home is ordinarily the one you live in have to report it on Form 1099-S. If you do notlater. most of the time. receive Form 1099-S, use sale documents andIf you have a loss on the sale, you cannot
other records to figure the total amount youdeduct it on your return. Example 1. You own and live in a house in received for your home.The following are main topics in this chapter. the city. You also own a beach house, which you
use during summer months. The house in the• Figuring gain or loss. city is your main home. Amount Realized
• Basis.
The amount realized is the selling price minusExample 2. You own a house, but you live in• Excluding the gain. selling expenses.another house that you rent. The rented house is
• Ownership and use tests. your main home. Selling expenses. Selling expenses include:
• Reporting the sale. Property used partly as your main home. If • Commissions,
you use only part of the property as your mainOther topics include the following. • Advertising fees,home, the rules discussed in this chapter apply• Business use or rental of home. only to the gain or loss on the sale of that part of • Legal fees, and
the property. For details, see Business Use or• Recapturing a federal mortgage subsidy. • Loan charges paid by the seller, such asRental of Home, later. loan placement fees or “points.”
Useful Items
You may want to see: Adjusted BasisFiguring Gain or LossPublication While you owned your home, you may have
To figure the gain or loss on the sale of your made adjustments (increases or decreases) to❏ 523 Selling Your Home main home, you must know the selling price, the the basis. This adjusted basis must be deter-
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time amount realized, and the adjusted basis. Sub- mined before you can figure gain or loss on the
Homeowners tract the adjusted basis from the amount real- sale of your home. For information on how to
ized to get your gain or loss. figure your home’s adjusted basis, see Deter-
Form (and Instructions) mining Basis, later.
Selling price❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains − Selling expenses
and Losses Amount of Gain or Loss
Amount realized❏ 8822 Change of Address To figure the amount of gain or loss, compare
Amount realized the amount realized to the adjusted basis.❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage
− Adjusted basisSubsidy Gain on sale. If the amount realized is more
Gain or loss than the adjusted basis, the difference is a gain
and, except for any part you can exclude, gener-
ally is taxable.
Selling Price Loss on sale. If the amount realized is lessMain Home
than the adjusted basis, the difference is a loss.The selling price is the total amount you receive
A loss on the sale of your main home cannot beThis section explains the term “main home.” for your home. It includes money, all notes,
deducted.Usually, the home you live in most of the time is mortgages, or other debts assumed by the
your main home and can be a: buyer as part of the sale, and the fair market Jointly owned home. If you and your spouse
value of any other property or any services you sell your jointly owned home and file a joint• House,
receive. return, you figure your gain or loss as one tax-• Houseboat, payer.Payment by employer. You may have to sell• Mobile home, your home because of a job transfer. If your Separate returns. If you file separate re-
• Cooperative apartment, or employer pays you for a loss on the sale or for turns, each of you must figure your own gain or
Page 100 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 103 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss according to your ownership interest in the • Deductible casualty losses,Determining Basishome. Your ownership interest is determined by • Insurance payments you received or ex-state law. You need to know your basis in your home to pect to receive for casualty losses,
determine any gain or loss when you sell it. YourJoint owners not married. If you and a • Payments you received for granting anbasis in your home is determined by how you gotjoint owner other than your spouse sell your easement or right-of-way,the home. Your basis is its cost if you bought it orjointly owned home, each of you must figure
built it. If you got it in some other way (inheri- • Depreciation allowed or allowable if youyour own gain or loss according to your owner-
tance, gift, etc.), its basis is either its fair market used your home for business or rental pur-ship interest in the home. Each of you applies value when you got it or the adjusted basis of the poses,the rules discussed in this chapter on an individ- person you got it from.ual basis. • Residential energy credit (generally al-While you owned your home, you may have lowed from 1977 through 1987) claimedmade adjustments (increases or decreases) to for the cost of energy improvements thatOther Dispositions your home’s basis. The result of these adjust- you added to the basis of your home,ments is your home’s adjusted basis, which is
The following rules apply to foreclosures and used to figure gain or loss on the sale of your • Nonbusiness energy property credit (al-repossessions, abandonments, trades, and home. See Adjusted Basis, later. lowed beginning in 2006) claimed for mak-transfers to a spouse. You can find more information on basis and ing certain energy saving improvements
adjusted basis in chapter 13 of this publication that you added to the basis of your home,
Foreclosure or repossession. If your home and in Publication 523. • Residential energy efficient property creditwas foreclosed on or repossessed, you have a (allowed beginning in 2006) claimed forsale. making certain energy saving improve-Cost As BasisYou figure the gain or loss from the sale in ments that you added to the basis of yourgenerally the same way as gain or loss from any home,The cost of property is the amount you pay for itsale. But the selling price of your home used to in cash, debt obligations, other property, or serv- • Adoption credit you claimed for improve-figure the amount of your gain or loss depends, ices. ments added to the basis of your home,in part, on whether you were personally liable for
repaying the debt secured by the home. See Purchase. If you buy your home, your basis is • Nontaxable payments from an adoption
Publication 523 for more information. its cost to you. This includes the purchase price assistance program of your employer that
and certain settlement or closing costs. Gener- you used for improvements you added toForm 1099-A and Form 1099-C. Generally, ally, your purchase price includes your down the basis of your home,you will receive Form 1099-A, Acquisition or payment and any debt, such as a first or secondAbandonment of Secured Property, from your • Energy conservation subsidy excludedmortgage or notes you gave the seller in pay-lender. This form will have the information you from your gross income because you re-ment for the home. If you build, or contract toneed to determine the amount of your gain or ceived it (directly or indirectly) from a pub-build, a new home, your purchase price canloss and any ordinary income from cancellation lic utility after 1992 to buy or install anyinclude costs of construction, as discussed inof debt. If your debt is canceled, you may re- energy conservation measure. An energyPublication 523.
ceive Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt. conservation measure is an installation or
Settlement fees or closing costs. When you modification that is primarily designed ei-
bought your home, you may have paid settle- ther to reduce consumption of electricity orAbandonment. If you abandon your home,
ment fees or closing costs in addition to the natural gas or to improve the managementyou may have ordinary income. If the aban- contract price of the property. You can include in of energy demand for a home, anddoned home secures a debt for which you are your basis some of the settlement fees andpersonally liable and the debt is canceled, you • District of Columbia first-time homebuyerclosing costs you paid for buying the home. Youhave ordinary income equal to the amount of the credit (allowed on the purchase of a princi-cannot include in your basis the fees and costscanceled debt. See Publication 523 for more pal residence in the District of Columbiafor getting a mortgage loan. A fee paid for buyinginformation. from August 5, 1997, through Decemberthe home is any fee you would have had to pay
31, 2005).even if you paid cash for the home (that is,Trading homes. If you trade your old home for without the need for financing).another home, treat the trade as a sale and a Chapter 13 lists some of the settlement fees At the time this publication went topurchase. and closing costs that you can include in the print, Congress was considering legis-
basis of property, including your home. It also lation that would extend the District ofCAUTION
!
Example. You owned and lived in a home lists some settlement costs that cannot be in- Columbia first-time homebuyer credit that ex-with an adjusted basis of $41,000. A real estate cluded in basis. pired for homes purchased after 2005. To finddealer accepted your old home as a trade-in and Also see Publication 523 for additional items out if this legislation was enacted, and for moreallowed you $50,000 toward a new home priced and a discussion of basis other than cost. details, go to www.irs.gov, click on More Formsat $80,000. This is treated as a sale of your old and Publications , and then on What’s Hot inhome for $50,000 with a gain of $9,000 ($50,000 forms and publications, or see Publication 553,– $41,000). Adjusted Basis Highlights of 2006 Tax Changes.
If the dealer had allowed you $27,000 and
Adjusted basis is your basis increased or de-assumed your unpaid mortgage of $23,000 on Improvements. These add to the value of
creased by certain amounts.your old home, your sales price would still be your home, prolong its useful life, or adapt it to
$50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in allowed plus the new uses. You add the cost of additions andIncreases to basis. These include any:$23,000 mortgage assumed). other improvements to the basis of your prop-
• Additions and other improvements that erty.
have a useful life of more than 1 year,Transfer to spouse. If you transfer your home
to your spouse, or to your former spouse inci- Examples. Putting a recreation room or an-• Special assessments for local improve-
other bathroom in your unfinished basement,dent to your divorce, you generally have no gain ments, and
putting up a new fence, putting in new plumbingor loss. This is true even if you receive cash or • Amounts you spent after a casualty to re- or wiring, putting on a new roof, or paving yourother consideration for the home. Therefore, the store damaged property. unpaved driveway are improvements. An addi-rules in this chapter do not apply.
tion to your house, such as a new deck, a sun-More information. If you need more infor- room, or a new garage, is also an improvement.Decreases to basis. These include any:mation, see Transfer to spouse in Publication
523 and Property Settlements in Publication • Gain you postponed from the sale of a Repairs. These maintain your home in good
504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. previous home before May 7, 1997, condition but do not add to its value or prolong
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 101

Page 104 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
its life. You do not add their cost to the basis of • You are married and file a joint return for Example 1. David Johnson, who is single,
the year. bought and moved into his home on February 1,your property.
2004. Each year during 2004 and 2005, David• Either you or your spouse meets the own-Examples. Repainting your house inside or left his home for a 2-month summer vacation.ership test.outside, fixing your gutters or floors, repairing David sold the house on March 1, 2006. Al-
• Both you and your spouse meet the useleaks or plastering, and replacing broken win- though the total time David used his home is
test.dow panes are examples of repairs. less than 2 years (21 months), he may exclude
any gain up to $250,000. The 2-month vacations• During the 2-year period ending on theRecordkeeping.  You should keep are short temporary absences and are counteddate of the sale, neither you nor yourrecords to prove your home’s adjusted as periods of use in determining whether Davidspouse excluded gain from the sale of an-basis. Ordinarily, you must keep rec-RECORDS
used the home for the required 2 years.other home.ords for 3 years after the due date for filing your
return for the tax year in which you sold your Example 2. Professor Paul Beard, who ishome. But if you sold a home before May 7, single, bought and moved into a house on Au-Ownership and Use Tests1997, and postponed tax on any gain, the basis gust 28, 2003. He lived in it as his main homeof that home affects the basis of the new home continuously until January 5, 2005, when heTo claim the exclusion, you must meet the own-you bought. Keep records proving the basis of went abroad for a 1-year sabbatical leave. Onership and use tests. This means that during theboth homes as long as they are needed for tax February 6, 2006, 1 month after returning from5-year period ending on the date of the sale, youpurposes. the leave, Paul sold the house at a gain. Be-must have:The records you should keep include: cause his leave was not a short temporary ab-
• Owned the home for at least 2 years (the sence, he cannot include the period of leave to• Proof of the home’s purchase price and ownership test), and meet the 2-year use test. He cannot exclude anypurchase expenses,
part of his gain, because he did not use the• Lived in the home as your main home for• Receipts and other records for all improve- residence for the required 2 years.at least 2 years (the use test).ments, additions, and other items that af-
fect the home’s adjusted basis, Ownership and use tests met at different
Exception. If you owned and lived in the prop- times. You can meet the ownership and use• Any worksheets you used to figure the ad- erty as your main home for less than 2 years, tests during different 2-year periods. However,justed basis of the home you sold, the you can still claim an exclusion in some cases. you must meet both tests during the 5-year pe-gain or loss on the sale, the exclusion, and The maximum amount you can claim will be riod ending on the date of the sale.the taxable gain, reduced. See Reduced Maximum Exclusion ,
• Any Form 2119, Sale of Your Home, that later. Example. In 1997, Helen Jones lived in a
you filed to postpone gain from the sale of rented apartment. The apartment building was
a previous home before May 7, 1997, and Example 1—home owned and occupied later changed to a condominium, and she
for 3 years. Amanda bought and moved into bought her apartment on December 3, 2003. In• Any worksheets you used to prepare Form her main home in September 2003. She sold the 2004, Helen became ill and on April 14 of that2119, such as the Adjusted Basis of Home home at a gain on September 15, 2006. During year she moved to her daughter’s home. On JulySold Worksheet or the Capital Improve- the 5-year period ending on the date of sale 12, 2006, while still living in her daughter’sments Worksheet from the Form 2119 in- (September 16, 2001 – September 15, 2006), home, she sold her apartment.structions. she owned and lived in the home for 3 years. Helen can exclude gain on the sale of her
She meets the ownership and use tests. apartment because she met the ownership and
use tests during the 5-year period from July 13,
Example 2—met ownership test but not 2001, to July 12, 2006, the date she sold the
use test. Dan bought a home in 2000. After apartment. She owned her apartment from De-Excluding the Gain living in it for 6 months, he moved out. He never cember 3, 2003, to July 12, 2006 (more than 2
lived in the home again and sold it at a gain on years). She lived in the apartment from July 13,You may qualify to exclude from your income all June 28, 2006. He owned the home during the 2001 (the beginning of the 5-year period), toor part of any gain from the sale of your main entire 5-year period ending on the date of sale April 14, 2004 (more than 2 years).home. This means that, if you qualify, you will (June 29, 2001 – June 28, 2006). However, he The time Helen lived in her daughter’s homenot have to pay tax on the gain up to the limit did not live in it for the required 2 years. He during the 5-year period can be counted as adescribed under Maximum Exclusion, next. To meets the ownership test but not the use test. period of ownership, and the time she lived inqualify, you must meet the ownership and use He cannot exclude any part of his gain on the her rented apartment during the 5-year periodtests described later. sale, unless he qualified for a reduced maximum can be counted as a period of use.You can choose not to take the exclusion by exclusion (explained later).including the gain from the sale in your gross Cooperative apartment. If you sold stock in a
income on your tax return for the year of the cooperative housing corporation, the ownership
sale. and use tests are met if, during the 5-year periodPeriod of Ownership and Use
ending on the date of sale, you:
The required 2 years of ownership and use dur-Maximum Exclusion • Owned the stock for at least 2 years, anding the 5-year period ending on the date of the
sale do not have to be continuous. • Lived in the house or apartment that theYou can exclude up to $250,000 of the gain on
 You meet the tests if you can show that you stock entitles you to occupy as your mainthe sale of your main home if all of the following
owned and lived in the property as your main home for at least 2 years.are true.
home for either 24 full months or 730 days (365• You meet the ownership test. × 2) during the 5-year period ending on the date Members of the uniformed services or For-of sale.• You meet the use test. eign Service. You can choose to have the
Temporary absence. Short temporary ab- 5-year test period for ownership and use sus-• During the 2-year period ending on the
sences for vacations or other seasonal ab- pended during any period you or your spousedate of the sale, you did not exclude gain
sences, even if you rent out the property during serve on “qualified official extended duty” as afrom the sale of another home.
the absences, are counted as periods of use. member of the uniformed services or Foreign
You can exclude up to $500,000 of the gain on The following examples assume that the re- Service of the United States. This means  that
the sale of your main home if all of the following duced maximum exclusion (discussed later) you may be able to meet the 2-year u se test
are true. does not apply to the sales. even if, because of your service, you did not
Page 102 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 105 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
actually live in your home for at least the re- Jamie later in the year. She meets the owner- Unforeseen circumstances. The sale of your
quired 2 years during the 5-year period ending ship and use tests, but Jamie does not. Emily main home is because of an unforeseen circum-
on the date of sale. can exclude up to $250,000 of gain on a sepa- stance if your primary reason for the sale is the
If this helps you qualify to exclude gain, you rate or joint return for 2006. The $500,000 maxi- occurrence of an event that you could not rea-
can choose to have the 5-year test period sus- mum exclusion for certain joint returns does not sonably have anticipated before buying and oc-
pended by filing a return for the year of sale that apply because Jamie does not meet the use cupying your main home. For more information
does not include the gain. test. on unforeseen circumstances, see Publication
523.
Example. David bought and moved into a Example 2 — each spouse sells a home.
home in 1998. He lived in it as his main home for The facts are the same as in Example 1 except More Than One Home Sold21/2 years. For the next 6 years, he did not live in that Jamie also sells a home in 2006 before he
it because he was on qualified official extended marries Emily. He meets the ownership and use During 2-Year Period
duty with the Army. He then sold the home at a tests on his home, but Emily does not. Emily and
gain in 2006. To meet the use test, David You generally cannot exclude gain on the sale ofJamie can each exclude up to $250,000 of gain.
chooses to suspend the 5-year test period for your home if, during the 2-year period ending onThe $500,000 maximum exclusion for certain
the 6 years he was on qualified official extended joint returns does not apply because Emily and the date of the sale, you sold another home at a
duty. This means he can disregard those 6 Jamie do not jointly meet the use test for the gain and excluded all or part of that gain. If you
years. Therefore, David’s 5-year test period con- same home. cannot exclude the gain, you must include it in
sists of the 5 years before he went on qualified your income.
official extended duty. He meets the ownership Death of spouse before sale. If your spouse
and use tests because he owned and lived in the died and you did not remarry before the date of Exception. You still can claim an exclusion,home for 21/2 years during this test period. sale, you are considered to have owned and but the maximum amount of gain you can ex-
lived in the property as your main home during clude will be reduced, if the reason you sold thePeriod of suspension. The period of sus-
any period of time when your spouse owned and home was:pension cannot last more than 10 years. To-
lived in it as a main home.gether, the 10-year suspension period and the • A change in place of employment,5-year test period can be as long as, but no
Home transferred from spouse. If your • Health, ormore than, 15 years. You cannot suspend the
home was transferred to you by your spouse (or5-year period for more than one property at a • Unforeseen circumstances (as definedformer spouse if the transfer was incident totime. You can revoke your choice to suspend the earlier).divorce), you are considered to have owned it5-year period at any time.
during any period of time when your spouse For more information about this exception, seeFor more information about the suspension
owned it.of the 5-year test period, see Uniformed serv- More Than One Home Sold During 2-Year Pe-
ices or Foreign Service member in Publication riod in Publication 523.
523. Use of home after divorce. You are consid-
ered to have used property as your main home
Exception for individuals with a disability. during any period when:
There is an exception to the use test if during the
Business Use or• You owned it, and5-year period before the sale of your home:
• Your spouse or former spouse is allowed• You become physically or mentally unable Rental of Hometo live in it under a divorce or separationto care for yourself, and
instrument and uses it as his or her main You may be able to exclude gain from the sale of• You owned and lived in your home as your home. a home that you have used for business or tomain home for a total of at least 1 year.
produce rental income. But you must meet the
Under this exception, you are considered to live ownership and use tests.Reduced Maximumin your home during any time that you own the
home and live in a facility (including a nursing Exclusion Example 1. On May 29, 2000, Amy bought
home) that is licensed by a state or political a house. She moved in on that date and lived in
subdivision to care for persons in your condition. You can claim an exclusion, but the maximum it until May 31, 2002, when she moved out of the
amount of gain you can exclude will be reduced, house and put it up for rent. The house wasIf you meet this exception to the use test, you if either of the following is true. rented from June 1, 2002, to March 31, 2004.still have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year ownership
Amy moved back into the house on April 1,test to claim the exclusion. 1. You did not meet the ownership and use 2004, and lived there until she sold it on Januarytests, but the reason you sold the homePrevious home destroyed or condemned. 30, 2006. During the 5-year period ending on thewas:For the ownership and use tests, you add the date of the sale (January 31, 2001 – January
time you owned and lived in a previous home 30, 2006), Amy owned and lived in the house fora. A change in place of employment,
that was destroyed or condemned to the time more than 2 years as shown in the followingb. Health, oryou owned and lived in the home on which you table.
wish to exclude gain. This rule applies if any part c. Unforeseen circumstances (as defined
of the basis of the home you sold depended on Five Year Used as Used aslater).
Period  Home  Rentalthe basis of the destroyed or condemned home.
Otherwise, you must have owned and lived in 2. Your exclusion would have been disal-  1/31/01 –the same home for 2 of the 5 years before the lowed because of the rule described in 5/31/02 16 monthssale to qualify for the exclusion. More Than One Home Sold During 2-Year
 6/1/02 –Period, later, except that the reason you 3/31/04  22 monthssold the home was:
Married Persons  4/1/04 –a. A change in place of employment, 1/30/06 22 months
If you and your spouse file a joint return for the 38 months 22 monthsb. Health, oryear of sale, you can exclude gain if either
Amy can exclude gain up to $250,000. However,c. Unforeseen circumstances (as definedspouse meets the ownership and use tests. (But
she cannot exclude the part of the gain equal tonext).see Maximum Exclusion, earlier.)
the depreciation she claimed or could have
claimed for renting the house, as explained afterUse Worksheet 3 in Publication 523 to figureExample 1 — one spouse sells a home.
your reduced maximum exclusion. Example 2.Emily sells her home in June 2006. She marries
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 103

Page 106 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters,Example 2. William owned and used a Use Form 6252, Installment Sale Income, to
and Thefts, in the case of a home that wasreport the sale. Enter your exclusion on line 15house as his main home from 2000 through
destroyed, orof Form 6252.2003. On January 1, 2004, he moved to another
state. He rented his house from that date until • Chapter 1 of Publication 544, in the caseSeller-financed mortgage. If you sell your of a home that was condemned.April 30, 2006, when he sold it. During the 5-year home and hold a note, mortgage, or other finan-period ending on the date of sale (May 1, 2001 – cial agreement, the payments you receive gen-April 30, 2006), William owned and lived in the Sale of remainder interest. Subject to theerally consist of both interest and principal. Youhouse for 32 months (more than 2 years). He other rules in this chapter, you can choose tomust separately report as interest income the exclude gain from the sale of a remainder inter-must report the sale on Form 4797. He can interest you receive as part of each payment. If est in your home. If you make this choice, youexclude gain up to $250,000. However, he can- the buyer of your home uses the property as a cannot choose to exclude gain from your sale ofnot exclude the part of the gain equal to the main or second home, you must also report the any other interest in the home that you selldepreciation he claimed or could have claimed name, address, and social security number separately.for renting the house, as explained next. (SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of either Schedule B Exception for sales to related persons.(Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A). The You cannot exclude gain from the sale of aDepreciation after May 6, 1997. If you were buyer must give you his or her SSN and you remainder interest in your home to a relatedentitled to take depreciation deductions be- must give the buyer your SSN. Failure to meet person. Related persons include your brotherscause you used your home for business pur- and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,these requirements may result in a $50 penalty
poses or as rental property, you cannot exclude spouse, ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),for each failure. If you or the buyer does not
the part of your gain equal to any depreciation and lineal descendants (children, grandchildren,have and is not eligible to get an SSN, see
allowed or allowable as a deduction for periods etc.). Related persons also include certain cor-Social Security Number in chapter 1. porations, partnerships, trusts, and exempt or-after May 6, 1997. If you can show by adequate
More information. For more information on ganizations.records or other evidence that the depreciation
installment sales, see Publication 537, Install-allowed was less than the amount allowable, the
ment Sales.amount you cannot exclude is the amount al-
lowed.
Recapturing (Paying
Property used partly for business or rental. Back) a FederalIf you used property partly as a home and partly Special Situations
for business or to produce rental income, see Mortgage Subsidy
The situations that follow may affect your exclu-Publication 523.
sion. If you financed your home under a federally
subsidized program (loans from tax-exempt
qualified mortgage bonds or loans with mort-Sale of home acquired in like-kind exchange.
gage credit certificates), you may have to recap-You cannot claim the exclusion if:
Reporting the Sale ture all or part of the benefit you received from• You acquired your home in a like-kind ex- that program when you sell or otherwise disposechange (also known as a section 1031 ex- of your home. You recapture the benefit by in-change); or your basis in your home is creasing your federal income tax for the year ofdetermined by reference to the basis ofDo not report the 2006 sale of your main home the sale. You may have to pay this recapture taxthe home in the hands of the person whoon your tax return unless: even if you can exclude your gain from incomeacquired the property in a like-kind ex- under the rules discussed earlier; that exclusion• You have a gain and you do not qualify to change (for example, you received the does not affect the recapture tax.home from that person as a gift), andexclude all of it, or
Loans subject to recapture rules. The re-• You sold the home during the 5-year pe-• You have a gain and you choose not to capture applies to loans that:riod beginning with the date your homeexclude it. was acquired in the like-kind exchange. 1. Came from the proceeds of qualified mort-
gage bonds, orGain from a like-kind exchange is not taxable. If you have any taxable gain on the sale of
This means that gain will not be recognized untilyour main home that cannot be excluded, report 2. Were based on mortgage credit certifi-you sell the property you receive. To defer gainthe entire gain realized on Schedule D (Form cates.from a like-kind exchange, you must have ex-1040). Report it in column (f) of line 1 or line 8 of The recapture also applies to assumptions ofchanged business or investment property forSchedule D, as short term or long term capital these loans.business or investment property of a like kind.gain depending on how long you owned the For more information about like-kind ex- When the recapture applies. The recapturehome. If you qualify for an exclusion, show it on changes, see Publication 544, Sales and Other of the federal mortgage subsidy applies only ifthe line directly below the line on which you Dispositions of Assets. you meet both of the following conditions.report the gain. Write “Section 121 exclusion” in
Home relinquished in an like-kind exchange.column (a) of that line and show the amount of • Within the first 9 years after the date you
If you use your main home partly for business or close your mortgage loan, you sell or oth-the exclusion in column (f) as a loss (in paren-
rental purposes and then exchange the home erwise dispose of your home at a gain.theses). for another property, see Publication 523.If you used the home for business or to • Your income for the year of disposition is
more than that year’s adjusted qualifyingproduce rental income, you may have to use Expatriates. You cannot claim the exclusion if income for your family size for that yearForm 4797 to report the sale of the business or the expatriation tax applies to you. The expatria- (related to the income requirements a per-rental part (or the sale of the entire property if tion tax applies to U.S. citizens who have re- son must meet to qualify for the federallyused entirely for business or rental). See Busi- nounced their citizenship (and long-term subsidized program).ness Use or Rental of Home in Publication 523. residents who have ended their residency). For
more information about the expatriation tax, see
When recapture does not apply. The recap-chapter 4 of Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide forInstallment sale. Some sales are made under ture does not apply if any of the following situa-Aliens.arrangements that provide for part or all of the tions apply to you.selling price to be paid in a later year. These Home destroyed or condemned. If your • Your mortgage loan was a qualified homesales are called “installment sales.” If you fi- home was destroyed or condemned, any gain improvement loan (QHIL) of not more thannance the buyer’s purchase of your home your- (for example, because of insurance proceeds $15,000 ($150,000 for a QHIL used to re-self, instead of having the buyer get a loan or you received) qualifies for the exclusion. pair damage from Hurricane Katrina tomortgage from a bank, you probably have an Any part of the gain that cannot be excluded homes in the hurricane disaster area; for ainstallment sale. You may be able to report the (because it is more than the maximum exclu- QHIL funded by a qualified mortgage bond
part of the gain you cannot exclude on the in- sion) can be postponed under the rules ex- that is a qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone
stallment basis. plained in: Bond; or for a QHIL for an owner-occupied
Page 104 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 107 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home in the Gulf Opportunity Zone (GO Dispositions of Assets, before completing Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of
Zone), Rita GO Zone, or Wilma GO Zone. Schedule D. Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in column
See Publication 4492, Information for Tax- (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,
payers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-Useful ItemsRita, and Wilma, for more information). vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that grossYou may want to see:
proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions• The home is disposed of as a result of and option premiums were reported to the IRS,Publicationyour death. enter that net sales price in column (d) of either❏ 537 Installment Sales• You dispose of the home more than 9 line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.years after the date you closed your mort-  If the net sales price is entered in column (d),❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofgage loan. do not include the commissions and option pre-Assets
miums in column (e).• You transfer the home to your spouse, or ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesto your former spouse incident to a di-
Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold orvorce, where no gain is included in your Form (and Instructions) traded reportable real estate, you generallyincome.
should receive from the real estate reporting❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains• You dispose of the home at a loss. person a Form 1099-S showing the gross pro-and Losses
• Your home is destroyed by a casualty, and ceeds.❏ 4797 Sales of Business Propertyyou replace it on its original site within 2 “Reportable real estate” is defined as any
years after the end of the tax year when ❏ 6252 Installment Sale Income present or future ownership interest in any of the
the destruction happened (within 5 years if following:❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsthe home was in the Hurricane Katrina dis-
• Improved or unimproved land, including airaster area and was destroyed by reason
space,of the hurricane after August 24, 2005).
• Inherently permanent structures, including• You refinance your mortgage loan (unless
any residential, commercial, or industrialyou later meet the conditions listed previ- Reporting Capital
building,ously under When the recapture applies).
Gains and Losses • A condominium unit and its accessory fix-
tures and common elements, includingNotice of amounts. At or near the time of Report capital gains and losses on Schedule D land, andsettlement of your mortgage loan, you should (Form 1040). Enter your sales and trades ofreceive a notice that provides the federally sub- • Stock in a cooperative housing corporationstocks, bonds, etc., and real estate (if not re-sidized amount and other information you will (as defined in section 216 of the Internalported on Form 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, orneed to figure your recapture tax. Revenue Code).8824) on line 1 of Part I or line 8 of Part II, as
appropriate. Include all these transactions evenHow to figure and report the recapture. The A “real estate reporting person” could includeif you did not receive a Form 1099-B, Proceedsrecapture tax is figured on Form 8828, Recap- the buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title orFrom Broker and Barter Exchange Transac-ture of Federal Mortgage Subsidy. If you sell escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-tions, or Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Realyour home and your mortgage is subject to re- ker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiringEstate Transactions (or substitute statement).capture rules, you must file Form 8828 even if the biggest interest in the property.You can use Schedule D-1 as a continuationyou do not owe a recapture tax. Attach Form Your Form 1099-S will show the gross pro-schedule to report more transactions.8828 to your Form 1040. For more information, ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-Be sure to add all sales price entries in col-see Form 8828 and its instructions. low the instructions for Schedule D to reportumn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total on
line 3. Also add all sales price entries in column these transactions and include them on line 1 or
(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10. 8 as appropriate.
Then add the following amounts reported to you
Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as afor 2006 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-S
nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your(or on substitute statements):
name but actually belong to someone else),• Proceeds from transactions involving report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only the16. stocks, bonds, and other securities, and proceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol-
• Gross proceeds from real estate transac- lowing amounts reported to you for 2006 on
tions (other than the sale of your main Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state-
home if you had no taxable gain) not re- ments) that you are not reporting on anotherReporting Gains ported on another form or schedule. form or schedule included with your return:
If this total is more than the total of lines 3 and 1. Proceeds from transactions involvingand Losses 10, attach a statement to your return explaining stocks, bonds, and other securities, andthe difference.
2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-
tions (other than the sale of your mainInstallment sales. You cannot use the install-
home if you are not required to report it).Introduction ment method to report a gain from the sale of
stock or securities traded on an established se- If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total ofThis chapter discusses how to report capital curities market. You must report the entire gain lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your returngains and losses from sales, exchanges, and in the year of sale (the year in which the trade explaining the reason for the difference.other dispositions of investment property on date occurs).Schedule D of Form 1040. The discussion in- File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with thecludes the following topics. Passive activity gains and losses. If you IRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi-have gains or losses from a passive activity, you nee in 2006, you must file a Form 1099-B or• How to report short-term gains and losses. may also have to report them on Form 8582. In Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS.• How to report long-term gains and losses. some cases, the loss may be limited under the Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with apassive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of• How to figure capital loss carryovers. separate instructions for more information about U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-• How to figure your tax on a net capital reporting capital gains and losses from a pas- nue Service Center by February 28, 2007 (Aprilgain. sive activity. 2, 2007, if you file Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S
electronically). Give the actual owner of the pro-• An illustrated example of how to complete Form 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop-
ceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or FormSchedule D. erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-
1099-S by January 31, 2007. On Form 1099-B,ties, through a broker, you should receive Form
If you sell or otherwise dispose of property you should be listed as the “Payer.” The other1099-B or equivalent statement from the broker.
used in a trade or business or for the production owner should be listed as the “Recipient.” OnUse the Form 1099-B or the equivalent state-
of income, see Publication 544, Sales and Other Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the “Filer.”ment to complete Schedule D.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 105

Page 108 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limit on deduction. Your allowable capitalTable 16-1. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the
lesser of:THEN your
• $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and filemaximum capital
a separate return), orIF your net capital gain is from ... gain rate is ...
• Your total net loss as shown on line 16 ofcollectibles gain 28% Schedule D.
gain on qualified small business stock minus the section
You can use your total net loss to reduce your1202 exclusion 28%
income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
Capital loss carryover. If you have a total net
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25% loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more than
or higher 15% the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you
can carry over the unused part to the next yearother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is and treat it as if you had incurred it in that nextlower than 25% 5% year. If part of the loss is still unused, you can
carry it over to later years until it is completely
1 Other gain means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on qualified small business stock, or used up.
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. When you figure the amount of any capital
loss carryover to the next year, you must take
the current year’s allowable deduction into ac-
count, whether or not you claimed it.
When you carry over a loss, it remains longThe other owner should be listed as the “Trans-
• All capital gain distributions from mutual
term or short term. A long-term capital loss youferor.” You do not, however, have to file a Form funds and REITs not reported directly on
carry over to the next tax year will reduce that1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds for line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form
year’s long-term capital gains before it reducesyour spouse. For more information about the 1040, and
that year’s short-term capital gains.reporting requirements and the penalties for fail- • Long-term capital loss carryovers.ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns, Figuring your carryover. The amount ofsee the General Instructions for Forms 1099, your capital loss carryover is the amount of your The result after combining these items with1098, 5498, and W-2G. total net loss that is more than the lesser of:your other long-term capital gains and losses is
your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 ofSale of property bought at various times. If 1. Your allowable capital loss deduction forSchedule D).you sell a block of stock or other property that the year, or
you bought at various times, report the Capital gain distributions only. You do 2. Your taxable income increased by your al-short-term gain or loss from the sale on one line not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow- lowable capital loss deduction for the yearin Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or ing are true. and your deduction for personal exemp-loss on one line in Part II. Write “Various” in • The only amounts you would have to re- tions.column (b) for the “Date acquired.” See Compre- port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-hensive Example later in this chapter. If your deductions are more than your grossbutions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (or income for the tax year, use your negative tax-substitute statement).Sale expenses.  Add to your cost or other able income in computing the amount in item (2).basis any expense of sale such as brokers’ fees, • You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,   Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work-commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substitute sheet in Publication 550 to determine the part ofoption premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in statement). your capital loss for 2006 that you can carry overcolumn (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule to 2007.D, whichever applies, unless you reported the If both of the above statements are true, reportnet sales price amount in column (d). Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities inyour capital gain distributions directly on line 13For more information about adjustments to 2006. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofof Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also,basis, see chapter 13. $7,000. They had no other capital transactions.use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain
Their taxable income was $26,000. On their jointTax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions toShort-term gains and losses. Capital gain or 2006 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-figure your tax.loss on the sale or trade of investment property used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000),held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or You can report your capital gain distributions can be carried over to 2007.loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If the on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form If their capital loss had been $2,000, theiramount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it 1040, if both of the following are true. capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.in parentheses. They would have no carryover.• None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substituteYou combine your share of short-term capital statements) you received have an amount Use short-term losses first. When you fig-gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations, in box 2b, 2c, or 2d. ure your capital loss carryover, use yourand fiduciaries, and any short-term capital loss
short-term capital losses first, even if you in-carryover, with your other short-term capital • You do not have to file Form 1040 for any
curred them after a long-term capital loss. If yougains and losses to figure your net short-term other capital gains or losses.
have not reached the limit on the capital losscapital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.
deduction after using the short-term capitalTotal net gain or loss. To figure your total net losses, use the long-term capital losses until youLong-term gains and losses. A capital gain gain or loss, combine your net short-term capital reach the limit.or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop- gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-termerty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital Decedent’s capital loss. A capital losscapital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result ongain or loss. You report it in Part II of Schedule sustained by a decedent during his or her lastSchedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses areD. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss, tax year (or carried over to that year from anmore than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.show it in parentheses. earlier year) can be deducted only on the finalIf both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 ofYou also report the following in Part II of income tax return filed for the decedent. TheForm 1040 is more than zero, see Capital GainSchedule D: capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply inTax Rates, later.
this situation. The decedent’s estate cannot de-• Undistributed long-term capital gains from
duct any of the loss or carry it over to followinga regulated investment company (mutual Capital Losses years.fund) or real estate investment trust
(REIT), Joint and separate returns. If you and yourIf your capital losses are more than your capital
spouse once filed separate returns and are now• Your share of long-term capital gains or gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.
filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-losses from partnerships, S corporations, Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,
tal loss carryovers. However, if you and yourand fiduciaries, enclosed in parentheses.
Page 106 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 109 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
spouse once filed a joint return and are now The eligible gain minus your section 1202 exclu-
filing separate returns, any capital loss carryover sion is a 28% rate gain. See Gains on Qualified Comprehensivefrom the joint return can be deducted only on the Small Business Stock in chapter 4 of Publication
return of the spouse who actually had the loss. 550. Example
Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wagesUnrecaptured section 1250 gain.  Generally, from her job, she has income from stocks andthis is any part of your capital gain from sellingCapital Gain Tax Rates other securities. For the 2006 tax year, she hadsection 1250 property (real property) that is due the following capital gains and losses, which sheThe tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are to depreciation (but not more than your net sec- reports on Schedule D. All the Forms 1099 shegenerally lower than the tax rates that apply to tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the received showed net sales prices. Her filled-inother income. These lower rates are called the 28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Schedule D is shown in this chapter.maximum capital gain rates. Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructionsThe term “net capital gain” means the to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Capital gains and losses — Schedule D.amount by which your net long-term capital gain For more information about section 1250 prop- Emily sold stock in two different companies thatfor the year is more than your net short-term erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of she held for less than a year. In June, she soldcapital loss. Publication 544. 100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she hadFor 2006, the maximum capital gain rates
bought in February. She had an adjusted basisare 5%, 15%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 16-1 for
of $650 in the stock and sold it for $900, for adetails. Tax computation using maximum capital gain of $250. In July, she sold 25 shares ofgains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends andIf you figure your tax using the maxi- Computer Co. stock that she bought in June.Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule Dmum capital gain rates and the regular She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,500tax computation results in a lower tax, Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure
TIP
and she sold it for $2,000, for a loss of $500. Shethe regular tax computation applies. your tax if you have qualified dividends or net reports these short-term transactions on line 1 incapital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched- Part I of Schedule D.ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains.Example. All of your net capital gain is from Emily had three other stock sales that sheselling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would Schedule D Tax Worksheet. You must use reports as long-term transactions on line 8 inbe 28%. Because you are single and your tax- Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Scheduleable income is $25,000, none of your taxable shares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inheritedD instructions to figure your tax if:income will be taxed above the 15% rate. The the Car Co. stock from her father. Its fair market28% rate does not apply. • You have to file Schedule D, and value at the time of his death was $2,500, which
became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.• Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or lineInvestment interest deducted. If you claim a
Because she had inherited the stock, her loss is19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), isdeduction for investment interest, you may have
a long-term loss, regardless of how long she andto reduce the amount of your net capital gain more than zero.
her father actually held the stock. She enters thethat is eligible for the capital gain tax rates. See Comprehensive Example, later, for an ex- loss in column (f) of line 8.Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gain ample of how to figure your tax using the Sched-you choose to include in investment income In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.ule D Tax Worksheet.when figuring the limit on your investment inter- stock for $14,000. She had bought 100 of those
est deduction. This is done on the Schedule D shares in 1995, for $1,000. She had bought 100Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax
Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and more shares in 1997 for $2,200, and an addi-Worksheet. If you do not have to use the
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa- tional 300 shares in 2000 for $1,500. Her totalSchedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained
tion about the limit on investment interest, see basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $9,300above) and any of the following apply, use thechapter 3 of Publication 550. ($14,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which sheQualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work- enters in column (f) of line 8.sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or FormCollectibles gain or loss. This is gain or loss In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug, for $4,100. This was qualified small businessantique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati- • You received qualified dividends. (See stock that she had bought in September 2001.num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev- Qualified Dividends in chapter 8.) Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 gainerage held more than 1 year. which she enters in column (f) of line 8. Because• You do not have to file Schedule D and she held the stock more than 5 years, she has aGain on qualified small business stock. If you received capital gain distributions. $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She claims theyou realized a gain from qualified small business (See Capital gain distributions only, ear- exclusion on the line below by entering $1,500stock that you held more than 5 years, you lier.) as a loss in column (f). She also enters thegenerally can exclude up to 50% of your gain
• Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both exclusion as a positive amount on line 2 of thefrom income. The exclusion can be up to 60%
more than zero. 28% Rate Gain Worksheet.for certain empowerment zone business stock.
28% Rate Gain Worksheet for Emily Jones—Line 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules
D and D-1 .................................................................... 1. 0
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain .... 2. 1,500
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ............................. 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
............... 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500)box 11, code C .................................................................
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- ...................... 6. ( 550)
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 .............................................................. 7. 450
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 107

Page 110 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
She received a Form 1099-B (not shown) also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car- the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line  18
from her broker for each of these transactions. ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work- is greater than zero, she checks the “No” box on
sheet. Her filled-in 28% Rate Gain Worksheet is line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax WorksheetReconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emily to figure her tax.shown below.makes sure that the total of the amounts re-
She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry- After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-
over Worksheet (not illustrated) in her 2005 edi- of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofule D is not less than the total of the amounts
tion of Publication 550, so she could properlyshown on the Forms 1099-B she received from Form 1040 through line 43. She enters the
report her loss carryover for the 2006 tax yearher broker. For 2006, the total is $23,100. amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of the
without refiguring it. Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out theCapital loss carryover from 2005. Emily rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax isTax computation. Because Emily hashas a capital loss carryover to 2006 of $800, of $3,236. This is less than the $4,126 tax shegains on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D,which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500 would have figured without the capital gain taxshe checks the “Yes” box on line 17 and goes tois long-term capital loss. She enters these rates.line 18. On line 18 she enters $450 from line 7 ofamounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. She
Page 108 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 111 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b);
or
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) is zero or less.
Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) ........................... 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or Form
1040NR, line 10b) .............................. 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4g . . 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e* . . 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ......... 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ..................... 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ....... 7. 9,350
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ................... 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0- ..................... 9. 9,350
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ........................................................ 10. 9,350
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D ............................... 11. 450
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 ........................................... 12. 450
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10. ............................................................ 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. ............................................ 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
• The amount on line 1 or
}
•  $30,650 if single or married filing separately; ....... 15. 30,000$61,300 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$41,050 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15 ............................. 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ........ 17. 20,650
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 ......................................... /H1707518. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 and 20 and go to line 21. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15 ............................................... /H1707519. 8,900
20. Multiply line 19 by 5% (.05) ............................................................. 20. 445
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 .............................. 21.
22. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-) ............... 22.
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. /H1707523.
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15) ............................................................ 24.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 ................. 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 18 ............................. 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above ................... 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- ................... 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. /H1707529.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25) ............................................................ 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 18, 19, 23, and 29 ................................................. 31.
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1 ................................................. 32.
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28) ............................................................ 33.
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ..... 34. 2,791
35. Add lines 20, 24, 30, 33, and 34 .......................................................... 35. 3,236
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ..... 36. 4,126
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends).  Enter the smaller of line 35 or line
36. Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41) ............................ 37. 3,236
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 109

Page 112 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
Car Co.
60 sh
INHERITED 2-3-06 2,100
20,200
2,500
Trucking Co.
100 sh
2-11-06 6-12-06 900 650
Computer Co.
25 sh
6-30-06 7-30-06 2,000 2,500
300
Furniture Co.
500 sh
VARIOUS 6-30-06 14,000 4,700 9,300
9,900
250
500
550
400
Toy Co.
20 sh
9-28-01 12-15-06 4,100 1,100 3,000
500
Section 1202
exclusion 1,500
()
()
()
()
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in
column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 10 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts. Add lines 8 and 9 in
column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions
14
15
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 15 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ( )
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to
Part III on the back 15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 or Form 1040NR instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2006Cat. No. 11338H
()
4 4
Part I
Part II
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
7
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
2006
2,900
Page 110 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 113 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
9,350
450
/H12011
/H12011
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2006
Summary
Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result. If line 16 is a loss, skip lines 17 through 20, and
go to line 21. If a gain, enter the gain on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. Then go
to line 17 below
16
16
18
Part III
Page 2
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the
instructions /H17075
Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank?
19
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2006
21
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on
page D-9 of the instructions /H17075
20
If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller
of:
21
19
● The loss on line 16 or
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below.
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and
22 below.
Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b?22
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR).
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
( )
Are lines 15 and 16 both gains?17
Yes. Go to line 18.
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
Note. When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 111

Page 114 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Four.
The three chapters in this part discuss some of the adjustments to income thatAdjustments to you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income. These chapters cover:
• Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement arrangementsIncome (IRAs) — chapter 17,
• Alimony you pay — chapter 18, and
• Student loan interest you pay—chapter 19.
Other adjustments to income are discussed elsewhere. See Table V below.
Table V. Other Adjustments to Income
Use this table to find information about other adjustments to income not covered in this part of the publication.
IF you are looking for more information about the deduction for... THEN see...
Certain business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and Chapter 26.
fee-basis officials
Contributions to a health savings account Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.
Moving expenses Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
One-half of self-employment tax Chapter 22.
Self-employed health insurance Chapter 21.
Payments to self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business.
Penalty on the early withdrawal of savings Chapter 7.
Contributions to an Archer MSA Chapter 21.
Reforestation amortization or expense Chapter 9 of Publication 535, Business Expenses.
Contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18)(D) pension Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
plans
Expenses from the rental of personal property Chapter 12.
Certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment benefits Chapter 12.
(sub-pay)
Foreign housing costs Chapter 4 of Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident
Aliens Abroad.
Jury duty pay given to your employer Chapter 12.
Contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for M embers of
403(b) plans the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Attorney fees and certain costs for actions involving certain unlawful Publication 525.
discrimination claims
Domestic production activities deduction Form 8903.
Page 112 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 115 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rollovers from designated Roth accounts. This chapter discusses the following topics.
If any part of an eligible rollover distribution is • The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRA
from a designated Roth account set up under an that is not a Roth or SIMPLE IRA).17. employee’s qualified plan, you can roll over, tax • The Roth IRA, which features nondeduct-free, that part of the distribution to another desig- ible contributions and tax-free distribu-nated Roth account or to a Roth IRA. tions.
Roth IRA contribution limit. If you were ageIndividual Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) and50 or older before 2007 and contributions on Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employeesyour behalf were made only to Roth IRAs, your (SIMPLEs) are not discussed in this chapter. ForRetirement contribution limit for 2006 is generally the
more information on these plans and employ-lesser of:
ees’ SEP IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are part of• $5,000, orArrangements these plans, see Publications 560 and 590.• Your taxable compensation for the year.
For information about contributions, deduc-However, if your modified adjusted gross in- tions, withdrawals, transfers, rollovers, and(IRAs) come (AGI) is above a certain amount, your other transactions for 2007, see Publication 590.contribution limit may be reduced.
Useful ItemsQualified Roth contribution programs. ForWhat’s New for 2006 tax years beginning after 2005, a qualified cash You may want to see:
or deferred arrangement (section 401(k) plan) orTraditional IRA contribution and deduction a tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) Publicationlimit. If you were age 50 before 2007, the plan) can create a qualified Roth contribution ❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Smallmost that could be contributed to your tradi- program so that participants can elect to have Businesstional IRA for 2006 is the smaller of the follow- part or all of their elective deferrals to the plan
ing amounts: designated as after-tax Roth contributions. For ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements
• $5,000, or more information about 401(k) plans, see Publi- (IRAs)
cation 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-• Your taxable compensation for the year.
ness. For more information about 403(b) plans, Form (and Instructions)
see Publication 571, Tax-Sheltered AnnuityNontaxable combat pay. Beginning in 2004, ❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified PlansPlans (403(b) Plans).you can treat nontaxable combat pay as com- (including IRAs) and Otherpensation for purposes of the limits on contribu- Tax-Favored Accountstions and deduction of contributions to IRAs.
❏ 8606 Nondeductible IRAsYou may be able to amend your 2004 or 2005
return. For more information, see Nontaxable Reminders
combat pay under When Can Contributions Be
Made? Statement of required minimum distribution.
If a minimum distribution is required from your Traditional IRAsQualified reservist repayments. If you are IRA, the trustee, custodian, or issuer that held(or were) a member of a reserve component and the IRA at the end of the preceding year must In this chapter the original IRA (sometimesyou were ordered or called to active duty after either report the amount of the required mini- called an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred toSeptember 11, 2001, you may be able to repay mum distribution to you, or offer to calculate it for as a “traditional IRA.” Two advantages of acertain early distributions even if the repayment you. The report or offer must include the date by traditional IRA are:would cause your total contributions to be more which the amount must be distributed. The re- • You may be able to deduct some or all ofthan the limit on contributions. See Qualified port is due January 31 of the year in which the
your contributions to it, depending on yourreservist repayments under How Much Can Be minimum distribution is required. It can be pro-
circumstances, andContributed? vided with the year-end fair market value state-
• Generally, amounts in your IRA, includingment that you normally get each year. No reportModified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri- earnings and gains, are not taxed untilis required for IRAs of owners who have died.
butions increased. For 2006, if you were they are distributed.IRA interest. Although interest earned fromcovered by a retirement plan at work, your de-
your IRA is generally not taxed in the yearduction for contributions to a traditional IRA is
earned, it is not tax-exempt interest. Do notreduced (phased out) if your modified adjusted What Is a Traditional IRA?
report this interest on your tax return asgross income (AGI) is:
tax-exempt interest. A traditional IRA is any IRA that is not a Roth IRA• More than $75,000 but less than $85,000
or a SIMPLE IRA.for a married couple filing a joint return or Form 8606.  If you make nondeductible contri-a qualifying widow(er), butions to a traditional IRA and you do not file
• More than $50,000 but less than $60,000 Who Can Set UpForm 8606, Nondeductible IRAs, with your tax
for a single individual or head of house- return, you may have to pay a $50 penalty. a Traditional IRA?hold, or
Hurricane tax relief. Special rules apply to• Less than $10,000 for a married individual You can set up and make contributions to athe use of retirement funds (including IRAs) byfiling a separate return. traditional IRA if:qualified individuals who suffered an economic • You (or, if you file a joint return, yourloss as a result of Hurricane Katrina, Rita, orQualified charitable distributions. If you spouse) received taxable compensationWilma. See Hurricane-Related Relief in chapterwere at least age 701/2 and you had a distribution during the year, and4 of Publication 590.made by the trustee of your IRA directly to a • You were not age 701/2 by the end of theThe term “50 or older” is used severalcharitable organization, it may be nontaxable. year.times in this chapter. It refers to an IRASee Qualified charitable distributions under Are
owner who is age 50 or older by theDistributions Taxable?
TIP
What is compensation? Generally, compen-end of the tax year.
Qualified reservist distributions. If you are sation is what you earn from working. Compen-
(or were) a member of a reserve component and sation includes wages, salaries, tips,
you were ordered or called to active duty after professional fees, bonuses, and other amounts
September 11, 2001, you may not have to pay you receive for providing personal services. TheIntroductionthe 10% tax on early distributions you received IRS treats as compensation any amount prop-
after you were ordered or called to active duty. erly shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other compen-An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is a
See Qualified reservist distributions under Early sation) of Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement,personal savings plan that gives you tax advan-
Distributions in Publication 590, Individual Re- provided that amount is reduced by any amounttages for setting aside money for your retire-
tirement Arrangements. properly shown in box 11 (Nonqualified plans).ment.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 113

Page 116 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Scholarship and fellowship payments are Trustees’ fees. Trustees’ administrative fees Contributions must be made by due date.
compensation for this purpose only if shown in are not subject to the contribution limit. Contributions can be made to your tradi tional
box 1 of Form W-2. IRA for a year at any time during the year or byQualified reservist repayments. If you areCompensation also includes commissions the due date for filing your return for that year,(or were) a member of a reserve component andand taxable alimony and separate maintenance not including extensions.you were ordered or called to active duty afterpayments. September 11, 2001, you may be able to con- Nontaxable combat pay. If you received non-
Self-employment income. If you are tribute (repay) to an IRA amounts equal to any taxable combat pay in 2004 or 2005, and the
self-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner), qualified reservist distributions you received. treatment of the combat pay as compensation
compensation is the net earnings from your You can make these repayment contributions means that you can contribute more than you
trade or business (provided your personal serv- even if they would cause your total contributions already have, you can make additional contribu-
ices are a material income-producing factor) to the IRA to be more than the general limit on tions to an IRA for 2004 or 2005 by May 28,
reduced by the total of: contributions. To be eligible to make these re- 2009. The contributions will be treated as having
• The deduction for contributions made on payment contributions, you must have received been made on the last day of the year for which
your behalf to retirement plans, and a qualified reservist distribution from an IRA or they were made. If you have already filed your
from a section 401(k) or 403(b) plan or similar return for a year for which you make a contribu-• The deduction allowed for one-half of your
arrangement. tion, you must file Form 1040X, Amended U.S.self-employment taxes.
For more information, see Qualified reservist Individual Income Tax Return.
repayments under How Much Can Be Contrib-  For more information, see When Can Contri-Compensation includes earnings from
uted in chapter 1 of Publication 590. butions Be Made in chapter 1 of Publication 590.self-employment even if they are not subject to
self-employment tax because of your religious Contributions on your behalf to a tradi- Age 701/2 rule. Contributions cannot be madebeliefs. tional IRA reduce your limit for contri- to your traditional IRA for the year in which you
butions to a Roth IRA. (See Roth IRAs,Nontaxable combat pay. For IRA pur- reach age 701/2 or for any later year.
CAUTION
!
later.)poses, your compensation includes any nontax- You attain age 70 1/2 on the date that is 6
able combat pay you receive. calendar months after the 70th anniversary ofGeneral limit. The most that can be contrib- your birth. If you were born on June 30, 1936,What is not compensation? Compensation uted to your traditional IRA generally is the the 70th anniversary of your birth is June 30,does not include any of the following items. smaller of the following amounts. 2006, and you attained age 70 1/2 on December• Earnings and profits from property, such • $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older in 30, 2006. If you were born on July 1, 1936, theas rental income, interest income, and div- 2006). 70th anniversary of your birth was July 1, 2006,idend income. • Your taxable compensation (defined ear- and you attained age 701/2 on January 1, 2007.• Pension or annuity income. lier) for the year.
Designating year for which contribution is• Deferred compensation received (com- This is the most that can be contributed regard- made. If an amount is contributed to yourpensation payments postponed from a less of whether the contributions are to one or traditional IRA between January 1 and April 15,past year). more traditional IRAs or whether all or part of the you should tell the sponsor which year (the cur-• Income from a partnership for which you contributions are nondeductible. (See Nonde- rent year or the previous year) the contribution isdo not provide services that are a material ductible Contributions, later.) Qualified reservist for. If you do not tell the sponsor which year it isincome-producing factor. repayments do not affect this limit. for, the sponsor can assume, and report to the• Any amounts (other than combat pay) you
IRS, that the contribution is for the current yearexclude from income, such as foreign Example 1. Betty, who is 34 years old and (the year the sponsor received it).earned income and housing costs. single, earned $24,000 in 2006. Her IRA contri-
butions for 2006 are limited to $4,000. Filing before a contribution is made. You
can file your return claiming a traditional IRAWhen and How Can a Example 2. John, an unmarried college stu- contribution before the contribution is actually
dent working part time, earned $3,500 in 2006. made. Generally, the contribution must be madeTraditional IRA Be Set Up?
His IRA contributions for 2006 are limited to by the due date of your return, not including
You can set up a traditional IRA at any time. $3,500, the amount of his compensation. extensions.
However, the time for making contributions for Spousal IRA limit. If you file a joint return Contributions not required. You do not haveany year is limited. See When Can Contributions and your taxable compensation is less than to contribute to your traditional IRA for every taxBe Made, later. that of your spouse, the most that can be con- year, even if you can.  You can set up different kinds of IRAs with a tributed for the year to your IRA is the smallervariety of organizations. You can set up an IRA of the following amounts.at a bank or other financial institution or with a How Much Can Youmutual fund or life insurance company. You can 1. $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older in
Deduct?also set up an IRA through your stockbroker. 2006).
Any IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code re- 2. The total compensation includible in the Generally, you can deduct the lesser of:quirements. gross income of both you and your spouse • The contributions to your traditional IRAfor the year, reduced by the following twoKinds of traditional IRAs. Your traditional for the year, oramounts.IRA can be an individual retirement account or • The general limit (or the spousal IRA limit,a. Your spouse’s IRA contribution for theannuity. It can be part of either a simplified if it applies).year to a traditional IRA.employee pension (SEP) or an employer or em-
However, if you or your spouse was covered byployee association trust account. b. Any contribution for the year to a Roth
an employer retirement plan, you may not beIRA on behalf of your spouse.
able to deduct this amount. See Limit If CoveredHow Much Can Be by Employer Plan, later.This means that the total combined contribu-
Contributed? tions that can be made for the year to your IRA
You may be eligible to claim a credit forand your spouse’s IRA can be as much as
contributions to your traditional IRA.There are limits and other rules that affect the $8,000 ($9,000 if only one of you is 50 or older,
For more information see chapter 37.amount that can be contributed to a traditional or $10,000 if both of you are 50 or older).
TIP
IRA. These limits and other rules are explained
below. Trustees’ fees. Trustees’ administrative feesWhen Can Contributions that are billed separately and paid in connectionCommunity property laws. Except as dis- Be Made? with your traditional IRA are not deductible ascussed later under Spousal IRA limit,  each
IRA contributions. However, they may be de-spouse figures his or her limit separately, using As soon as you set up your traditional IRA, ductible as a miscellaneous itemized deductionhis or her own compensation. This is the rule contributions can be made to it through your on Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28.even in states with community property laws. chosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator).
Brokers’ commissions. Brokers’ commis- Contributions must be in the form of money Brokers’ commissions. Brokers’ commis-
sions paid in connection with your traditional IRA (cash, check, or money order). Property cannot sions are part of your IRA cont ribution and, as
are subject to the contribution limit. be contributed. such, are deductible subject to the limits.
Page 114 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 117 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
retirement plan at any time during the year forTable 17-1. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are Covered by
which contributions were made, your deductionRetirement Plan at Work may be further limited. This is discussed later
under Limit If Covered by Employer Plan. LimitsIf you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if
on the amount you can deduct do not affect theyour modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction.
amount that can be contributed. See Nonde-
ductible Contributions, later.IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
 $50,000 or less a full deduction.single
Are You Covered by an Employer
more than $50,000 a partial deduction. Plan?or but less than $60,000
The Form W-2 you receive from your employerhead of household $60,000 or more no deduction. has a box used to indicate whether you were
covered for the year. The “Retirement plan” box $75,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly should be checked if you were covered.
more than $75,000 a partial deduction. Reservists and volunteer firefighters shouldor but less than $85,000 also see Situations in Which You Are Not Cov-
ered, later.qualifying widow(er) $85,000 or more no deduction. If you are not certain whether you were cov-
ered by your employer’s retirement plan, youless than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing
should ask your employer.separately2
$10,000 or more no deduction.
Federal judges. For purposes of the IRA de-1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). duction, federal judges are covered by an em-2If you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this purpose
ployer retirement plan.(therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the “Single” column).
Full deduction. If neither you nor your a. The IRA deduction for the year of the For Which Year(s) Are You
spouse was covered for any part of the year by spouse with the greater compensation. Covered?an employer retirement plan, you can take a b. Any designated nondeductible contribu-
deduction for total contributions to one or more tion for the year made on behalf of the Special rules apply to determine the tax years
traditional IRAs of up to the lesser of the follow- spouse with the greater compensation. for which you are covered by an employer plan.
ing amounts. These rules differ depending on whether thec. Any contributions for the year to a Roth
• $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older in plan is a defined contribution plan or a definedIRA on behalf of the spouse with the
2006). benefit plan.greater compensation.
• 100% of your compensation.
Tax year. Your tax year is the annual account-This limit is reduced by any contributions to aThis limit is reduced by any contributions made ing period you use to keep records and report501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse withto a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf. income and expenses on your income tax re-the lesser compensation.
Spousal IRA. In the case of a married turn. For almost all people, the tax year is the
couple with unequal compensation who file a calendar year.Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa-
joint return, the deduction for contributions to rated (and did not remarry) before the end of the
Defined contribution plan. Generally, youthe traditional IRA of the spouse with less com- year, you cannot deduct any contributions to
pensation is limited to the lesser of the follow- are covered by a defined contribution plan for ayour spouse’s IRA. After a divorce or legal sepa-
ing amounts. tax year if amounts are contributed or allocatedration, you can deduct only contributions to your
to your account for the plan year that ends withown IRA. Your deductions are subject to the1. $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older in or within that tax year.rules for single individuals.2006).
A defined contribution plan is a plan that2. The total compensation includible in the provides for a separate account for each personCovered by an employer retirement plan. Ifgross income of both spouses for the year covered by the plan. Types of defined contribu-you or your spouse was covered by an employerreduced by the following three amounts. tion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo-
nus plans, and money purchase pension plans.Table 17-2. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are NOT
Covered by Retirement Plan at Work Defined benefit plan. If you are eligible to
participate in your employer’s defined benefitIf you are not covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine plan for the plan year that ends within your taxif your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction. year, you are covered by the plan. This rule
applies even if you:
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take... • Declined to participate in the plan,
• Did not make a required contribution, orsingle, any amount a full deduction. • Did not perform the minimum service re-head of household, or quired to accrue a benefit for the year.qualifying widow(er)
A defined benefit plan is any plan that is not amarried filing jointly or any amount a full deduction.
defined contribution plan. Defined benefit plansseparately with a spouse who is
include pension plans and annuity plans.not covered by a plan at work
$150,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly with a No vested interest. If you accrue a benefit for
a plan year, you are covered by that plan even ifspouse who is covered by a plan more than $150,000 a partial deduction. you have no vested interest in (legal right to) theat work but less than $160,000 accrual.
$160,000 or more no deduction.
Situations in Which You Are Notless than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing separately with a
spouse who is covered by a plan Covered$10,000 or more no deduction.at work2
Unless you are covered under another employer
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). plan, you are not covered by an employer plan if2You are entitled to the full deduction if you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year. you are in one of the situations described below.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 115

Page 118 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Social security or railroad retirement. Cov- only a partial (reduced) deduction or no deduc- you need more information on filing status, see
erage under social security or railroad retire- tion at all, depending on your income and your chapter 2.
ment is not coverage under an employer filing status. Lived apart from spouse. If you did not liveretirement plan. Your deduction begins to decrease (phase with your spouse at any time during the year andout) when your income rises above a certainBenefits from a previous employer’s plan. you file a separate return, your filing status, foramount and is eliminated altogether when itIf you receive retirement benefits from a previ- this purpose, is single.reaches a higher amount. These amounts varyous employer’s plan, you are not covered by that depending on your filing status.plan. Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). HowTo determine if your deduction is subject to
you figure your modified AGI depends onReservists. If the only reason you participate phaseout, you must determine your modified
whether you are filing Form 1040 or Formin a plan is because you are a member of a adjusted gross income (AGI) and your filing sta-
1040A. If you made contributions to your IRA forreserve unit of the armed forces, you may not tus. See Filing status  and Modified adjusted
be covered by the plan. You are not covered 2006 and received a distribution from your IRAgross income (AGI), later. Then use Table 17-1
by the plan if both of the following conditions in 2006, see Publication 590.or 17-2 to determine if the phaseout applies.
are met. Do not assume that your modified AGISocial security recipients. Instead of using1. The plan you participate in is established is the same as your compensation.Table 17-1 or 17-2, use the worksheets in Ap-for its employees by: Your modified AGI may include incomeCAUTION
!
pendix B of Publication 590 if, for the year, all in addition to your compensation (discusseda. The United States, of the following apply. earlier), such as interest, dividends, and incomeb. A state or political subdivision of a • You received social security benefits. from IRA distributions.state, or • You received taxable compensation.c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b) Form 1040. If you file Form 1040, refigure• Contributions were made to your tradi-above. tional IRA. the amount on the page 1 “adjusted gross in-
come” line without taking into account any of the• You or your spouse was covered by an2. You did not serve more than 90 days on
employer retirement plan. following amounts.active duty during the year (not counting
duty for training). Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc- • IRA deduction.
tion, your nondeductible contribution, and the • Student loan interest deduction.Volunteer firefighters. If the only reason you taxable portion, if any, of your social securityparticipate in a plan is because you are a vol- • Domestic production activities deduction.benefits.unteer firefighter, you may not be covered by
• Foreign earned income exclusion.the plan. You are not covered by the plan if Deduction phaseout. If you were covered byboth of the following conditions are met. • Foreign housing exclusion or deduction.an employer retirement plan and you did not
1. The plan you participate in is established receive any social security retirement benefits, • Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-for its employees by: your IRA deduction may be reduced or elimi- est shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In-nated depending on your filing status and modi-a. The United States, terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savingsfied AGI as shown in Table 17-1.b. A state or political subdivision of a Bonds Issued After 1989 (For Filers With
state, or If your spouse is covered. If you are not Qualified Higher Education Expenses).
covered by an employer retirement plan, butc. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b) • Exclusion of employer-provided adoptionyour spouse is, and you did not receive anyabove. benefits shown on Form 8839, Qualifiedsocial security benefits, your IRA deduction may2. Your accrued retirement benefits at the be- Adoption Expenses.be reduced or eliminated entirely depending onginning of the year will not provide more your filing status and modified AGI as shown in This is your modified AGI.than $1,800 per year at retirement. Table 17-2. Form 1040A. If you file Form 1040A,
refigure the amount on the page 1 “adjustedFiling status. Your filing status depends pri-
gross income” line without taking into accountmarily on your marital status. For this purpose,Limit If Covered by Employer Plan any of the following amounts.you need to know if your filing status is single or
If either you or your spouse was covered by an head of household, married filing jointly or quali- • IRA deduction.employer retirement plan, you may be entitled to fying widow(er), or married filing separately. If
• Student loan interest deduction.
• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-Worksheet 17-1. Figuring Your est shown on Form 8815.Modified AGI Keep for Your Records
This is your modified AGI.
Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for
traditional IRA purposes. At the time this publication went to
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would extend the deduction
CAUTION
!
1. Enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from Form 1040, line 38, or for tuition and fees that expired at the end ofForm 1040A, line 22 ................................ 1. 2005. To find out if this legislation was enacted,
2. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Form 1040, line 32, or Form and for more details, go to www.irs.gov, click on
1040A, line 17 .................................... 2. More Forms and Publications , and then on
What’s Hot in forms and publications , or see3. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line 33, or Publication 553. If the deduction for tuition andForm 1040A, line 18 ................................ 3. fees is extended, it is not taken into account
when figuring your modified adjusted gross in-4. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Form 1040,
come shown above.line 35 .......................................... 4.
5. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from Form Both contributions for 2006 and distribu-
2555, line 45, or Form 2555-EZ, line 18, ................... 5. tions in 2006. If all three of the following apply,
any IRA distributions you received in 2006 may6. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 ..... 6. be partly tax free and partly taxable.
7. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 7. • You received distributions in 2006 from
one or more traditional IRAs.8. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form
8839, line 30 ...................................... 8. • You made contributions to a traditional
IRA for 2006.9. Add lines 1 through 8. This is your Modified AGI for traditional IRA
purposes ........................................ 9. • Some of those contributions may be non-
deductible contributions.
Page 116 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 119 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If this is your situation, you must figure the tax- will be taxed until they are distributed. See When Can You Move Retirementable part of the traditional IRA distribution before Can You Withdraw or Use IRA Assets, later.
Plan Assets?you can figure your modified AGI. To do this, you
can use Worksheet 1-5, Figuring the Taxable Cost basis. You will have a cost basis in your You can transfer, tax free, assets (money orPart of Your IRA Distribution, in Publication 590. traditional IRA if you made any nondeductible property) from other retirement plans (includingcontributions. Your cost basis is the sum of theIf at least one of the above does not apply, traditional IRAs) to a traditional IRA. You cannondeductible contributions to your IRA minusfigure your modified AGI using Worksheet 17-1 make the following kinds of transfers.any withdrawals or distributions of nondeduct-in this chapter. • Transfers from one trustee to another.ible contributions. • Rollovers.How to figure your reduced IRA deduction. • Transfers incident to a divorce.You can figure your reduced IRA deduction for Inherited IRAseither Form 1040 or Form 1040A by using the
worksheets in chapter 1 of Publication 590. Transfers to Roth IRAs. Under certain condi-If you inherit a traditional IRA, you are called aAlso, the instructions for Form 1040 and Form tions, you can move assets from a traditionalbeneficiary. A beneficiary can be any person or1040A include similar worksheets that you may IRA or from a designated Roth account to a Rothentity the owner chooses to receive the benefitsbe able to use instead. IRA. See Can You Move Amounts Into a Rothof the IRA after he or she dies. Beneficiaries of a IRA under Roth IRAs, later.traditional IRA must include in their gross in-
come any taxable distributions they receive.Reporting Deductible
Contributions Trustee-to-Trustee TransferInherited from spouse. If you inherit a tradi-
tional IRA from your spouse, you generallyIf you file Form 1040, enter your IRA deduction A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA from
have the following three choices.on line 32 of that form. If you file Form 1040A, one trustee directly to another, either at your
enter your IRA deduction on line 17. You cannot request or at the trustee’s request, is not a rollo-1. Treat it as your own IRA by designatingdeduct IRA contributions on Form 1040EZ. ver. Because there is no distribution to you, theyourself as the account owner. transfer is tax free. Because it is not a rollover, it2. Treat it as your own by rolling it over into is not affected by the 1-year waiting period re-Nondeductible your traditional IRA, or to the extent it is quired between rollovers, discussed later undertaxable, into a:Contributions Rollover From One IRA Into Another . For infor-
a. Qualified employer plan, mation about direct transfers to IRAs from retire-
Although your deduction for IRA contributions b. Qualified employee annuity plan (sec- ment plans other than IRAs, see Publication
may be reduced or eliminated, contributions can 590.tion 403(a) plan),be made to your IRA up to the general limit or, if c. Tax-sheltered annuity plan (sectionit applies, the spousal IRA limit. The difference 403(b) plan), orbetween your total permitted contributions and Rolloversd. Deferred compensation plan of a stateyour IRA deduction, if any, is your nondeductible or local government (section 457 plan).contribution. Generally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution to
you of cash or other assets from one retirement3. Treat yourself as the beneficiary rather
Example. Mike is 28 years old and single. In plan that you contribute (roll over) to anotherthan treating the IRA as your own.
2006, he was covered by a retirement plan at retirement plan. The contribution to the second
work. His salary was $57,312. His modified AGI retirement plan is called a “rollover contribution.”Treating it as your own. You will be con-
was $65,000. Mike made a $4,000 IRA contribu- sidered to have chosen to treat the IRA as yourtion for 2006. Because he was covered by a Note. An amount rolled over tax free fromown if:retirement plan and his modified AGI was over one retirement plan to another is generally in-• Contributions (including rollover contribu-$60,000, he cannot deduct his $4,000 IRA con- cludible in income when it is distributed from thetions) are made to the inherited IRA, ortribution. He must designate this contribution as second plan.• You do not take the required minimum dis-a nondeductible contribution by reporting it on tribution for a year as a beneficiary of the Kinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA. YouForm 8606, as explained next. can roll over amounts from the following plansIRA.
into a traditional IRA:Form 8606. To designate contributions as You will only be considered to have chosen to • A traditional IRA,nondeductible, you must file Form 8606. treat the IRA as your own if: • An employer’s qualified retirement plan forYou do not have to designate a contribution • You are the sole beneficiary of the IRA, its employees,as nondeductible until you file your tax return. and • A deferred compensation plan of a state orWhen you file, you can even designate other- • You have an unlimited right to withdraw local government (section 457 plan), orwise deductible contributions as nondeductible. amounts from it. • A tax-sheltered annuity plan (sectionYou must file Form 8606 to report nonde-
403(b) plan).ductible contributions even if you do not have to However, if you receive a distribution from
file a tax return for the year. your deceased spouse’s IRA, you can roll that
Treatment of rollovers. You cannot deduct adistribution over into your own IRA within theFailure to report nondeductible contribu-
rollover contribution, but you must report the60-day time limit, as long as the distribution istions. If you do not report nondeductible con-
rollover distribution on your tax return as dis-not a required distribution, even if you are nottributions, all of the contributions to your
cussed later under Reporting rollovers fromthe sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse’straditional IRA will be treated as deductible. All
IRAs and under Reporting rollovers from em-IRA.distributions from your IRA will be taxed unless
ployer plans.you can show, with satisfactory evidence, that
nondeductible contributions were made. Inherited from someone other than spouse. Kinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA.
If you inherit a traditional IRA from anyone other You may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu-Penalty for overstatement. If you over- than your deceased spouse, you cannot treat tion from your traditional IRA into a qualifiedstate the amount of nondeductible contributions
the inherited IRA as your own. This means that plan. These plans include the federal Thrift Sav-on your Form 8606 for any tax year, you must
you cannot make any contributions to the IRA. It ings Fund (for federal employees), deferredpay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement,
also means you cannot roll over any amounts compensation plans of state or local govern-unless it was due to reasonable cause.
ments (section 457 plans), and tax-shelteredinto or out of the inherited IRA. However, youPenalty for failure to file Form 8606. You annuity plans (section 403(b) plans). The part ofcan make a trustee-to-trustee transfer as longwill have to pay a $50 penalty if you do not file a the distribution that you can roll over is the partas the IRA into which amounts are being movedrequired Form 8606, unless you can prove that that would otherwise be taxable (includible inis set up and maintained in the name of thethe failure was due to reasonable cause. your income). Qualified plans may, but are notdeceased IRA owner for the benefit of you as
required to, accept such rollovers.beneficiary.Tax on earnings on nondeductible contribu-
For more information, see the discussion oftions. As long as contributions are within the Time limit for making a rollover contribution.
inherited IRAs under Rollover From One IRAcontribution limits, none of the earnings or gains You generally must make the rollover contribu-
Into Another, later.on contributions (deductible or nondeductible) tion by the 60th day after the day you receive the
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 117

Page 120 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
distribution from your traditional IRA or your em- amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex- allocable to the excess, or of excess an-
ployer’s plan. cept for the part that is a return of nondeductible nual additions and any allocable gains.
contributions). The amount you keep may be The IRS may waive the 60-day requirement 5. A loan treated as a distribution because it
subject to the 10% additional tax on early distri-where the failure to do so would be against does not satisfy certain requirements ei-
butions, discussed later under What Acts Resultequity or good conscience, such as in the event ther when made or later (such as upon
in Penalties or Additional Taxes.of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond default), unless the participant’s accrued
your reasonable control. For more information, benefits are reduced (offset) to repay the
Required distributions. Amounts that mustsee Publication 590. loan.
be distributed during a particular year under the 6. Dividends on employer securities.Extension of rollover period. If an amount required distribution rules (discussed later) are 7. The cost of life insurance coverage.distributed to you from a traditional IRA or a not eligible for rollover treatment.qualified employer retirement plan is a frozen
deposit at any time during the 60-day period Inherited IRAs. If you inherit a traditional IRA Reporting rollovers from employer plans.allowed for a rollover, special rules extend the from your spouse, you generally can roll it over, Enter the total distribution (before income tax orrollover period. For more information, see Publi- or you can choose to make the inherited IRA other deductions were withheld) on Form 1040,cation 590. your own. See Treating it as your own, earlier. line 16a, or Form 1040A, line 12a. This amount
should be shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R. FromNot inherited from spouse. If you inherit aMore information. For more information on this amount, subtract any contributions (usuallytraditional IRA from someone other than yourrollovers, see Publication 590. shown in box 5 of Form 1099-R) that were tax-spouse, you cannot roll it over or allow it to
able to you when made. From that result, sub-receive a rollover contribution. You must with-
tract the amount that was rolled over eitherdraw the IRA assets within a certain period. ForRollover From One IRA Into directly or within 60 days of receiving the distri-more information, see Publication 590.Another bution. Enter the remaining amount, even if
zero, on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A,Reporting rollovers from IRAs. Report anyYou can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the line 12b. Also, enter ‘‘Rollover’’ next to Formrollover from one traditional IRA to the same orassets from one traditional IRA if you reinvest
1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.another traditional IRA on lines 15a and 15b,them within 60 days in the same or another
Form 1040, or lines 11a and 11b, Form 1040A.traditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, you
Enter the total amount of the distribution oncannot deduct the amount that you reinvest in an
Transfers Incident to DivorceForm 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a. IfIRA.
the total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferredWaiting period between rollovers. Gener- Form 1040A, line 11a, was rolled over, enter from your spouse or former spouse to you by aally, if you make a tax-free rollover of any part of zero on Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, divorce or separate maintenance decree or aa distribution from a traditional IRA, you cannot, line 11b. If the total distribution was not rolled written document related to such a decree, thewithin a 1-year period, make a tax-free rollover over, enter the taxable portion of the part that interest in the IRA, starting from the date of theof any later distribution from that same IRA. You was not rolled over on Form 1040, line 15b, or transfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer isalso cannot make a tax-free rollover of any Form 1040A, line 11b. Put “Rollover” next to tax free. For detailed information, see Publica-amount distributed, within the same 1-year pe- Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. tion 590.riod, from the IRA into which you made the See the forms instructions.
tax-free rollover. If you rolled over the distribution in 2007 or
The 1-year period begins on the date you from an IRA into a qualified plan (other than an Converting From Any Traditionalreceive the IRA distribution, not on the date you IRA), attach a statement explaining what you IRA to a Roth IRAroll it over into an IRA. did.
You can convert amounts from a traditionalExample. You have two traditional IRAs, IRA into a Roth IRA if, for the tax year youIRA-1 and IRA-2. You make a tax-free rollover of Rollover From Employer’s Plan make the withdrawal from the traditional IRA,a distribution from IRA-1 into a new traditional Into an IRA both of the following requirements are met.IRA (IRA-3). You cannot, within 1 year of the • Your modified AGI (explained later underdistribution from IRA-1, make a tax-free rollover You can roll over into a traditional IRA all or Roth IRAs) is not more than $100,000.of any distribution from either IRA-1 or IRA-3 into part of an eligible rollover distribution you re- • You are not a married individual filing aanother traditional IRA. ceive from your (or your deceased spouse’s): separate return.However, the rollover from IRA-1 into IRA-3 • Employer’s qualified pension,
does not prevent you from making a tax-free profit-sharing or stock bonus plan,
rollover from IRA-2 into any other traditional • Annuity plan, Note. If you did not live with your spouse atIRA. This is because you have not, within the • Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) any time during the year and you file a separatelast year, rolled over, tax free, any distribution plan), or return, your filing status, for this purpose, isfrom IRA-2 or made a tax-free rollover into
single.• Governmental deferred compensationIRA-2.
plan (section 457 plan).Exception. There is an exception to the Required distributions. You cannot convertrule that amounts rolled over tax free into an A qualified plan is one that meets the require- amounts that must be distributed from yourIRA cannot be rolled over tax free again within ments of the Internal Revenue Code. traditional IRA for a particular year (including thethe 1-year period beginning on the date of the calendar year in which you reach age 70 1/2)original distribution. The exception applies to a Eligible rollover distribution. Generally, an under the required distribution rules (discusseddistribution which meets all three of the follow- eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of later).ing requirements. all or part of the balance to your credit in a
qualified retirement plan except the following.1. It is made from a failed financial institution Inherited IRAs. If you inherited a traditional
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora- 1. A required minimum distribution (explained IRA from someone other than your spouse, you
tion (FDIC) as receiver for the institution. later under When Must You Withdraw IRA cannot convert it to a Roth IRA.
2. It was not initiated by either the custodial Assets? (Required Minimum Distributions).
institution or the depositor. 2. Hardship distributions. Income. You must include in your gross in-
3. It was made because: come distributions from a traditional IRA that3. Any of a series of substantially equal peri-
you would have had to include in income if youodic distributions paid at least once a yeara. The custodial institution is insolvent,
had not converted them into a Roth IRA. You doover:and
not include in gross income any part of a distri-b. The receiver is unable to find a buyer a. Your lifetime or life expectancy, bution from a traditional IRA that is a return offor the institution. b. The lifetimes or life expectancies of you your basis, as discussed later.and your beneficiary, or If you must include any amount in your grossc. A period of 10 years or more. income, you may have to increase your with-Partial rollovers. If you withdraw assets from
holding or make estimated tax payments. Seea traditional IRA, you can roll over part of the 4. Corrective distributions of excess contribu-
chapter 4.withdrawal tax free and keep the rest of it. The tions or excess deferrals, and any income
Page 118 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 121 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
violation. See What Acts Result in Penalties or 701/2 is referred to as the required beginningRecharacterizations
Additional Taxes, later. date.
You may be able to treat a contribution made to Distributions by the required beginning date.Contributions returned before the due dateone type of IRA as having been made to a You must receive at least a minimum amount forof return. If you made IRA contributions indifferent type of IRA. This is called recharacter- each year starting with the year you reach age2006, you can withdraw them tax free by theizing the contribution. More detailed information 701/2 (your 701/2 year). If you do not (or did not)due date of your return. If you have an exten-is in Publication 590. receive that minimum amount in your 701/2 year,sion of time to file your return, you can with-
then you must receive distributions for your 701/2draw them tax free by the extended due date.How to recharacterize a contribution. To year by April 1 of the next year.You can do this if, for each contribution yourecharacterize a contribution, you generally If an IRA owner dies after reaching age 701/2,withdraw, both of the following conditions ap-must have the contribution transferred from the but before April 1 of the next year, no minimumply.first IRA (the one to which it was made) to the distribution is required because death occurred• You did not take a deduction for the contri-second IRA in a trustee-to-trustee transfer. If before the required beginning date.bution.the transfer is made by the due date (including
extensions) for your tax return for the year dur- • You withdraw any interest or other income Even if you begin receiving distribu-
ing which the contribution was made, you can earned on the contribution. You can take tions before you attain age 70 1/2, you
elect to treat the contribution as having been into account any loss on the contribution must begin calculating and receivingCAUTION
!
originally made to the second IRA instead of to while it was in the IRA when calculating required minimum distributions by your required
the first IRA. If you recharacterize your contri- the amount that must be withdrawn. If beginning date.
bution, you must do all three of the following. there was a loss, the net income earned
Distributions after the required beginningon the contribution may be a negative• Include in the transfer any net income allo-
date. The required minimum distribution foramount.cable to the contribution. If there was a
any year after the year you turn 70 1/2 must beloss, the net income you must transfer
made by December 31 of that later year.may be a negative amount.
Note. To calculate the amount you must• Report the recharacterization on your tax Beneficiaries. If you are the beneficiary of awithdraw, see Publication 590.return for the year during which the contri- decedent’s traditional IRA, the requirements for
bution was made. distributions from that IRA generally depend onEarnings includible in income. You must
• Treat the contribution as having been whether the IRA owner died before or after theinclude in income any earnings on the contribu-
made to the second IRA on the date that it required beginning date for distributions.tions you withdraw. Include the earnings in in-
was actually made to the first IRA. come for the year in which you made the More information. For more information, in-contributions, not in the year in which you with- cluding how to figure your minimum requireddraw them.No deduction allowed. You cannot deduct distribution each year and how to figure your
the contribution to the first IRA. Any net income required distribution if you are a beneficiary of aGenerally, except for any part of a with-
you transfer with the recharacterized contribu- decedent’s IRA, see Publication 590.drawal that is a return of nondeductible
tion is treated as earned in the second IRA. contributions (basis), any withdrawal ofCAUTION
!
your contributions after the due date (or ex-Required notifications. To recharacterize Are Distributions Taxable?tended due date) of your return will be treated asa contribution, you must notify both the trustee a taxable distribution. Excess contributions canof the first IRA (the one to which the contribu- In general, distributions from a traditional IRAalso be recovered tax free as discussed undertion was actually made) and the trustee of the are taxable in the year you receive them.What Acts Result in Penalties or Additionalsecond IRA (the one to which the contribution Exceptions. Exceptions to distributions fromTaxes, later.is being moved) that you have elected to treat traditional IRAs being taxable in the year youthe contribution as having been made to the receive them are:Early distributions tax. The 10% additionalsecond IRA rather than the first. You must tax on distributions made before you reach age • Rollovers,make the notifications by the date of the trans- 591/2 does not apply to these tax-free withdraw- • Tax-free withdrawals of contributions, dis-fer. Only one notification is required if both als of your contributions. However, the distribu- cussed earlier, andIRAs are maintained by the same trustee. The tion of interest or other income must be reported • The return of nondeductible contributions,notification(s) must include all of the following on Form 5329 and, unless the distribution quali- discussed later under Distributions Fully orinformation. fies as an exception to the age 59 1/2 rule, it will Partly Taxable.• The type and amount of the contribution to be subject to this tax.the first IRA that is to be recharacterized.
• The date on which the contribution was Although a conversion of a traditional
When Must You Withdrawmade to the first IRA and the year for IRA is considered a rollover for Roth
which it was made. IRA purposes, it is not an exception toIRA Assets? (Required
CAUTION
!
• A direction to the trustee of the first IRA to the rule that distributions from a traditional IRAMinimum Distributions)transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer the are taxable in the year you receive them. Con-
amount of the contribution and any net version distributions are includible in your grossYou cannot keep funds in a traditional IRA indef-income (or loss) allocable to the contribu- income subject to this rule and the special rulesinitely. Eventually they must be distributed. Iftion to the trustee of the second IRA. for conversions explained in Publication 590.there are no distributions, or if the distributions• The name of the trustee of the first IRA are not large enough, you may have to pay a Qualified charitable distributions. A quali-and the name of the trustee of the second 50% excise tax on the amount not distributed as fied charitable distribution (QCD) is a nontax-IRA. required. See Excess Accumulations (Insuffi- able distribution made directly by the trustee of• Any additional information needed to cient Distributions), later. The requirements for your IRA (other than a SEP or SIMPLE IRA) tomake the transfer. distributing IRA funds differ depending on an organization eligible to receive tax-deductible
whether you are the IRA owner or the benefi- contributions. You must have been at least age
ciary of a decedent’s IRA.Reporting a recharacterization. If you elect 701/2 when the distribution was made. Your total
to recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as a QCDs for the year cannot be more thanRequired minimum distribution. Thecontribution to another IRA, you must report the $100,000. If you file a joint return, your spouseamount that must be distributed each year isrecharacterization on your tax return as directed can also have a QCD of up to $100,000. How-referred to as the required minimum distribution.by Form 8606 and its instructions. You must ever, the amount of the QCD is limited to the
treat the contribution as having been made to amount of the distribution that would otherwiseRequired distributions not eligible for rollo-
the second IRA. be included in income. If your IRA includes non-ver. Amounts that must be distributed (re-
deductible contributions, the distribution is firstquired minimum distributions) during a particular
considered to be paid out of otherwise taxableyear are not eligible for rollover treatment.When Can You Withdraw income. For more information see Publication
IRA owners. If you are the owner of a tradi-or Use IRA Assets? 590.
tional IRA, you must start receiving distributions
You cannot claim a charitable contribu-There are rules limiting use of your IRA assets from your IRA by April 1 of the year following the tion deduction for any QCD not in-and distributions from it. Violation of the rules year in which you reach age 70 1/2. April 1 of the cluded in your income.generally results in additional taxes in the year of year following the year in which you reach age
CAUTION
!
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 119

Page 122 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Ordinary income. Distributions from tradi- Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a). If Investment in Collectibles
tional IRAs that you include in income are taxed only part of the distribution is taxable, enter the
If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, theas ordinary income. total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or Form
amount invested is considered distributed to you1040A, line 11a, and the taxable part on FormNo special treatment. In figuring your tax, 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. You in the year invested. You may have to pay theyou cannot use the 10-year tax option or capital cannot report distributions on Form 1040EZ. 10% additional tax on early distributions, dis-gain treatment that applies to lump-sum distribu- cussed later.tions from qualified employer plans.
What Acts Result in
Collectibles. These include:Penalties or Additional • Artworks,Distributions Fully or Partly Taxes? • Rugs,Taxable
• Antiques,The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs forDistributions from your traditional IRA may be • Metals,retirement savings can be offset by additionalfully or partly taxable, depending on whether • Gems,taxes and penalties if you do not follow the rules.your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu- • Stamps,There are additions to the regular tax fortions.
using your IRA funds in prohibited transactions. • Coins,Fully taxable. If only deductible contributions There are also additional taxes for the following • Alcoholic beverages, andwere made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if activities. • Certain other tangible personal property.you have more than one), you have no basis in • Investing in collectibles.your IRA. Because you have no basis in your • Making excess contributions. Exception. Your IRA can invest in one,IRA, any distributions are fully taxable when • Taking early distributions. one-half, one-quarter, or one-tenth ounce U.S.received. See Reporting taxable distributions on • Allowing excess amounts to accumulate gold coins, or one-ounce silver coins minted byyour return, later. (failing to take required distributions). the Treasury Department. It can also invest in
Partly taxable. If you made nondeductible certain platinum coins and certain gold, silver,
There are penalties for overstating thecontributions to any of your traditional IRAs, you palladium, and platinum bullion.amount of nondeductible contributions and forhave a cost basis (investment in the contract)
failure to file a Form 8606, if required.equal to the amount of those contributions.
These nondeductible contributions are not taxed Excess Contributionswhen they are distributed to you. They are a
return of your investment in your IRA.
Prohibited Transactions Generally, an excess contribution is the
Only the part of the distribution that repre- amount contributed to your traditional IRA(s)Generally, a prohibited transaction is any im-sents nondeductible contributions (your cost ba- for the year that is more than the smaller of theproper use of your traditional IRA by you, yoursis) is tax free. If nondeductible contributions following amounts.beneficiary, or any disqualified person.have been made, distributions consist partly of • The maximum deductible amount for theDisqualified persons include your fiduciarynondeductible contributions (basis) and partly of year. For 2006, this is $4,000 ($5,000 ifand members of your family (spouse, ancestor,deductible contributions, earnings, and gains (if you are 50 or older).lineal descendent, and any spouse of a linealthere are any). Until all of your basis has been • Your taxable compensation for the year.descendent).distributed, each distribution is partly nontaxable
and partly taxable. The following are examples of prohibited
Tax on excess contributions. In general, iftransactions with a traditional IRA.Form 8606. You must complete Form 8606 the excess contributions for a year are not with-• Borrowing money from it.and attach it to your return if you receive a drawn by the date your return for the year is due• Selling property to it.distribution from a traditional IRA and have ever (including extensions), you are subject to a 6%• Receiving unreasonable compensation formade nondeductible contributions to any of your tax. You must pay the 6% tax each year onmanaging it.traditional IRAs. Using the form, you will figure excess amounts that remain in your traditional• Using it as security for a loan.the nontaxable distributions for 2006 and your IRA at the end of your tax year. The tax cannottotal IRA basis for 2006 and earlier years. • Buying property for personal use (present be more than 6% of the value of your IRA as ofor future) with IRA funds. the end of your tax year.Note. If you are required to file Form 8606,
but you are not required to file an income tax Effect on an IRA account. Generally, if you or Excess contributions withdrawn by due datereturn, you still must file Form 8606. Send it to your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans- of return. You will not have to pay the 6% tax ifthe IRS at the time and place you would other- action in connection with your traditional IRAwise file an income tax return. you withdraw an excess contribution made dur-account at any time during the year, the account ing a tax year and you also withdraw interest orstops being an IRA as of the first day of thatDistributions reported on Form 1099-R. If other income earned on the excess contribution.year.you receive a distribution from your traditional You must complete your withdrawal by the dateIRA, you will receive Form 1099-R, Distributions your tax return for that year is due, includingEffect on you or your beneficiary. If yourFrom Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or extensions.account stops being an IRA because you or yourProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
beneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction,tracts, etc., or a similar statement. IRA distribu- How to treat withdrawn contributions.
the account is treated as distributing all its as-tions are shown in boxes 1 and 2a of Form Do not include in your gross income an excess
sets to you at their fair market values on the first1099-R. A number or letter code in box 7 tells contribution that you withdraw from your tradi-
day of the year. If the total of those values isyou what type of distribution you received from tional IRA before your tax return is due if both
more than your basis in the IRA, you will have ayour IRA. the following conditions are met.
taxable gain that is includible in your income. For • No deduction was allowed for the excessWithholding. Federal income tax is withheld information on figuring your gain and reporting it contribution.from distributions from traditional IRAs unless in income, see Are Distributions Taxable,  ear- • You withdraw the interest or other incomeyou choose not to have tax withheld. See chap- lier. The distribution may be subject to additional earned on the excess contribution.ter 4. taxes or penalties.
You can take into account any loss on the contri-IRA distributions delivered outside the Taxes on prohibited transactions. If some- bution while it was in the IRA when calculatingUnited States. In general, if you are a U.S. one other than the owner or beneficiary of a the amount that must be withdrawn. If there wascitizen or resident alien and your home address traditional IRA engages in a prohibited transac- a loss, the net income you must withdraw mayis outside the United States or its possessions, tion, that person may be liable for certain taxes. be a negative amount.you cannot choose exemption from withholding In general, there is a 15% tax on the amount ofon distributions from your traditional IRA. How to treat withdrawn interest or otherthe prohibited transaction and a 100% additional
income. You must include in your gross in-Reporting taxable distributions on your re- tax if the transaction is not corrected.
come the interest or other income that wasturn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ-
earned on the excess contribution. Report it oning early distributions on Form 1040, line 15b, or More information. For more information on
your return for the year in which the excessForm 1040A, line 11b (no entry is required on prohibited transactions, see Publication 590.
Page 120 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 123 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
contribution was made. Your withdrawal of inter- distribution before you are age 59 1/2, you may Exemption from tax. If you are unable to take
est or other income may be subject to an addi- not have to pay the 10% additional tax if you required distributions because you h ave a tradi-
tional 10% tax on early distributions, discussed are in one of the following situations. tional IRA invested in a contract issued  by an
later. insurance company that is in state insurer delin-• You have unreimbursed medical expenses
quency proceedings, the 50% excise tax doesthat are more than 7.5% of your adjustedExcess contributions withdrawn after due not apply if the conditions and requirements ofgross income.date of return. In general, you must include Revenue Procedure 92-10 are satisfied.• The distributions are not more than theall distributions (withdrawals) from your tradi- cost of your medical insurance.tional IRA in your gross income. However, if More information. For more information on
• You are disabled.the following conditions are met, you can with- excess accumulations, see Publication 590.
• You are the beneficiary of a deceased IRAdraw excess contributions from your IRA and
owner.not include the amount withdrawn in your gross
income. • You are receiving distributions in the form Reporting Additional Taxes
of an annuity.• Total contributions (other than rollover
Generally, you must use Form 5329 to report thecontributions) for 2006 to your IRA were • The distributions are not more than your tax on excess contributions, early distributions,not more than $4,000 ($5,000 if you are qualified higher education expenses. and excess accumulations. If you must file Form50 or older). • You use the distributions to buy, build, or 5329, you cannot use Form 1040A or Form• You did not take a deduction for the ex- rebuild a first home. 1040EZ.cess contribution being withdrawn. • The distribution is due to an IRS levy of
the qualified plan. Filing a tax return. If you must file an individ-The withdrawal can take place at any time, even ual income tax return, complete Form 5329 and• The distribution is a qualified reservist dis-after the due date, including extensions, for filing attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the totaltribution.your tax return for the year. amount of additional taxes due on Form 1040,Most of these exceptions are explained in Publi- line 60.Excess contribution deducted in an earlier cation 590.year. If you deducted an excess contribution in Not filing a tax return. If you do not have toan earlier year for which the total contributions file a tax return but do have to pay one of theNote. Distributions that are timely and prop-were not more than the maximum deductible additional taxes mentioned earlier, file the com-erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are notamount for that year ($2,000 for 2001 and earlier pleted Form 5329 with the IRS at the time andsubject to either regular income tax or the 10%years, $3,000 for 2002 through 2004 ($3,500 for place you would have filed your Form 1040. Beadditional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess2002 through 2004, and $4,500 for 2005 if you sure to include your address on page 1 and yourcontributions after the due date of your returnwere 50 or older)), you can still remove the signature and date on page 2. Enclose, but doare also tax free and therefore not subject to theexcess from your traditional IRA and not include not attach, a check or money order payable to10% additional tax. (See Excess contributionsit in your gross income. To do this, file Form the United States Treasury for the tax you owe,withdrawn after due date of return, earlier.) This1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax as shown on Form 5329. Enter your social se-also applies to transfers incident to divorce, asReturn, for that year and do not deduct the curity number and “2006 Form 5329” on yourdiscussed earlier.excess contribution on the amended return. check or money order.Generally, you can file an amended return within Receivership distributions. Early distribu- Form 5329 not required. You do not have to3 years after you filed your return, or 2 years tions (with or without your consent) from savings use Form 5329 if either of the following situa-from the time the tax was paid, whichever is institutions placed in receivership are subject to tions exist.later. this tax unless one of the exceptions listed ear- • Distribution code 1 (early distribution) islier applies. This is true even if the distribution isExcess due to incorrect rollover information. correctly shown in box 7 of all Formsfrom a receiver that is a state agency.If an excess contribution in your traditional IRA is 1099-R. If you do not owe any other addi-the result of a rollover and the excess occurred tional tax on a distribution, multiply the tax-Additional 10% tax. The additional tax onbecause the information the plan was required able part of the early distribution by 10%early distributions is 10% of the amount of theto give you was incorrect, you can withdraw the and enter the result on Form 1040, line 60.early distribution that you must include in yourexcess contribution. The limits mentioned above Put “No” to the left of line 60 to indicategross income. This tax is in addition to anyare increased by the amount of the excess that that you do not have to file Form 5329.regular income tax resulting from including theis due to the incorrect information. You will have However, if you owe this tax and also owedistribution in income.to amend your return for the year in which the any other additional tax on a distribution,excess occurred to correct the reporting of the Nondeductible contributions. The tax on do not enter this 10% additional tax di-rollover amounts in that year. Do not include in early distributions does not apply to the part of a rectly on your Form 1040. You must fileyour gross income the part of the excess contri- distribution that represents a return of your non- Form 5329 to report your additional taxes. bution caused by the incorrect information. deductible contributions (basis). • If you rolled over part or all of a distribution
from a qualified retirement plan, the partMore information. For more information on rolled over is not subject to the tax onearly distributions, see Publication 590.Early Distributions early distributions.
You must include early distributions of taxable
amounts from your traditional IRA in your gross Excess Accumulations
income. Early distributions are also subject to an (Insufficient Distributions)additional 10% tax. See the discussion of Form Roth IRAs5329 under Reporting Additional Taxes, later, to You cannot keep amounts in your traditional IRA
figure and report the tax. indefinitely. Generally, you must begin receiving Regardless of your age, you may be able todistributions by April 1 of the year following theEarly distributions defined. Early distribu- establish and make nondeductible contributionsyear in which you reach age 701/2. The requiredtions generally are amounts distributed from to a retirement plan called a Roth IRA.minimum distribution for any year after the yearyour traditional IRA account or annuity before in which you reach age 70 1/2 must be made by Contributions not reported. You do not re-you are age 591/2. December 31 of that later year. port Roth IRA contributions on your return.
Age 591/2 rule. Generally, if you are under age
Tax on excess. If distributions are less than591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on the What Is a Roth IRA?the required minimum distribution for the year,distribution of any assets (money or other prop-
you may have to pay a 50% excise tax for thaterty) from your traditional IRA. Distributions A Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that,year on the amount not distributed as required.before you are age 591/2 are called early distribu- except as explained in this chapter, is subject totions. Request to excuse the tax. If the excess ac- the rules that apply to a traditional IRA (definedThe 10% additional tax applies to the part of cumulation is due to reasonable error, and you earlier). It can be either an account or an annu-the distribution that you have to include in gross have taken, or are taking, steps to remedy the ity. Individual retirement accounts and annuitiesincome. It is in addition to any regular income tax insufficient distribution, you can request that the are described in Publication 590.on that amount. tax be excused. If you believe you qualify for this To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuity
Exceptions. There are several exceptions relief, file Form 5329, and attach a letter of must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is set
to the age 591/2 rule. Even if you receive a explanation. up. A deemed IRA can be a Roth IRA, but
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 121

Page 124 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
neither a SEP IRA nor a SIMPLE IRA can be e. Exclusion of qualified savings bond in- Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made
designated as a Roth IRA. terest shown on Form 8815, and only to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit gener-
Unlike a traditional IRA, you cannot deduct ally is the lesser of the following amounts.f. Exclusion of employer-provided adop-
contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy tion benefits shown on Form 8839. • $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older in
the requirements, qualified distributions (dis- 2006).g. Domestic production activities deduc-
cussed later) are tax free. Contributions can be tion from Form 1040, line 35. • Your taxable compensation.made to your Roth IRA after you reach age 701/2
However, if your modified AGI is above a certainand you can leave amounts in your Roth IRA as You can use Worksheet 17-2 to figure your amount, your contribution limit may be reduced,long as you live. modified AGI. as explained later under Contribution limit re-
duced.When Can a Roth IRA Be How Much Can Be Contributed? Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs. If contribu-Set Up?
tions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditionalThe contribution limit for Roth IRAs generally
You can set up a Roth IRA at any time. How- IRAs established for your benefit, your contribu-depends on whether contributions are made
ever, the time for making contributions for any tion limit for Roth IRAs generally is the same asonly to Roth IRAs or to both traditional IRAs and
year is limited. See When Can You Make Contri- Roth IRAs. your limit would be if contributions were made
butions, later under Can You Contribute to a
Roth IRA?
Worksheet 17-2. Modified Adjusted
Gross Income for Roth IRACan You Contribute to a
Purposes Keep for Your RecordsRoth IRA?
Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for Roth IRA purposes.Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA if
you have taxable compensation (defined later)
1. Enter your adjusted gross income from Form 1040, line 38, orand your modified AGI (defined later) is less
Form 1040A, line 22 ............................... 1.than:
• $160,000 for married filing jointly or quali- 2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRAfying widow(er), (other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA or a minimum required• $10,000 for married filing separately and distribution from an IRA (if figuring MAGI for conversion purposes) 2.you lived with your spouse at any time
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........................... 3.during the year, or
• $110,000 for single, head of household, or 4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Form 1040, line 32, ormarried filing separately and you did not Form 1040A, line 17 ............................... 4.live with your spouse at any time during
the year. 5. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line 33,
or Form 1040A, line 18 ............................. 5.
You may be eligible to claim a credit for 6. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Formcontributions to your Roth IRA. For 1040, line 35 .................................... 6.more information, see chapter 37.
TIP
7. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from
Form 2555, line 45, or Form 2555-EZ, line 18 .............. 7.Is there an age limit for contributions? Con-
tributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard- 8. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 . . . 8.
less of your age.
9. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line
Can you contribute to a Roth IRA for your 1 4........................................... 9.
spouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA for
10. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits fromyour spouse provided the contributions satisfy
Form 8839, line 30 ................................ 10.the spousal IRA limit (discussed in How Much
Can Be Contributed  under Traditional IRAs ), 11. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 10 .................. 11.you file jointly, and your modified AGI is less
than $160,000. 12. Enter:
• $160,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)Compensation. Compensation includes • $10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with yourwages, salaries, tips, professional fees, bo- spouse at any time during the yearnuses, and other amounts received for providing • $110,000 for all others 12.personal services. It also includes commissions,
self-employment income, nontaxable combat Is the amount on line 11 more than the amount on line 12?
pay, and taxable alimony and separate mainte- If yes, then  see the Note below.
nance payments. If no, then  the amount on line 11 is your modified AGI for Roth
IRA purposes.Modified AGI. Your modified AGI for Roth
IRA purposes is your adjusted gross income Note. If the amount on line 11 is more than the amount on line 12 and you have other(AGI) as shown on your return modified as income or loss items, such as social security income or passive activity losses, that arefollows. subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the purpose of
1. Subtract the following: figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. When figuring your modified AGI for
conversion purposes, refigure your AGI without taking into account any income froma. Conversion income. This is any income
conversions or minimum required distributions from IRAs. (If you receive social securityresulting from the conversion of an IRA
benefits, use Worksheet 1 in Appendix B of Publication 590 to refigure your AGI.) Then go(other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA.
to list item (2) under Modified AGI or line 3 above in Worksheet 17-2 to refigure yourb. Minimum required distributions from modified AGI. If you do not have other income or loss items subject to AGI-basedIRAs (for conversions only). phaseouts, your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is the amount on line 11.
2. Add the following deductions and exclu-
sions: Caution. At the time this publication went to print, Congress was considering legislation that
a. Traditional IRA deduction, would extend the deduction for tuition and fees that expired at the end of 2005. To find out if this
b. Student loan interest deduction, legislation was extended and for more details, go to www.irs.gov, click on More Forms and
c. Foreign earned income exclusion, Publications, then on What’s Hot in forms and publications, or see Publication 553. If the deduction is
d. Foreign housing exclusion or deduction, extended and you claim the deduction, include the amount you deducted in the total on line 11.
Page 122 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 125 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
only to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all contri- Table 17-3. Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
butions (other than employer contributions
This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by theunder a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to
amount of your modified adjusted gross income (modified AGI).all IRAs other than Roth IRAs.
This means that your contribution limit is
the lesser of the following amounts. IF you have taxable
compensation and your AND your modified• $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or older in
filing status is... AGI is... THEN...2006) minus all contributions (other than
employer contributions under a SEP or less than $150,000 you can contribute up to $4,000married filing jointly, orSIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAs ($5,000 if you are 50 or older inqualifying widow(er)other than Roth IRAs. 2006).• Your taxable compensation minus all con-
at least $150,000 the amount you can contribute istributions (other than employer contribu-
but less than $160,000 reduced as explained undertions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan)
Contribution limit reduced infor the year to all IRAs other than Roth
Publication 590.IRAs.
However, if your modified AGI is above a certain $160,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced,
zero (-0-) you can contribute up to $4,000married filing separatelyas explained next under Contribution limit re-
($5,000 if you are 50 or older inand you lived with yourduced.
2006).spouse at any time during
the yearContribution limit reduced. If your modified more than zero (-0-) the amount you can contribute isAGI is above a certain amount, your contribution but less than $10,000 reduced as explained underlimit is gradually reduced. Use Table 17-3 to Contribution limit reduced indetermine if this reduction applies to you. Publication 590.
Figuring the reduction. If the amount you $10,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.can contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, see
Publication 590 for how to figure the reduction. less than $95,000 you can contribute up to $4,000single,
($5,000 if you are 50 or older inhead of household, or
2006).married filing separatelyWhen Can You Make and you did not live with at least $95,000 the amount you can contribute isContributions? your spouse at any time but less than $110,000 reduced as explained underduring the yearYou can make contributions to a Roth IRA for a Contribution limit reduced in
year at any time during the year or by the due Publication 590.
date of your return for that year (not including
$110,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.extensions).
You can make contributions for 2006
by the due date (not including exten- Applying excess contributions. If contribu- transfer an amount from the traditional IRAsions) for filing your 2006 tax return.
TIP
tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more than to the trustee of the Roth IRA.
the limit, you can apply the excess contribution • Same trustee transfer. If the trustee ofin one year to a later year if the contributions for the traditional IRA also maintains the Roththat later year are less than the maximum al-What If You Contribute Too Much? IRA, you can direct the trustee to transferlowed for that year. an amount from the traditional IRA to theA 6% excise tax applies to any excess contribu- Roth IRA.tion to a Roth IRA. Can You Move Amounts
Same trustee. Conversions made with theInto a Roth IRA?Excess contributions. These are the contri- same trustee can be made by redesignating the
butions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equal traditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open-You may be able to convert amounts from eitherthe total of: ing a new account or issuing a new contract.a traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth
IRA. You may be able to recharacterize contri-1. Amounts contributed for the tax year to Converting from a SIMPLE IRA. Generally,butions made to one IRA as having been madeyour Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop- you can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRAdirectly to a different IRA. You can roll amountserly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRA to a Roth IRA under the same rules explainedover from a designated Roth account or fromor properly converted from a traditional earlier under Converting From Any Traditionalone Roth IRA to another Roth IRA.IRA, as described later) that are more than IRA to a Roth IRA.
your contribution limit for the year, plus  However, you cannot convert any amount
distributed from the SIMPLE IRA during the2. Any excess contributions for the preceding Conversions 2-year period beginning on the date you firstyear, reduced by the total of: participated in any SIMPLE IRA plan maintainedYou can convert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. by your employer.a. Any distributions out of your Roth IRAs The conversion is treated as a rollover, regard-
for the year, plus less of the conversion method used. Most of the More information. For more detailed informa-rules for rollovers, described earlier under Rollo-b. Your contribution limit for the year mi- tion on conversions, see Publication 590.ver From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi-nus your contributions to all your IRAs
tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers. However,for the year. the 1-year waiting period does not apply. Failed Conversions
Withdrawal of excess contributions. For Conversion methods. You can convert If, when you converted amounts from a tradi-purposes of determining excess contributions, amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA in tional IRA into a Roth IRA, you expected to haveany contribution that is withdrawn on or before any of the following ways. modified AGI of less than $100,000 and a filingthe due date (including extensions) for filing your status other than married filing separately, but• Rollover. You can receive a distributiontax return for the year is treated as an amount your expectations did not come true, you havefrom a traditional IRA and roll it over (con-not contributed. This treatment applies only if made a failed conversion.tribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 daysany earnings on the contributions are also with- after the distribution.drawn. The earnings are considered to have Results of failed conversions. If the con-
been earned and received in the year the excess • Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can di- verted amount (contribution) is not recharacter-
contribution was made. rect the trustee of the traditional IRA to ized (explained earlier), the contribution will be
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 123

Page 126 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
treated as a regular contribution to the Roth IRA 5-year period applies to each conversion. See the rules for payments under inst ruments exe-
and subject to the following tax consequences. Ordering rules for distributions,  later, to deter- cuted after 1984. If you need the rules for pay-
mine the amount, if any, of the distribution that is ments under pre-1985 instruments, get and• A 6% excise tax per year will apply to any attributable to the part of the conversion contri- keep a copy of the 2004 version of Publicationexcess contribution not withdrawn from bution that you had to include in income. 504. That was the last year the information onthe Roth IRA. pre-1985 instruments was included in Publica-
Additional tax on other early distributions.• The distributions from the traditional IRA tion 504.
Unless an exception applies, the taxable part ofmust be included in your gross income. Use Table 18-1 in this chapter as a guide to
other distributions from your Roth IRA(s) that determine whether certain payments are con-• The 10% additional tax on early distribu- are not qualified distributions is subject to the sidered alimony.tions may apply to any distribution. 10% additional tax on early distributions. See Definitions. The following definitions applyPublication 590 for more information.How to avoid. You must move the amount throughout this chapter.
converted (including all earnings from the date Ordering rules for distributions. If you re- Spouse or former spouse. Unless other-of conversion) into a traditional IRA by the due ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that is wise stated, the term “spouse” includes formerdate (including extensions) for your tax return for not a qualified distribution, part of it may be spouse.the year during which you made the conversion taxable. There is a set order in which contribu-to the Roth IRA. You do not have to include this Divorce or separation instrument. Thetions (including conversion contributions) anddistribution (withdrawal) in income. See term “divorce or separation instrument” means: earnings are considered to be distributed fromRecharacterizations, earlier, for more informa- your Roth IRA. Regular contributions are distrib- 1. A decree of divorce or separate mainte-tion. uted first. See Publication 590 for more informa- nance or a written instrument incident totion. that decree,
Rollover From a Roth IRA Must you withdraw or use Roth IRA assets? 2. A written separation agreement, or
You are not required to take distributions fromYou can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the 3. A decree or any type of court order requir-your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri-assets from one Roth IRA if you contribute them ing a spouse to make payments for thebution rules that apply to traditional IRAs do notwithin 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of the support or maintenance of the otherapply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive.rules for rollovers, explained earlier under Rollo- spouse. This includes a temporary decree,However, after the death of a Roth IRA owner,ver From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi- an interlocutory (not final) decree, and acertain of the minimum distribution rules thattional IRAs, apply to these rollovers. decree of alimony pendente lite (whileapply to traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs. awaiting action on the final decree or
agreement).More information. For more detailed informa-Are Distributions Taxable?
tion on Roth IRAs, see Publication 590.
You do not include in your gross income quali- Useful Itemsfied distributions or distributions that are a return You may want to see:of your regular contributions from your Roth
IRA(s). You also do not include distributions Publicationfrom your Roth IRA that you roll over tax free into
❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individualsanother Roth IRA. You may have to include part
of other distributions in your income. See Order- 18.
ing rules for distributions, later.
Rollover from designated Roth account. A
rollover from a designated Roth account can General RulesAlimony
only be made to another designated Roth ac-
count or to a Roth IRA. The following rules apply to alimony regardless
of when the divorce or separation instrumentWhat are qualified distributions? A qualified Introduction was executed.distribution is any payment or distribution from This chapter discusses the rules that apply if youyour Roth IRA that meets the following require- Payments not alimony. Not all paymentspay or receive alimony. It covers the followingments. under a divorce or separation instrument aretopics. alimony. Alimony does not include:1. It is made after the 5-year period beginning • What payments are alimony.with the first taxable year for which a con- 1. Child support, 
• What payments are not alimony, such astribution was made to a Roth IRA set up 2. Noncash property settlements,child support.for your benefit, and
3. Payments that are your spouse’s part of• How to deduct alimony you paid.2. The payment or distribution is: community income as explained under
• How to report alimony you received as in- Community Property in Publication 504,a. Made on or after the date you reach come.age 591/2, 4. Payments to keep up the payer’s property,
• Whether you must recapture the tax bene- orb. Made because you are disabled, fits of alimony. Recapture means adding 5. Use of property.c. Made to a beneficiary or to your estate back in your income all or part of a deduc-
after your death, or tion you took in a prior year.
Payments to a third party. Cash payments,d. To pay up to $10,000 (lifetime limit) of checks, or money orders, to a third party onAlimony is a payment to or for a spouse orcertain qualified first-time homebuyer behalf of your spouse under the terms of yourformer spouse under a divorce or separationamounts. See Publication 590 for more divorce or separation instrument can be ali-instrument. It does not include voluntary pay-information. mony, if they otherwise qualify. These includements that are not made under a divorce or
payments for your spouse’s medical expenses,separation instrument.
housing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,Additional tax on distributions of conversion Alimony is deductible by the payer and must
etc. The payments are treated as received bycontributions within 5-year period. If, within be included in the spouse’s or former spouse’s
your spouse and then paid to the third party.the 5-year period starting with the first day of income. Although this chapter is generally writ-
your tax year in which you convert an amount ten for the payer of the alimony, the recipient can Life insurance premiums. Alimony includesfrom a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA, you take a use the information to determine whether an premiums you must pay under your divorce ordistribution from a Roth IRA, you may have to amount received is alimony. separation instrument for insurance on your lifepay the 10% additional tax on early distributions. To be alimony, a payment must meet certain to the extent your spouse owns the policy.You generally must pay the 10% additional tax requirements. Different requirements generally
on any amount attributable to the part of the apply to payments under instruments executed Payments for jointly-owned home. If your
amount converted (the conversion contribution) after 1984 and to payments under instruments divorce or separation instrument stat es that you
that you had to include in income. A separate executed before 1985. This chapter discusses must pay expenses for a home owned by you
Page 124 Chapter 18 Alimony

Page 127 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. The instrument does not designate theTable 18-1. Alimony Requirements (Instruments Executed After 1984)
payment as not alimony.
Payments ARE alimony if all of the Payments are NOT alimony if any of the 3. The spouses are not members of the same
following are true: following are true: household at the time the payments are
made. This requirement applies only if thePayments are required by a divorce or Payments are not required by a divorce or spouses are legally separated under a de-separation instrument. separation instrument. cree of divorce or separate maintenance.
Payer and recipient spouse do not file a joint Payer and recipient spouse file a joint return 4. There is no liability to make any paymentreturn with each other. with each other. (in cash or property) after the death of the
recipient spouse.Payment is in cash (including checks or Payment is:
money orders). 5. The payment is not treated as child sup-• Not in cash,
port. • A noncash property settlement,
• Spouse’s part of community income, or Each of these requirements is discussed next.
• To keep up the payer’s property.
Cash payment requirement. Only cash pay-Payment is not designated in the instrument Payment is designated in the instrument as ments, including checks and money orders,as not alimony. not alimony. qualify as alimony. The following do not qualify
as alimony.Spouses legally separated under a decree of Spouses legally separated under a decree of
divorce or separate maintenance are not divorce or separate maintenance are • Transfers of services or property (includ-
members of the same household. members of the same household. ing a debt instrument of a third party or an
annuity contract).Payments are not required after death of the Payments are required after death of the
• Execution of a debt instrument by therecipient spouse. recipient spouse.
payor.Payment is not treated as child support. Payment is treated as child support.
• The use of property.
These payments are deductible by the payer These payments are neither deductible by the Payments to a third party. Cash paymentsand includible in income by the recipient. payer nor includible in income by the recipient. to a third party under the terms of your divorce or
separation instrument can qualify as cash pay-
ments to your spouse. See Payments to a thirdand your spouse or former spouse, some of your for instruments executed after 1984 apply to party under General Rules, earlier.instruments executed before 1985.payments may be alimony. Also, cash payments made to a third party at
Mortgage payments. If you must pay all the the written request of your spouse may qualify1. A divorce or separation instrument exe-
as alimony if all the following requirements aremortgage payments (principal and interest) on a cuted before 1985 and then modified after
met.jointly-owned home, and they otherwise qualify 1984 to specify that the after-1984 rules
as alimony, you can deduct one-half of the total will apply. 1. The payments are in lieu of payments ofpayments as alimony. If you itemize deductions 2. A temporary divorce or separation instru- alimony directly to your spouse.and the home is a qualified home, you can claim ment executed before 1985 and incorpo-half of the interest in figuring your deductible 2. The written request states that bothrated into, or adopted by, a final decreeinterest. Your spouse must report one-half of the spouses intend the payments to be treatedexecuted after 1984 that:payments as alimony received. If your spouse as alimony.
itemizes deductions and the home is a qualified a. Changes the amount or period of pay- 3. You receive the written request from yourhome, he or she can claim one-half of the inter- ment, or spouse before you file your return for theest on the mortgage in figuring deductible inter- year you made the payments.b. Adds or deletes any contingency orest. condition.
Taxes and insurance. If you must pay all Payments designated as not alimony. Youthe real estate taxes or insurance on a home For the rules for alimony payments under and your spouse can designate that otherwiseheld as tenants in common, you can deduct pre-1985 instruments not meeting these excep- qualifying payments are not alimony. You do thisone-half of these payments as alimony. Your tions, see the 2004 revision of Publication 504 by including a provision in your divorce or sepa-spouse must report one-half of these payments on the IRS website at www.irs.gov. ration instrument that states the payments areas alimony received. If you and your spouse not deductible as alimony by you and are ex-
itemize deductions, you can each claim one-half Example 1. In November 1984, you and cludable from your spouse’s income. For this
of the real estate taxes and none of the home your former spouse executed a written separa- purpose, any instrument (written statement)
tion agreement. In February 1985, a decree ofinsurance. signed by both of you that makes this designa-
divorce was substituted for the written separa- If your home is held as tenants by the en- tion and that refers to a previous written separa-
tion agreement. The decree of divorce did nottirety or joint tenants, none of your payments for tion agreement is treated as a written separation
change the terms for the alimony you pay yourtaxes or insurance are alimony. But if you item- agreement. If you are subject to temporary sup-
former spouse. The decree of divorce is treated port orders, the designation must be made in theize deductions, you can claim all of the real
as executed before 1985. Alimony payments original or a later temporary support order.estate taxes and none of the home insurance. under this decree are not subject to the rules for Your spouse can exclude the payments fromOther payments to a third party. If you payments under instruments executed after
income only if he or she attaches a copy of themade other third-party payments, see Publica- 1984. instrument designating them as not alimony totion 504 to see whether any part of the payments his or her return. The copy must be attachedqualifies as alimony. Example 2. Assume the same facts as in each year the designation applies.Example 1  except that the decree of divorce
changed the amount of the alimony. In this ex- Spouses cannot be members of the sameample, the decree of divorce is not treated as household.  Payments to your spouse whileexecuted before 1985. The alimony paymentsInstruments you are members of the same household are notare subject to the rules for payments under in- alimony if you are legally separated under astruments executed after 1984.Executed After 1984 decree of divorce or separate maintenance. A
home you formerly shared is considered oneAlimony requirements. A payment to or for aThe following rules for alimony apply to pay- household, even if you physically separate your-spouse under a divorce or separation instrumentments under divorce or separation instruments selves in the home.is alimony if the spouses do not file a joint returnexecuted after 1984. You are not treated as members of the samewith each other and all the following require-
household if one of you is preparing to leave thements are met. Exception for instruments executed before household and does leave no later than 1 month
1985. There are two situations where the rules 1. The payment is in cash. after the date of the payment.
Chapter 18 Alimony Page 125

Page 128 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception. If you are not legally separated same if the payment required at death were to
under a decree of divorce or separate mainte- be discounted by an appropriate interest factor How To Deductnance, a payment under a written separation to account for the prepayment.
agreement, support decree, or other court order Child support. A payment that is specifically
Alimony Paidmay qualify as alimony even if you are members designated as child support or treated as specifi-of the same household when the payment is cally designated as child support under your You can deduct alimony you paid, whether ormade. divorce or separation instrument is not alimony. not you itemize deductions on your return. You
The amount of child support may vary over time. must file Form 1040. You cannot use FormLiability for payments after death of recipient Child support payments are not deductible by 1040A or Form 1040EZ.spouse. If any part of payments you make the payer and are not taxable to the recipient. Enter the amount of alimony you paid onmust continue to be made for any period after Form 1040, line 31a. In the space provided onSpecifically designated as child support.your spouse’s death, that part of your payments line 31b, enter your spouse’s social securityA payment will be treated as specifically desig-is not alimony, whether made before or after the number.nated as child support to the extent that thedeath. If all of the payments would continue,
 If you paid alimony to more than one person,payment is reduced either:then none of the payments made before or after
enter the social security number of one of thethe death are alimony. 1. On the happening of a contingency relating recipients. Show the social security number andThe divorce or separation instrument does to your child, or amount paid to each other recipient on an at-not have to expressly state that the payments tached statement. Enter your total payments oncease upon the death of your spouse if, for 2. At a time that can be clearly associated line 31a.example, the liability for continued payments with the contingency.
would end under state law. If you do not provide your spouse’sA payment may be treated as specifically desig- social security number, you may havenated as child support even if other separateExample. You must pay your former to pay a $50 penalty and your deduc-CAUTION
!
payments are specifically designated as childspouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10 years. tion may be disallowed.support.Your divorce decree states that the payments
will end upon your former spouse’s death. You Contingency relating to your child. A
must also pay your former spouse or your former contingency relates to your child if it depends on
spouse’s estate $20,000 in cash each year for any event relating to that child. It does not matter
How To Report10 years. The death of your spouse would not whether the event is certain or likely to occur.
terminate these payments under state law. Events relating to your child include the child’s:
Alimony ReceivedThe $10,000 annual payments may qualify • Becoming employed,as alimony. The $20,000 annual payments that
Report alimony you received as income on Form• Dying,do not end upon your former spouse’s death,
1040, line 11. You cannot use Form 1040A orthey are not alimony. • Leaving the household, Form 1040EZ.Substitute payments. If you must make • Leaving school, You must give the person who paid theany payments in cash or property after your
alimony your social security number. If• Marrying, orspouse’s death as a substitute for continuing
you do not, you may have to pay a $50otherwise qualifying payments, the otherwise
CAUTION
!
• Reaching a specified age or income level. penalty.qualifying payments are not alimony. To the
extent that your payments begin, accelerate, or Clearly associated with a contingency.increase because of the death of your spouse, Payments are presumed to be reduced at a timeotherwise qualifying payments you made may clearly associated with the happening of a con-be treated as payments that were not alimony. tingency relating to your child only in the follow- Recapture RuleWhether or not such payments will be treated as ing situations.not alimony depends on all the facts and circum- If your alimony payments decrease or terminatestances. 1. The payments are to be reduced not more during the first 3 calendar years, you may bethan 6 months before or after the date the subject to the recapture rule. If you are subject toExample 1. Under your divorce decree, you child will reach 18, 21, or local age of ma- this rule, you have to include in income in themust pay your former spouse $30,000 annually. jority. third year part of the alimony payments youThe payments will stop at the end of 6 years or previously deducted. Your spouse can deduct in2. The payments are to be reduced on two orupon your former spouse’s death, if earlier. the third year part of the alimony payments he ormore occasions that occur not more than 1Your former spouse has custody of your mi- she previously included in income.year before or after a different one of yournor children. The decree provides that if any children reaches a certain age from 18 to The 3-year period starts with the first calen-child is still a minor at your spouse’s death, you 24. This certain age must be the same for dar year you make a payment qualifying asmust pay $10,000 annually to a trust until the each child, but need not be a whole num- alimony under a decree of divorce or separateyoungest child reaches the age of majority. The ber of years. maintenance or a written separation agreement.trust income and corpus (principal) are to be Do not include any time in which payments wereused for your children’s benefit. In all other situations, reductions in payments being made under temporary support orders.are not treated as clearly associated with theThese facts indicate that the payments to be The second and third years are the next 2 calen-happening of a contingency relating to yourmade after your former spouse’s death are a dar years, whether or not payments are madechild.substitute for $10,000 of the $30,000 annual during those years.Either you or the IRS can overcome the pre-payments. Of each of the $30,000 annual pay- The reasons for a reduction or termination ofsumption in the two situations above. This isments, $10,000 is not alimony. alimony payments that can require a recapturedone by showing that the time at which the
include:payments are to be reduced was determinedExample 2. Under your divorce decree, you
independently of any contingencies relating tomust pay your former spouse $30,000 annually. • A change in your divorce or separation
your children. For example, if you can show thatThe payments will stop at the end of 15 years or instrument,
the period of alimony payments is customary inupon your former spouse’s death, if earlier. The • A failure to make timely payments,the local jurisdiction, such as a period equal todecree provides that if your former spouse dies
one-half of the duration of the marriage, you canbefore the end of the 15-year period, you must • A reduction in your ability to provide sup-
overcome the presumption and may be able topay the estate the difference between $450,000 port, or
treat the amount as alimony.($30,000 × 15) and the total amount paid up to • A reduction in your spouse’s supportthat time. For example, if your spouse dies at the needs.end of the tenth year, you must pay the estate
$150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000).
These facts indicate that the lump-sum pay- When to apply the recapture rule. You are
ment to be made after your former spouse’s subject to the recapture rule in the third year if
death is a substitute for the full amount of the the alimony you pay in the third year decreases
$30,000 annual payments. None of the annual by more than $15,000 from the second year or
payments are alimony. The result would be the the alimony you pay in the second and third
Page 126 Chapter 18 Alimony

Page 129 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
years decreases significantly from the alimony Student Loan Interestyou pay in the first year. Reminders DefinedWhen you figure a decrease in alimony, do
not include the following amounts. Student loan interest is interest you paid duringKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005.
the year on a qualified student loan. It includesThis Act provides tax relief for persons affected1. Payments made under a temporary sup- both required and voluntary interest payments.by Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may beport order.
able to claim a student loan interest deduction.2. Payments required over a period of at See Publication 4492.least 3 calendar years that vary because Qualified Student Loan
they are a fixed part of your income from a
business or property, or from compensa- This is a loan you took out solely to pay qualified
tion for employment or self-employment. education expenses (defined later) that were:
Introduction3. Payments that decrease because of the • For you, your spouse, or a person who
was your dependent (defined in chapter 3)death of either spouse or the remarriage of This chapter discusses the education-related
when you took out the loan,the spouse receiving the payments before adjustments you can deduct in figuring your ad-
the end of the third year. justed gross income. • Paid or incurred within a reasonable pe-
riod of time before or after you took out theThis chapter covers the student loan interest
loan, anddeduction.Figuring the recapture. You can use Work-
• For education provided during an aca-sheet 1 in Publication 504 to figure recaptured
demic period for an eligible student.Useful Itemsalimony.
You may want to see: Loans from the following sources are not qual-
Including the recapture in income. If you ified student loans.Publicationmust include a recapture amount in income, • A related person.show it on Form 1040, line 11 (“Alimony re- ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
ceived”). Cross out “received” and enter “recap- • A qualified employer plan.
ture.” On the dotted line next to the amount,
enter your spouse’s last name and social secur- Exceptions. For purposes of the student
ity number. loan interest deduction, the following are excep-
tions to the general rules for dependents.Student Loan Interest
• You can have a dependent even if you areDeducting the recapture. If you can deduct a Deduction the dependent of another taxpayer.recapture amount, show it on Form 1040, line
31a (“Alimony paid”). Cross out “paid” and enter • An individual can be your dependent evenGenerally, personal interest you pay, other than“recapture.” In the space provided, enter your if the individual filed a joint return with acertain mortgage interest, is not deductible.spouse’s social security number. spouse.However, if your modified adjusted gross in-
come (MAGI) is less than $65,000 ($135,000 if • An individual can be your dependent even
filing a joint return) you may be able to take a if the individual had gross income for the
deduction for interest paid on a student loan year that was equal to or more than the
(also known as an education loan) used for exemption amount for the year ($3,300 for
2006).higher education. For most taxpayers, MAGI is
the adjusted gross income as figured on their19. federal income tax return before subtracting any Reasonable period of time. Qualified educa-deduction for student loan interest. This deduc- tion expenses are treated as paid or incurredtion can reduce the amount of your income sub- within a reasonable period of time before or after
ject to tax by up to $2,500 in 2006. Table 19-1 you take out the loan if they are paid with theEducation- summarizes the features of the student loan proceeds of student loans that are part of a
interest deduction. federal postsecondary education loan program.
Even if not paid with the proceeds of thatRelated
Table 19-1. Student Loan Interest type of loan, the expenses are treated as paid or
incurred within a reasonable period of time ifDeduction at a GlanceAdjustments both of the following requirements are met.Do not rely on this table alone.
Refer to the text for more details. • The expenses relate to a specific aca-
demic period, andFeature DescriptionWhat’s New • The loan proceeds are disbursed within aMaximum You can decrease your income period that begins 90 days before the startbenefit subject to tax by up to $2,500.Educator expense deduction expires. The of that academic period and ends 90 days
deduction from AGI for educator expenses has after the end of that academic period.Your student loanLoan
qualificationsexpired. To deduct educator expenses, you • must have been taken out
solely to pay qualifiedmust itemize your deductions. See chapter 26. If neither of the above situations applies, the
education expenses, and reasonable period of time usually is determinedTuition and fees deduction expires. You • cannot be from a related based on all the relevant facts and circum-person or made under acannot take a deduction for qualified tuition and stances.qualified employer plan.fees paid in 2006. But you still may be able to
Academic period. An academic period in-take a credit for these expenses. See chapter The student must beStudent cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other35. qualifications • you, your spouse, or your period of study (such as a summer school ses-dependent, and sion) as reasonably determined by an educa-• enrolled at least half-time inAt the time this publication went to tional institution. In the case of an educationala degree program.print, Congress was considering legis- institution that uses credit hours or clock hourslation that would reinstate the expiredCAUTION
!
Time limit on You can deduct interest paid and does not have academic terms, each pay-deductions for educator expenses and tuition deduction during the remaining period of ment period can be treated as an academicand fees. To find out if this legislation was en- your student loan. period.acted, and for more details, go to www.irs.gov,
Phaseout The amount of your deductionclick on More Forms and Publications, and then Eligible student. This is a student who wasdepends on your income level.on What1s Hot in forms and publications, or see enrolled at least half-time in a program leading
Publication 553, Highlights of 2006 Tax to a degree, certificate, or other recognized edu-
Changes. cational credential.
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 127

Page 130 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Enrolled at least half-time. A student was certificate from an institution of higher educa- • Loan origination fees that are payments
tion, a hospital, or a health care facility that for property or services provided by theenrolled at least half-time if the student was
offers postgraduate training. lender, such as commitment fees ortaking at least half the normal full-time work load
An educational institution must meet the processing costs.for his or her course of study.
above criteria only during the academic pe-The standard for what is half of the normal • Interest you paid on a loan to the extentriod(s) for which the student loan was incurred.full-time work load is determined by each eligible payments were made through your partici-The deductibility of interest on the loan is noteducational institution. However, the standard pation in the National Health Serviceaffected by the institution’s subsequent loss ofmay not be lower than any of those established Corps Loan Repayment Program (theeligibility.by the Department of Education under the “NHSC Loan Repayment Program”) or
The educational institution should be certain other state loan repayment pro-Higher Education Act of 1965.
able to tell you if it is an eligible educa- grams. For more information, see Student
tional institution. Loan Repayment Assistance  in chapter 5Loan from a related person. You cannot de-
TIP
of Publication 970. duct interest on a loan you get from a related
person. Related persons include: Adjustments to qualified education ex-
penses. You must reduce your qualified edu-• Your spouse, Can You Claim thecation expenses by certain tax-free items (such• Your brothers and sisters, Deductionas the tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-
ships). See chapter 4 of Publication 970 for• Your half brothers and half sisters, Generally, you can claim the deduction if all fourdetails.• Your ancestors (parents, grandparents, of the following requirements are met.
etc.), • Your filing status is any filing status except
Include as Interest• Your lineal descendants (children, grand- married filing separately.
children, etc.), and In addition to simple interest on the loan, certain • No one else is claiming an exemption for
• Certain corporations, partnerships, trusts, loan origination fees, capitalized interest, inter- you on his or her tax return.
and exempt organizations. est on revolving lines of credit, and interest on • You are legally obligated to pay interest onrefinanced student loans can be student loan a qualified student loan.interest if all other requirements are met.Loan from a qualified employer plan. You • You paid interest on a qualified studentcannot deduct interest on a loan made under a Loan origination fee. This is a one-time fee loan.qualified employer plan or under a contract pur- charged by the lender for the use of money,
chased under such a plan. which is treated as interest accrued over the life
Interest paid by others. If you are the personof the loan. This payment cannot be for property
legally obligated to make interest payments andor services provided by the lender, such as com-
someone else makes a payment of interest onQualified Education Expenses mitment fees or processing costs.
your behalf, you are treated as receiving the
For purposes of the student loan interest deduc- payments from the other person and, in turn,Capitalized interest.  This is unpaid interest
tion, these expenses are the total costs of at- paying the interest. See chapter 4 of Publicationon a student loan that is added by the lender to
tending an eligible educational institution, 970 for more information.the outstanding principal balance of the loan.
including graduate school. They include
Interest on revolving lines of credit. Thisamounts paid for the following items.
interest, which includes interest on credit card No Double Benefit Allowed• Tuition and fees. debt, is student loan interest if the borrower uses
You cannot deduct as interest on a student loanthe line of credit (credit card) only to pay quali-• Room and board.
any amount that is an allowable deduction underfied education expenses. See Qualified Educa-• Books, supplies, and equipment. any other provision of the tax law (for example,tion Expenses, earlier.
home mortgage interest).• Other necessary expenses (such as trans-
Interest on refinanced student loans. Thisportation).
includes interest on both: How Much Can YouThe cost of room and board qualifies only to • Consolidated loans—loans used to refi- Deductthe extent that it is not more than the greater of: nance more than one student loan of the
same borrower, and• The allowance for room and board, as de- Your student loan interest deduction for 2006 is
termined by the eligible educational institu- • Collapsed loans—two or more loans of generally the smaller of:
tion, that was included in the cost of the same borrower that are treated by • $2,500, orattendance (for federal financial aid pur- both the lender and the borrower as one
poses) for a particular academic period • The interest you paid in 2006.loan.
and living arrangement of the student, or
The amount determined above is phased out• The actual amount charged if the student If you refinance a qualified student loan (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is betweenis residing in housing owned or operated for more than your original loan and $50,000 and $65,000 ($105,000 and $135,000 ifyou use the additional amount for anyby the eligible educational institution. CAUTION
!
you file a joint return). You cannot take a studentpurpose other than qualified education ex- loan interest deduction if your MAGI is $65,000penses, you cannot deduct any interest paid on or more ($135,000 or more if you file a jointEligible educational institution. An eligible the refinanced loan. return). For details on figuring your MAGI, seeeducational institution is any college, university,
chapter 4 of Publication 970.vocational school, or other postsecondary edu- Voluntary interest payments. These arecational institution eligible to participate in a stu- payments made on a qualified student loan dur-dent aid program administered by the How Do You Figure theing a period when interest payments are notDepartment of Education. It includes virtually all required, such as when the borrower has been Deductionaccredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri- granted a deferment or the loan has not yetvately owned profit-making) postsecondary in- entered repayment status. Generally, you figure the deduction using thestitutions. Student Loan Interest Deduction Worksheet inCertain educational institutions located the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions.
outside the United States also participate in the Do Not Include as Interest However, if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ,
U.S. Department of Education’s Federal Stu- or 4563, or you are excluding income fromYou cannot claim a student loan interest deduc-dent Aid (FSA) programs. sources within Puerto Rico, you must completetion for any of the following items.For purposes of the student loan interest Worksheet 4-1 in chapter 4 of Publication 970.
deduction, an eligible educational institution • Interest you paid on a loan if under the To help you figure your student loan interest
also includes an institution conducting an intern- terms of the loan, you are not legally obli- deduction, you should receive Form 1098-E,
ship or residency program leading to a degree or gated to make interest payments. Student Loan Interest Statement. Generally, an
Page 128 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 131 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
institution (such as a bank or governmental include on Form 1098-E only payments of stated those amounts. For information on allo cating
agency) that received interest payments of $600 interest. Other interest payments, such as cer- payments between interest and pri ncipal, see
or more during 2006 on one or more qualified tain loan origination fees and capitalized inter- chapter 4 of Publication 970.
student loans must send Form 1098-E (or ac- est, may not appear on the form you receive.  To claim the deduction, enter the allow able
ceptable substitute) to each borrower by Janu- However, if you pay qualifying interest that is not amount on line 33 (Form 1040),  or line 18 (Form
ary 31, 2007. included on Form 1098-E, you can also deduct 1040A).
For qualified student loans taken out before
September 1, 2004, the institution is required to
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 129

Page 132 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Five.
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to subtract theStandard deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract either the standard
deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized deductions are deductions for cer-Deduction and tain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). The ten chapters in
this part discuss the standard deduction, each itemized deduction, and the limit
Itemized on some of your itemized deductions if your adjusted gross income exceeds
certain amounts. See chapter 20 for the factors to consider when deciding
whether to subtract the standard deduction or itemized deductions.
Deductions
• You are a nonresident or dual-status alien Table 20-2. You qualify for this benefit if you are
during the year. You are considered a totally or partly blind.
dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-
20. dent and resident alien during the year. Partly blind. If you are partly blind, you must
Note. If you are a nonresident alien who is get a certified statement from an eye doctor or
married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at registered optometrist that:
the end of the year, you can choose to be • You cannot see better than 20/200 in theStandard treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publication better eye with glasses or contact lenses,519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.) If you ormake this choice, you can take the stan-Deduction dard deduction. • Your field of vision is not more than 20
degrees.
If an exemption for you can be claimed If your eye condition will never improve be-What’s New on another person’s return (such as yond these limits, the statement should includeyour parents’ return), your standardCAUTION
!
this fact. You must keep the statement in yourdeduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-Increase in standard deduction. The stan- records.tion for Dependents, later.dard deduction for most taxpayers who do not
If your vision can be corrected beyond theseitemize their deductions on Schedule A of Form
limits only by contact lenses that you can wear1040 is higher in 2006 than it was in 2005. The
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,amount depends on your filing status. There are
you can take the higher standard deduction fortables at the end of this chapter to help you Standard Deduction blindness if you otherwise qualify.figure your standard deduction for 2006.
Amount
Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
Introduction You can take the higher standard deduction ifThe standard deduction amount depends on
your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:your filing status, whether you are 65 or older orThis chapter discusses the following topics.
blind, and whether an exemption can be claimed • You file a joint return, or• How to figure the amount of your standard for you by another taxpayer. Generally, the stan-deduction. • You file a separate return and can claimdard deduction amounts are adjusted each year an exemption for your spouse becausefor inflation. The standard deduction amounts• The standard deduction for dependents. your spouse had no gross income and anfor most taxpayers for 2006 are shown in Table• Who should itemize deductions. exemption for your spouse could not be20-1. claimed by another taxpayer.
Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking Decedent’s final return. The amount of the
a standard deduction or itemizing their deduc- standard deduction for a decedent’s final tax You cannot claim the higher standardtions. The standard deduction is a dollar amount return is the same as it would have been had the deduction for an individual other thanthat reduces the amount of income on which you decedent continued to live. However, if the de- yourself and your spouse.CAUTION
!
are taxed. cedent was not 65 or older at the time of death,
The standard deduction is a benefit that elim- the higher standard deduction for age cannot be
inates the need for many taxpayers to itemize claimed.
actual deductions, such as medical expenses, Examples
charitable contributions, and taxes, on Schedule
A of Form 1040. The standard deduction is The following examples illustrate how to deter-Higher Standard Deduction
higher for taxpayers who are 65 or older or blind. mine your standard deduction using Tables 20-1for Age (65 or Older)
If you have a choice, you can use the method and 20-2.
that gives you the lower tax.    If you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled
to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65 Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, areYou benefit from the standard deduc- or older at the end of the year. You are consid- filing a joint return for 2006. Neither is blind.tion if your standard deduction is more ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday. They decide not to itemize their deductions.than the total of your allowable item-
TIP
Therefore, you can take a higher standard de- They use Table 20-1. Their standard deductionized deductions. duction for 2006 if you were born before January is $10,300.
2, 1942.Persons not eligible for the standard deduc- Example 2. Assume the same facts as inUse Table 20-2 to figure the standard deduc-tion. Your standard deduction is zero and you Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the endtion amount.should itemize any deductions you have if: of 2006. Larry and Donna use Table 20-2. Their
standard deduction is $11,300.• You are married and filing a separate re-
Higher Standard Deductionturn, and your spouse itemizes deduc-
Example 3. Bill, 72, and Terry, 66, are filingtions, for Blindness
a joint return for 2006. Neither is blind. They
• You are filing a tax return for a short tax decide not to itemize their deductions. They useIf you are blind on the last day of the year and
year because of a change in your annual Table 20-2. Their standard deduction isyou do not itemize deductions, you are entitled
accounting period, or $12,300.to a higher standard deduction as shown in
Page 130 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Page 133 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
married filing a separate return, he enters • Had large uninsured casualty or theft
$5,150 on line 6. On line 7a he enters $4,100 as losses,Standard Deduction his standard deduction because it is smaller • Made large contributions to qualified chari-than $5,150, the amount on line 6.for Dependents ties, or
Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimed • Have total itemized deductions that areThe standard deduction for an individual for on her parents’ 2006 tax return. She is 18 years more than the standard deduction to whichwhom an exemption can be claimed on another old and blind. She has interest income of $1,300 you otherwise are entitled.person’s tax return is generally limited to the and wages of $2,900. She has no itemized de-greater of: These deductions are explained in chaptersductions. Amy uses Table 20-3 to find her stan-
21–28.• $850, or dard deduction. She enters her wages of $2,900
on line 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and enters If you decide to itemize your deductions, com-• The individual’s earned income for the $3,200 on line 3. On line 5 she enters $3,200,year plus $300 (but not more than the reg- plete Schedule A and attach it to your Formthe larger of lines 3 and 4. Since she is single,ular standard deduction amount, generally 1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, lineAmy enters $5,150 on line 6. She enters $3,200$5,000). 28, on Form 1040, line 40.on line 7a. This is the smaller of the amounts on
lines 5 and 6. Because she checked one box inHowever, if the individual is 65 or older or the top part of the worksheet, she enters $1,250 Electing to itemize for state tax or other pur-blind, the standard deduction may be higher. on line 7b. She then adds the amounts on lines poses. Even if your itemized deductions areIf an exemption for you (or your spouse if you 7a and 7b and enters her standard deduction of less than the amount of your standard deduc-are filing jointly) can be claimed on someone $4,450 on line 7c. tion, you can elect to itemize deductions on yourelse’s return, use Table 20-3 to determine your
standard deduction. federal return rather than take the standard de-
duction. You may want to do this, for example, ifEarned income defined. Earned income is the tax benefit of being able to itemize yoursalaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and Who Should Itemize deductions on your state tax return is greaterother amounts received as pay for work you
than the tax benefit you lose on your federalactually perform. You should itemize deductions if your total de- return by not taking the standard deduction. To For purposes of the standard deduction, ductions are more than the standard deduction make this election, you must check the box onearned income also includes any part of a schol- amount. Also, you should itemize if you do not line 29 of Schedule A.arship or fellowship grant that you must include qualify for the standard deduction, as discussedin your gross income. See Scholarship and Fel- earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-lowship Grants in chapter 1 of Publication 970 Changing your mind. If you do not itemizedard deduction.for more information on what qualifies as a your deductions and later find that you should You should first figure your itemized deduc-scholarship or fellowship grant. have itemized — or if you itemize your deduc-tions and compare that amount to your standard
tions and later find you should not have — youdeduction to make sure you are using theExample 1. Michael is single. His parents
method that gives you the greater benefit. can change your return by filing Form 1040X,claim an exemption for him on their 2006 tax
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.return. He has interest income of $780 and You may be subject to a limit on some See Amended Returns and Claims for Refund inwages of $150. He has no itemized deductions. of your itemized deductions if your ad- chapter 1 for more information on amended re-Michael uses Table 20-3 to find his standard justed gross income (AGI) is more thanCAUTION
!
deduction. He enters $150 (his earned income) turns.$150,500 ($75,250 if you are married filing sep-on line 1, $450 ($150 plus $300) on line 3, $850 arately). See chapter 29 and the instructions for Married persons who filed separate re-(the larger of $450 and $850) on line 5, and Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, for more infor- turns. You can change methods of taking de-$5,150 on line 6. The amount of his standard mation on figuring the correct amount of your ductions only if you and your spouse both makededuction, on line 7a, is $850 (the smaller of itemized deductions. the same changes. Both of you must file a con-$850 and $5,150).
sent to assessment for any additional tax eitherWhen to itemize. You may benefit from
one may owe as a result of the change.Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col- itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form
lege student, is claimed on his parents’ 2006 tax 1040) if you: You and your spouse can use the method
return. Joe is married and files a separate return. that gives you the lower total tax, even though• Do not qualify for the standard deduction,His wife does not itemize deductions on her one of you may pay more tax than you wouldor the amount you can claim is limited,separate return. have paid by using the other method. You bothJoe has $1,500 in interest income and • Had large uninsured medical and dental must use the same method of claiming deduc-wages of $3,800. He has no itemized deduc- expenses during the year, tions. If one itemizes deductions, the othertions. Joe finds his standard deduction by using • Paid interest and taxes on your home, should itemize because he or she will not qualifyTable 20-3. He enters his earned income, for the standard deduction. See Persons not$3,800, on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and • Had large unreimbursed employee busi- eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.enters $4,100 on line 3. On line 5 he enters ness expenses or other miscellaneous de-
$4,100, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe is ductions,
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 131

Page 134 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 20-3. Standard Deduction Worksheet2006 Standard Deduction Tables for Dependents
If you are married filling a separate return and your spouse Use this worksheet only if someone else can
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
take the standard deduction even if you were born before Janu- married filing jointly).
CAUTION
!
ary 2, 1942, or you are blind.
If you were born before January 2, 1942, or you are blind,
check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to theTable 20-1. Standard Deduction Chart
worksheet.for Most People*
Born beforeYouTHEN your January 2, 1942 Blind standard
IF your filing status is... deduction is...
Your spouse, if claiming Born beforesingle or married filing separately $ 5,150
spouse’s exemption January 2, 1942 Blind married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child 10,300
head of household 7,550
Total number of boxes you checked* Do not use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1942, or you are blind,
or if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married
1. Enter your earned income (definedfiling jointly). Use Table 20-2 or 20-3 instead.
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
2. Additional amount 2. $300
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $850
Table 20-2. Standard Deduction Chart for People 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.Born Before January 2, 1942, or
Who are Blind* 6. Enter the amount shown below for your
filing status.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the
chart. • Single or Married filing separately—
$5,150 6.Born before
You January 2, 1942
• Married filing jointly or QualifyingBlind 
widow(er) with dependent child—
$10,300Born beforeYour spouse, if claiming • Head of household—$7,550January 2, 1942spouse’s exemption Blind 
7. Standard deduction.
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If born after January 1, 1942, and notTotal number of boxes you checked
blind, stop here. This is yourTHEN your standard deduction. Otherwise, goAND the number standard on to line 7b. 7a.IF your in the box above deduction b. If born before January 2, 1942, orfiling status is... is... is... blind, multiply $1,250 ($1,000 if
single 1 $ 6,400 married or qualifying widow(er) with
2 7,650 dependent child) by the number in
the box above. 7b.married filing jointly or 1 11,300
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is yourqualifying widow(er) 2 12,300
standard deduction for 2006. 7c.with dependent child 3 13,300
4 14,300
married filing 1 6,150
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, andseparately 2 7,150 other compensation received for personal services you performed. It3 8,150 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
4 9,150 include in your income.
head of household 1 8,800
2 10,050
* If someone can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table 20-3, instead.
Page 132 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Page 135 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (and Instructions)
How Much of the❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions21. Expenses Can You
Deduct?
Medical and You can deduct only the amount of your medicalWhat Are Medical and dental expenses that is more than 7.5% of
your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, lineDental Expenses Expenses? 38).
In this chapter, the term “7.5% limit” is usedMedical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, to refer to 7.5% of your adjusted gross income.cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of dis- The phrase “subject to the 7.5% limit” is alsoWhat’s New ease, and the costs for treatments affecting any used. This phrase means that you must subtractpart or function of the body. They include the 7.5% (.075) of your adjusted gross income fromStandard mileage rate. The standard mile- costs of equipment, supplies, and diagnostic your medical expenses to figure your medicalage rate allowed for operating expenses for a devices needed for these purposes. They also expense deduction.car when you use it for medical reasons is 18 include dental expenses.cents per mile. See Transportation under What Example. Your adjusted gross income isMedical Expenses Are Includible. Medical care expenses must be primarily to $40,000, 7.5% of which is $3,000. You paidalleviate or prevent a physical or mental defect medical expenses of $2,500. You cannot deductMedicare Part D. A new voluntary prescrip- or illness. Do not include expenses that are any of your medical expenses because they aretion drug insurance program called Medicare merely beneficial to general health, such as vita- not more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross in-Part D went into effect on January 1, 2006. If you mins or a vacation. come.enrolled in this program, the premiums you pay
are reduced by a federal subsidy. The value of Medical expenses include the premiums you
the federal subsidy, like all Medicare benefits, is pay for insurance that covers the expenses of
excluded from your income. medical care, and the amounts you pay for
You can include in medical expenses the transportation to get medical care. Medical ex- Whose Medical
premiums you pay for Medicare Part D insur- penses also include amounts paid for qualified
ance. See Insurance Premiums  under What Expenseslong-term care services and limited amountsMedical Expenses Are Includible. paid for any qualified long-term care insurance
Can You Include?contract.
You can generally include medical expenses
you pay for yourself as well as those you pay forReminders someone who was your spouse or your depen-
dent either when the services were provided orWhat Expenses CanHealth coverage tax credit. There is a credit when you paid for them. There are different rulesfor health insurance premiums paid by certain for decedents and for individuals who are theYou Include This Year?workers who are displaced by foreign trade or subject of multiple support agreements.who are receiving a pension from the Pension You can include only the medical and dentalBenefit Guaranty Corporation. For more infor- What if you are claimed as a dependent onexpenses you paid this year, regardless of whenmation, see Health Coverage Tax Credit  in some else’s return? Even if you, or yourthe services were provided. If you pay medicalchapter 37. spouse if you are filing a joint return, are claimedexpenses by check, the day you mail or deliver as a dependent on someone else’s tax return,the check generally is the date of payment. If you can include the medical expenses of anyyou use a “pay-by-phone” or “online” account to person you could have claimed as a dependent
pay your medical expenses, the date reported if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, were notIntroduction on the statement of the financial institution being claimed as a dependent on some else’s
This chapter will help you determine the follow- showing when payment was made is the date of return.
ing. payment. If you use a credit card, include medi-
cal expenses you charge to your credit card in• What medical expenses are. Spouse
the year the charge is made, not when you• What expenses you can include this year. You can include medical expenses you paid foractually pay the amount charged.
• How much of the expenses you can de- your spouse. To include these expenses, you
duct. must have been married either at the time your
Separate returns. If you and your spouse live spouse received the medical services or at the• Whose medical expenses you can include. in a noncommunity property state and file sepa- time you paid the medical expenses.
• What medical expenses are includible. rate returns, each of you can include only the
Example 1. Mary received medical treat-medical expenses each actually paid. Any medi-• How you treat reimbursements. ment before she married Bill. Bill paid for thecal expenses paid out of a joint checking ac-• How to report the deduction on your tax treatment after they married. Bill can includecount in which you and your spouse have thereturn. these expenses in figuring his medical expensesame interest are considered to have been paid deduction even if Bill and Mary file separate• How to report impairment-related work ex- equally by each of you, unless you can show returns.penses. otherwise. If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could not• How to report health insurance costs if you Community property states. If you and include Mary’s expenses in his separate return.are self-employed. your spouse live in a community property state Mary would include the amounts she paid during
the year in her separate return. If they filed aand file separate returns, any medical expenses
joint return, the medical expenses both paidpaid out of community funds are divided equally.Useful Items during the year would be used to figure theirEach of you should include half the expenses. IfYou may want to see: medical expense deduction.medical expenses are paid out of the separate
funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paidPublications Example 2. This year, John paid medicalthe medical expenses can include them. If you expenses for his wife Louise, who died last year.❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses live in a community property state, are married, John married Belle this year and they file a joint
and file a separate return, see Publication 555,❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Other return. Because John was married to Louise
Community Property.Tax-Favored Health Plans when she received the medical services, he can
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 133

Page 136 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
include those expenses in figuring his medical You can include medical expenses that youQualifying Child
deduction for this year. paid for a child before adoption if the child quali-
A qualifying child is a child who: fied as your dependent when the medical serv-
ices were provided or when the expenses wereDependent 1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster paid.child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- If you pay back an adoption agency or otherYou can include medical expenses you paid for ter, or a descendant of any of them (for persons for medical expenses they paid underyour dependent. For you to include these ex- example, your grandchild, niece, or an agreement with you, you are treated as hav-penses, the person must have been your depen- nephew), ing paid those expenses provided you clearlydent either at the time the medical services were
substantiate that the payment is directly attribu-2. At the end of 2006 was:provided or at the time you paid the expenses. A
table to the medical care of the child.person generally qualifies as your dependent for a. Under age 19, But if you pay the agency or other person forpurposes of the medical expense deduction if
medical care that was provided and paid forboth of the following requirements are met. b. Under age 24 and a full-time student, or
before adoption negotiations began, you cannotc. Permanently and totally disabled,1. The person was a qualifying child or a include them as medical expenses.
qualifying relative, and You may be able to take a credit or3. Lived with you for more than half of 2006,2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national, exclusion for other expenses related toandor a resident of the United States, Canada, adoption. See the Instructions for Form
TIP
4. Did not provide over half of his or her ownor Mexico. If your qualifying child was 8839, for more information.support for 2006.adopted, see Exception for adopted child,
next. Child of divorced or separated parents. ForAdopted child. A legally adopted child is purposes of the medical and dental expensestreated as your own child. This includes a childException for adopted child. If you are a deduction, a child of divorced or separated par-lawfully placed with you for legal adoption.U.S. citizen or U.S. national and your adopted ents can be treated as a dependent of both
child lived with you as a member of your house- parents. Each parent can include the medical
hold for 2006, that child does not have to be a expenses he or she pays for the child, even if the
U.S. citizen or national or a resident of the other parent claims the child’s dependency ex-
United States, Canada, or Mexico. emption, if:
Table 21-1. Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist
You can include: You cannot include:
• Bandages • Medical and hospital • Baby sitting and childcare • Medical insurance included
• Birth control pills prescribed insurance premiums in a car insurance policy• Bottled water
by your doctor covering all persons• Medical services fees (from • Contributions to Archer MSAs
injured in or by your car• Capital expenses for doctors, dentists, surgeons, (see Publication 969)
equipment or improvements specialists, and other • Medicine you buy without a• Diaper service
to your home needed for medical practitioners) prescription • Expenses for your generalmedical care (see • Oxygen equipment and • Nursing care for a healthyhealth (even if following yourPublication 502) oxygen baby doctor’s advice) such as—
• Certain fertility • Part of life-care fee paid to • Prescription drugs you—Health club dues
enhancement procedures retirement home designated brought in (or ordered—Household help (even if
(see Publication 502) for medical care shipped) from anotherrecommended by a doctor)
• Certain weight-loss country, in most cases• Prescription medicines —Social activities, such as
expenses for obesity (see Publication 502)(prescribed by a doctor) and dancing or swimming lessons
• Diagnostic devices insulin —Trip for general health • Nutritional supplements,
improvement vitamins, herbal• Expenses of an organ • Psychiatric and
supplements, “naturaldonor psychological treatment • Flexible spending account
medicines,” etc., unlessreimbursements for medical• Eye surgery—to promote • Social Security tax,
recommended by aexpenses (if contributionsthe correct function of the Medicare tax, FUTA, and
medical practitioner as awere on a pre-tax basis) (seeeye state employment tax for
treatment for a specificPublication 502)worker providing medical• Guide dogs or other medical conditioncare (see Wages for • Funeral, burial, or cremationanimals aiding the blind, diagnosed by a physiciannursing services, below) expensesdeaf, and disabled
• Surgery for purely• Special items (artificial • Health savings account• Hospital services fees (lab cosmetic reasons (seelimbs, false teeth, payments for medicalwork, therapy, nursing Publication 502)eye-glasses, contact expenses (see Publicationservices, surgery, etc.)
• Toothpaste, toiletries,lenses, hearing aids, 502)• Lead-based paint removal cosmetics, etc.crutches, wheelchair, etc.) • Illegal operation or treatment(see Publication 502)
• Teeth whitening• Special education for • Life insurance or income• Legal abortion
mentally or physically • Weight-loss expenses notprotection policies, or policies• Legal operation to prevent disabled persons (see for the treatment of obesityproviding payment for loss ofhaving children such as a Publication 502) or other disease life, limb, sight, etc.vasectomy or tubal ligation
• Stop-smoking programs • Maternity clothes• Long-term care contracts,
• Transportation for neededqualified (see Publication
medical care502)
• Treatment at a drug or• Meals and lodging provided
alcohol center (includesby a hospital during medical
meals and lodging providedtreatment
by the center)
• Wages for nursing services
(see Publication 502)
Page 134 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 137 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. The child is in the custody of one or both In figuring your medical expense deduction, you medical service, or group hospitaliz ation
parents for more than half the year, and clinical care, orcan include only one-fourth of your mother’s
medical expenses. Your brothers cannot include2. The child receives over half of his or her • Qualified long-term care insurance con-any part of the expenses. However, if you andsupport during the year from his or her tracts (subject to additional limitations).your brothers share the nonmedical supportparents, and See Qualified Long-term Care Insuranceitems and you separately pay all of your Contracts in Publication 502.3. The child’s parents: mother’s medical expenses without receiving
any reimbursement, you can include the amount If you have a policy that provides more thana. Are divorced or legally separated under you paid for her medical expenses in your medi- one kind of payment, you can include the premi-a decree of divorce or separate mainte- cal expenses. ums for the medical care part of the policy if thenance,
charge for the medical part is reasonable. Theb. Are separated under a written separa- cost of the medical part must be separatelyDecedenttion agreement, or stated in the insurance contract or given to you
in a separate statement.Medical expenses paid before death by the de-c. Live apart at all times during the last 6
cedent are included in figuring any deduction formonths of the year.
Note. When figuring the amount of insur-medical and dental expenses on the decedent’s
ance premiums you can deduct on Schedule A,final income tax return. This includes expensesThis does not apply if the child’s exemption is
do not include any health coverage tax creditfor the decedent’s spouse and dependents asbeing claimed under a multiple support agree-
advance payments shown in box 1 of Formwell as for the decedent.ment.
1099-H.The survivor or personal representative of a
decedent can choose to treat certain expenses Employer-sponsored health insurance plan.
Qualifying Relative paid by the decedent’s estate for the decedent’s Do not include in your medical and dental ex-
medical care as paid by the decedent at the time penses any insurance premiums paid by an em-A qualifying relative is a person: the medical services were provided. The ex- ployer-sponsored health insurance plan unless
penses must be paid within the 1-year period the premiums are included in box 1 of your Form1. Who is your: beginning with the day after the date of death. If W-2. Also, do not include any other medical and
dental expenses paid by the plan unless thea. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or you are the survivor or personal representative
amount paid is included in box 1 of your Forma descendant of any of them (for exam- making this choice, you must attach a statement
W-2.ple, your grandchild), to the decedent’s Form 1040 (or the decedent’s
amended return, Form 1040X) saying that theb. Brother, sister, or a son or daughter of Example. You are a federal employee par-expenses have not been and will not be claimedeither of them, ticipating in the premium conversion plan of theon the estate tax return.
c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sib- Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) pro-Qualified medical expenses paidling of either of them (for example, your gram. Your share of the FEHB premium is paidbefore death by the decedent are notgrandmother, grandfather, aunt, or un- by making a pre-tax reduction in your salary.deductible if paid with a tax-free distri-CAUTION
!
cle), Because you are an employee whose insurancebution from any Archer MSA or health savings premiums are paid with money that is neverd. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, account. included in your gross income, you cannot de-stepmother, son-in-law, daugh- Amended returns and claims for refund are duct the premiums paid with that money.ter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law, discussed in chapter 1.brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or Long-term care services. Contributions
made by your employer to provide coverage fore. Any other person (other than your What if you pay medical expenses of a de- qualified long-term care services under a flexiblespouse) who lived with you all year as a ceased spouse or dependent? If you paid spending or similar arrangement must be in-member of your household if your rela- medical expenses for your deceased spouse or cluded in your income. This amount will be re-tionship does not violate local law, dependent, include them as medical expenses ported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.on your Form 1040 in the year paid, whether
2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Quali- Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).they are paid before or after the decedent’s
fying Child earlier) of any other person for If you have medical expenses that are reim-death. The expenses can be included if the
2006, and bursed by a health reimbursement arrange-person was your spouse or dependent either at
ment, you cannot include those expenses inthe time the medical services were provided or3. For whom you provided over half of the your medical expenses. This is because an HRAat the time you paid the expenses.support in 2006. But see Children of di- is funded solely by the employer.vorced or separated parents, earlier, and
Support claimed under a multiple support Medicare A. If you are covered under social
agreement, next. security (or if you are a government employee
who paid Medicare tax), you are enrolled inWhat Medical
Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare ASupport claimed under a multiple support is not a medical expense. If you are not coveredExpenses Areagreement. If you are considered to have pro- under social security (or were not a governmentvided more than half of a qualifying relative’s employee who paid Medicare tax), you can vol-Includible?support under a multiple support agreement, untarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation youyou can include medical expenses you pay for can include the premiums paid for Medicare AUse Table 21-1 in this chapter as a guide tothat person. A multiple support agreement is as a medical expense.determine which medical and dental expensesused when two or more people provide more
you can include on Schedule A (Form 1040).than half of a person’s support, but no one alone Medicare B. Medicare B is a supplementalSee Publication 502 for information about otherprovides more than half. medical insurance. Premiums you pay for Medi-expenses you can include.For rules regarding what expenses you can care B are a medical expense. If you applied for
include this year, see What Expenses Can You it at age 65 or after you became disabled, you
Include This Year, earlier. can include in medical expenses the monthlyInsurance Premiums
premiums you paid. Check the information youAny medical expenses paid by others who
You can include in medical expenses insurance received from the Social Security Administrationjoined you in the agreement cannot be included
premiums you pay for policies that cover medi- to find out your premium.as medical expenses by anyone. However, you
cal care. Policies can provide payment for:can include the entire unreimbursed amount you Medicare D.  Medicare D is a voluntary pre-paid for medical expenses. • Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc., scription drug insurance program for persons
with Medicare A or B. You can include as a• Prescription drugs,Example. You and your three brothers each medical expense premiums you pay for Medi-provide one-fourth of your mother’s total sup- • Replacement of lost or damaged contact care D.port. Under a multiple support agreement, you lenses,treat your mother as your dependent. You paid Prepaid insurance premiums. Premiums
• Membership in an association that givesall of her medical expenses. Your brothers reim- you pay before you are age 65 for insurance for
cooperative or so-called “free-choice”bursed you for three-fourths of these expenses. medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 135

Page 138 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dependents after you reach age 65 are medical • Work-related expenses for purposes ofTransportation taking a credit for dependent care. (Seecare expenses in the year paid if they are:
chapter 32.)You can include in medical expenses amounts• Payable in equal yearly installments, or
paid for transportation primarily for, and essen- You can choose to apply them either way asmore often, and tial to, medical care. long as you do not use the same expenses to• Payable for at least 10 years, or until you claim both a credit and a medical expense de-
reach age 65 (but not for less than 5 duction.You can include:
years). • Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambu-
lance service,
Unused sick leave used to pay premiums. • Transportation expenses of a parent who How Do You TreatYou must include in gross income cash pay- must go with a child who needs medicalments you receive at the time of retirement for care, Reimbursements?unused sick leave. You also must include in
• Transportation expenses of a nurse orgross income the value of unused sick leave You can include in medical expenses only thoseother person who can give injections,that, at your option, your employer applies to the amounts paid during the taxable year for whichmedications, or other treatment requiredcost of your continuing participation in your em- you received no insurance or other reimburse-by a patient who is traveling to get medicalployer’s health plan after you retire. You can ment.care and is unable to travel alone, andinclude this cost of continuing participation in the
health plan as a medical expense. • Transportation expenses for regular visits Insurance Reimbursementto see a mentally ill dependent, if theseIf you participate in a health plan where your visits are recommended as a part of treat-employer automatically applies the value of un- You must reduce your total medical expensesment. for the year by all reimbursements for medicalused sick leave to the cost of your continuing
expenses that you receive from insurance orparticipation in the health plan (and you do not
other sources during the year. This includesCar expenses. You can include out-of-pockethave the option to receive cash), do not include
payments from Medicare.expenses, such as the cost of gas and oil, whenthe value of the unused sick leave in gross Even if a policy provides reimbursement foryou use your car for medical reasons. You can-income. You cannot include this cost of continu- only certain specific medical expenses, younot include depreciation, insurance, general re-ing participation in that health plan as a medical must use amounts you receive from that policypair, or maintenance expenses.expense. to reduce your total medical expenses, includingIf you do not want to use your actual ex- those it does not provide reimbursement for.penses, for 2006 you can use a standard rate ofMeals and Lodging 18 cents a mile for use of a car for medical Example. You have insurance policiesreasons.You can include in medical expenses the cost of which cover your hospital and doctors’ bills but You can also include parking fees and tolls. not your nursing bills. The insurance you receivemeals and lodging at a hospital or similar institu- You can add these fees and tolls to your medical for the hospital and doctors’ bills is more thantion if a principal reason for being there is to get expenses whether you use actual expenses or their charges. In figuring your medical deduc-medical care. See Nursing home, later. use the standard mileage rate. tion, you must reduce the total amount you spentYou may be able to include in medical ex- for medical care by the total amount of insuranceExample. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles forpenses the cost of lodging not provided in a you received even if the policies do not covermedical reasons during the year. He spent $250hospital or similar institution. You can include some of your medical expenses.for gas, $5 for oil, and $50 for tolls and parking.the cost of such lodging while away from home if
He wants to figure the amount he can include in Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).all of the following requirements are met. A health reimbursement arrangement is an em-medical expenses both ways to see which gives
• The lodging is primarily for and essential ployer-funded plan that reimburses employeeshim the greater deduction.
to medical care. for medical care expenses and allows unusedHe figures the actual expenses first. He adds
amounts to be carried forward. An HRA isthe $250 for gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 for• The medical care is provided by a doctor funded solely by the employer and the reim-tolls and parking for a total of $305.in a licensed hospital or in a medical care bursements for medical expenses, up to a maxi-He then figures the standard mileagefacility related to, or the equivalent of, a mum dollar amount for a coverage period, areamount. He multiplies the 2,800 miles by 18licensed hospital. not included in your income.cents a mile for a total of $504. He then adds the• The lodging is not lavish or extravagant $50 tolls and parking for a total of $554. Other reimbursements. Generally, you dounder the circumstances. Bill includes the $554 of car expenses with not reduce medical expenses by payments you
his other medical expenses for the year because receive for:• There is no significant element of personal
the $554 is more than the $305 he figured usingpleasure, recreation, or vacation in the • Permanent loss or loss of use of a mem-actual expenses.travel away from home. ber or function of the body (loss of limb,
sight, hearing, etc.) or disfigurement to theThe amount you include in medical expenses for Transportation expenses you cannot in- extent the payment is based on the naturelodging cannot be more than $50 for each night clude. You cannot include in medical ex- of the injury without regard to the amountfor each person. You can include lodging for a penses the cost of transportation expenses in of time lost from work, orperson traveling with the person receiving the the following situations.
• Loss of earnings.medical care. For example, if a parent is travel- • Going to and from work, even if your con-ing with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be dition requires an unusual means of trans- You must, however, reduce your medical ex-included as a medical expense for lodging. portation. penses by any part of these payments that isMeals are not included. designated for medical costs. See How Do You• Travel for purely personal reasons to an-
Figure and Report the Deduction on Your Taxother city for an operation or other medicalNursing home. You can include in medical Return, later.care.expenses the cost of medical care in a nursing For how to treat damages received for per-home, home for the aged, or similar institution, • Travel that is merely for the general im- sonal injury or sickness, see Damages for Per-for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. provement of one’s health. sonal Injuries, later.
This includes the cost of meals and lodging in You do not have a medical deduction if you
the home if a principal reason for being there is are reimbursed for all of your medical expenses
Disabled Dependentto get medical care. for the year.
Care ExpensesDo not include the cost of meals and lodging Excess reimbursement. If you are reim-
if the reason for being in the home is personal. bursed more than your medical expenses, youSome disabled dependent care expenses mayYou can, however, include in medical expenses may have to include the excess in income. Youqualify as either:the part of the cost that is for medical or nursing may want to use Figure 21-A to help you decide
• Medical expenses orcare. if any of your reimbursement is taxable.
Page 136 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 139 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How Do You Figure
and Report the
Deduction on Your
Tax Return?
Once you have determined which medical care
expenses you can include, you figure and report
the deduction on your tax return.
What Tax Form Do You
Use?
You figure your medical expense deduction on
lines 1–4 of Schedule A, Form 1040. You can-
not claim medical expenses on Form 1040A or
Form 1040EZ. If you need more information on
itemized deductions or you are not sure if you
can itemize, see chapters 20 and 29.
Enter the amount you paid for medical and
dental expenses on line 1, Schedule A (Form
1040). This should be your expenses that were
not reimbursed by insurance or any other
sources.
You can deduct only the amount of your
medical and dental expenses that is more than
7.5% of your adjusted gross income shown on
line 38, Form 1040. For an example, see the
partial Schedule A, in this chapter.
Impairment-Related
Work Expenses
Figure 21-A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Was any part of your
premiums paid by
your employer?
Were your employer’s
contributions to your
premiums included in
your income?
Did you pay any part
of the premiums?
NONE of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
(Business or Medical)Premiums paid by you. If you pay the en- not include the reimbursement up to the amount
tire premium for your medical insurance or all of of the expense in income. However, if the reim- If you are disabled, you can take a businessthe costs of a plan similar to medical insurance bursement is more than the expense, see Ex- deduction for expenses that are necessary forand your insurance premiums or other reim- cess reimbursement, earlier. you to be able to work. If you take a businessbursements are more than your total medical deduction for these impairment-related work ex-Example. Last year, you had medical ex-expenses for the year, you have an excess reim- penses, they are not subject to the 7.5% limitpenses of $500. You cannot deduct the $500bursement. You generally do not include the that applies to medical expenses.because it is less than 7.5% of your adjustedexcess reimbursement in your gross income. You are disabled if you have:gross income. If, in a later year, you are reim-Premiums paid by you and your employer. bursed for any of the $500 in medical expenses, • A physical or mental disability (for exam-If both you and your employer contribute to your you do not include that amount in your gross ple, blindness or deafness) that function-medical insurance plan and your employer’s income. ally limits your being employed, orcontributions are not included in your gross in-
• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-come, you must include in your gross income
ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatthe part of your excess reimbursement that is
substantially limits one or more of yourfrom your employer’s contribution. Damages for Personal major life activities, such as performingSee Publication 502 to figure the amount of
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-the excess reimbursement you must include in Injuries ing, learning, or working.gross income.
If you receive an amount in settlement of aReimbursement in a later year. If you are
Impairment-related expenses defined. Im-personal injury suit, part of that award may be forreimbursed in a later year for medical expenses
pairment-related expenses are those ordinarymedical expenses that you deducted in an ear-you deducted in an earlier year, you generally
and necessary business expenses that are:lier year. If it is, you must include that part in yourmust report the reimbursement as income up to
income in the year you receive it to the extent itthe amount you previously deducted as medical • Necessary for you to do your work satis-reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.expenses. factorily,See Reimbursement in a Later Year, discussedHowever, do not report as income the • For goods and services not required orearlier.amount of reimbursement you received up to the used, other than incidentally, in your per-amount of your medical deductions that did not Future medical expenses. If you receive an sonal activities, andreduce your tax for the earlier year. For more amount in settlement of a damage suit for per-information about the recovery of an amount • Not specifically covered under other in-sonal injuries, part of that award may be forthat you claimed as an itemized deduction in an come tax laws.future medical expenses. If it is, you must re-earlier year, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries duce any future medical expenses for thesein chapter 12. injuries until the amount you received has been Where to report. If you are self-employed,completely used. deduct the business expenses on the appropri-
ate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E, or F) used toMedical expenses not deducted. If you did
report your business income and expenses.not deduct a medical expense in the year you
paid it because your medical expenses were not If you are an employee, complete Form
more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, 2106, Employee Business Expenses, or Form
or because you did not itemize deductions, do 2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Employee Business
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 137

Page 140 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3,434
2,475
959
33,000
Bill and Helen Jones 000000000
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-1)1
22
3Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38
(99) /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A&B (Form 1040).
2006
Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form 1040), If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form At the time this publication went to
line 27, that part of the amount on Form 2106, print, Congress was considering legis-1040 instructions, use the worksheet in Publica-
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to lation that would extend the deductiontion 535, Business Expenses, to figure your de- CAUTION
!
your impairment. Enter the amount that is unre- for state and local general sales taxes. To findduction.
lated to your impairment on Schedule A (Form out if this legislation was enacted and for more
1040), line 20. Your impairment-related work details, go to www.irs.gov, click on More FormsNote. When figuring the amount you canexpenses are not subject to the and Publications,  and then on What’s Hot indeduct for insurance premiums, do not include2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies forms and publications, or see Publication 553,any advance payments shown in box 1 of Formto other employee business expenses. Highlights of 2006 Tax Changes.1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC)
Advance Payments. Also, if you are claiming theExample. You are blind. You must use a
health coverage tax credit, subtract the amountreader to do your work. You use the reader both
shown on Form 8885, line 4, from the total insur-during your regular working hours at your place
ance premiums you paid.of work and outside your regular working hours Introductionaway from your place of work. The reader’s
This chapter discusses which taxes you canservices are only for your work. You can deduct Where to report. You take this deduction on deduct if you itemize deductions on Schedule Ayour expenses for the reader as business ex- Form 1040, line 29. If you itemize your deduc- (Form 1040). It also explains which taxes youpenses. tions and do not claim 100% of your can deduct on other schedules or forms andself-employed health insurance on line 29, in- which taxes you cannot deduct.clude any remaining premiums with all other
This chapter covers the following topics.medical care expenses on Schedule A (Form
Health Insurance Costs 1040), subject to the 7.5% limit. See chapter 7 of • Income taxes (federal, state, local, and
Publication 535, Business Expenses, for more foreign).for Self-Employed information. • Real estate taxes (state, local, and for-
eign).Persons
• Personal property taxes (state and local).If you were self-employed and had a net profit
• Taxes and fees you cannot deduct.for the year, were a general partner (or a limited
partner receiving guaranteed payments), or re-
Use Table 22-1 as a guide to determine whichceived wages from an S corporation in which 22.you were a more than 2% shareholder (who is taxes you can deduct.
treated as a partner), you may be able to deduct, At the end of the chapter is a section thatas an adjustment to income, all of the amount explains which form you use to deduct the differ-paid for medical and qualified long-term care ent types of taxes.insurance on behalf of yourself, your spouse, Taxes
and dependents.
Business taxes. You can deduct certainThe insurance plan must be established
taxes only if they are ordinary and necessaryunder your trade or business, and you cannot
What’s Newtake this deduction to the extent that the amount expenses of your trade or business or of produc-
of the deduction is more than your earned in- ing income. For information on these taxes, see
come from that trade or business. Federal telephone excise tax. Although you Publication 535, Business Expenses.
cannot deduct any excise tax that is not a busi-You cannot take this deduction for any
ness-related expense, you may still be able tomonth in which you were eligible to participate in State or local taxes. These are taxes im-request a credit for certain federal telephoneany subsidized health plan maintained by your posed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions, orexcise tax you paid. For more information, seeemployer or your spouse’s employer. This rule is
any of their political subdivisions (such as achapter 37.applied separately to plans that provide
county or city), or by the District of Columbia.long-term care insurance and plans that do not Limit on itemized deductions. The amountprovide long-term care insurance. Indian tribal government. An Indian tribalof adjusted gross income allowed without limit-If you qualify to take the deduction, use the government that is recognized by the Secretarying your itemized deductions has increased. ForSelf-Employed Health Insurance Deduction of the Treasury as performing substantial gov-2006, if your adjusted gross income is more thanWorksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to fig- ernment functions will be treated as a state for$150,500 ($75,250 if you are married filing sep-ure the amount you can deduct. But if any of the purposes of claiming a deduction for taxes. In-arately), you may have to reduce the amount offollowing applies, do not use the worksheet. come taxes, real estate taxes, and personalcertain itemized deductions, including most mis-
• You had more than one source of income property taxes imposed by that Indian tribal gov-cellaneous deductions. For more information
subject to self-employment tax. ernment (or by any of its subdivisions that areand a worksheet, see the instructions for Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), line 28. treated as political subdivisions of a state) are• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In- deductible.come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned General sales taxes no longer deductible.Income Exclusion. You can no longer elect to deduct state and local
Foreign taxes. These are taxes imposed by ageneral sales taxes instead of state and local• You are using amounts paid for qualified
foreign country or any of its political subdivi-income taxes as an itemized deduction onlong-term care insurance to figure the de-
Schedule A (Form 1040).duction. sions.
Page 138 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 141 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• California Nonoccupational Disability Ben-Useful Items What To Deduct
efit Fund.You may want to see:
Your deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti- • New Jersey Nonoccupational Disabilitymated tax payments, or other tax payments asPublication Benefit Fund.follows.❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals • New Jersey Unemployment Compensa-Withheld taxes. You can deduct state and tion Fund.❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time local income taxes withheld from your salary inHomeowners • New York Nonoccupational Disability Ben-the year they are withheld. For 2006, these
efit Fund.taxes will be shown in boxes 17 and 19 of yourForm (and Instructions) Form W-2. You may also have state or local • Rhode Island Temporary Disability Benefitincome tax withheld on Form W-2G (box 14),❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Fund.Form 1099-MISC (box 16), or Form 1099-RDeductions
• Washington State Supplemental Worker’s(boxes 10 and 13).❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental Compensation Fund.Income and Loss Estimated tax payments. You can deduct es-
• West Virginia Unemployment Compensa-timated tax payments you made during the year❏ Form 1116 Foreign Tax Credit tion Fund.to a state or local government. However, you
must have a reasonable basis for making the
estimated tax payments. Any estimated state or Employee contributions to private or
local tax payments you make that are not rea- voluntary disability plans are not de-
sonably determined in good faith at the time of ductible.Tests To Deduct CAUTION
!
payment are not deductible. For example, you
made an estimated state income tax payment.Any Tax Refund (or credit) of state or local incomeHowever, the estimate of your state tax liability taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for)shows that you will get a refund of the fullThe following two tests must be met for any tax state or local income taxes in a year after theamount of your estimated payment. You had noto be deductible by you. year in which you paid them, you may have toreasonable basis to believe you had any addi- include the refund in income on Form 1040, line• The tax must be imposed on you. tional liability for state income taxes and you 10, in the year you receive it. This includescannot deduct the estimated tax payment.• You must pay the tax during your tax year. refunds resulting from taxes that were
overwithheld, applied from a prior year return,Refund applied to taxes. You can deduct any
not figured correctly, or figured again because ofpart of a refund of prior-year state or local in-The tax must be imposed on you. Generally,
an amended return. If you did not itemize yourcome taxes that you chose to have credited toyou can deduct only taxes that are imposed on
deductions in the previous year, do not includeyour 2006 estimated state or local income taxes.you.
the refund in income. If you deducted the taxes Do not reduce your deduction by either ofGenerally, you can deduct property taxes
in the previous year, include all or part of thethe following items.only if you are the property owner. If your spouse
refund on Form 1040, line 10, in the year youowns property and pays real estate taxes on it, • Any state or local income tax refund (or receive the refund. For a discussion of howthe taxes are deductible on your spouse’s sepa- credit) you expect to receive for 2006. much to include, see Recoveries in chapter 12.rate return or on your joint return.
• Any refund of (or credit for) prior-year
state and local income taxes you actuallyYou must pay the tax during your tax year. Foreign Income Taxesreceived in 2006.If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deduct
only those taxes you actually paid during your Generally, you can take either a deduction or aHowever, part or all of this refund (or credit) maytax year. If you pay your taxes by check, the day credit for income taxes imposed on you by abe taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state oryou mail or deliver the check is the date of foreign country or a U.S. possession. However,local income taxes, later.payment, provided the check is honored by the you cannot take a deduction or credit for foreign
financial institution. If you use a pay-by-phone income taxes paid on income that is exemptSeparate federal returns. If you and youraccount, the date reported on the statement of from U.S. tax under the foreign earned incomespouse file separate state, local, and federalthe financial institution showing when payment exclusion or the foreign housing exclusion. Forincome tax returns, you each can deduct on yourwas made is the date of payment. If you contest information on these exclusions, see Publicationfederal return only the amount of your own statea tax liability and are a cash basis taxpayer, you 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Residentand local income tax that you paid during the taxcan deduct the tax only in the year you actually Aliens Abroad. For information on the foreign taxyear.pay it (or transfer money or other property to credit, see Publication 514.Joint state and local returns. If you andprovide for satisfaction of the contested liability).
your spouse file joint state and local returns andSee Publication 538, Accounting Periods and
separate federal returns, each of you can deductMethods, for details.
on your separate federal return a part of the totalIf you use an accrual method of accounting, Real Estate Taxesstate and local income taxes paid during the taxsee Publication 538, for more information.
year. You can deduct only the amount of the Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,total taxes that is proportionate to your gross or foreign taxes on real property levied for theincome compared to the combined gross in- general public welfare. You can deduct thesecome of you and your spouse. However, youIncome Taxes taxes only if they are based on the assessedcannot deduct more than the amount you actu- value of the real property and charged uniformlyally paid during the year. You can avoid thisThis section discusses the deductibility of state against all property under the jurisdiction of thecalculation if you and your spouse are jointly andand local income taxes (including employee taxing authority.individually liable for the full amount of the statecontributions to state benefit funds) and foreign Deductible real estate taxes generally do notand local income taxes. If so, you and yourincome taxes. include taxes charged for local benefits and im-spouse can deduct on your separate federal provements that increase the value of the prop-returns the amount you each actually paid. erty. They also do not include itemized chargesState and Local Income Joint federal return. If you file a joint federal for services (such as trash collection) assessed
Taxes return, you can deduct the total of the state and against specific property or certain people, even
local income taxes both of you paid. if the charge is paid to the taxing authority. ForYou can deduct state and local income taxes. more information about taxes and charges thatContributions to state benefit funds. As an are not deductible, see Real Estate-RelatedException.  You cannot deduct state and local employee, you can deduct mandatory contribu- Items You Cannot Deduct, later.income taxes you pay on income that is exempt tions to state benefit funds withheld from your
from federal income tax, unless the exempt in- wages that provide protection against loss of Tenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous-
come is interest income. For example, you can- wages. Mandatory payments made to the fol- ing corporation. Generally, if you are a ten-
not deduct the part of a state’s income tax that is lowing state benefit funds are deductible as ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing
on a cost-of-living allowance that is exempt from state income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040), corporation, you can deduct the a mount paid to
federal income tax. line 5. the corporation that represents your share of the
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 139

Page 142 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 22-1.  Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
You Can Deduct You Cannot Deduct
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or Fees and charges that are not expenses of your trade
business or of producing income. or business or of producing income, such as fees for
driver’s licenses, car inspections, parking, or charges
for water bills (see Taxes and Fees You Cannot
Deduct).
Fines and penalties.
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary
Employee contributions to state funds listed disability plans.
under Contributions to state benefit funds. State and local general sales taxes.
One-half of self-employment tax paid.
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business. State and local sales and use taxes.
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty Federal excise taxes, such as tax on gasoline.
income. Per capita taxes.
Occupational taxes. See chapter 28.
Personal Property State and local personal property taxes. Import duties.
Taxes
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions).
Foreign real estate taxes. Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions).
Tenant’s share of real estate taxes paid by Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
cooperative housing corporation. Homeowners association charges.
real estate taxes the corporation paid or incurred 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leapfor your dwelling unit. The corporation should your deduction. Enter it on years, divide line 2 by 366) .... .345provide you with a statement showing your Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isshare of the taxes. For more information, see Note. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property you your deduction. Enter it onSpecial Rules for Cooperatives in Publication bought or sold during the real property tax year. Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $214530.
Real estate taxes for prior years. Do notDivision of real estate taxes between buyers Since the buyers of their old home paid all of the
divide delinquent taxes between the buyer andand sellers. If you bought or sold real estate taxes, Dennis and Beth also include the $214 in
seller if the taxes are for any real property taxduring the year, the real estate taxes must be the selling price of the old home. (The buyers
year before the one in which the property is sold.divided between the buyer and the seller. add the $214 to their cost of the home.)
The buyer and the seller must divide the real Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delinquent Dennis and Beth owned their new home dur-
estate taxes according to the number of days in taxes, the buyer cannot deduct them. The buyer ing the real property tax year for 243 days (May
the real property tax year (the period to which must add them to the cost of the property. The 3 to December 31, including their date of
the tax imposed relates) that each owned the seller can deduct these taxes paid by the buyer. purchase). They figure their deduction for taxes
property. The seller is treated as paying the However, the seller must include them in the on their new home as follows.
taxes up to, but not including, the date of sale. selling price.
The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin- Taxes On New Home Examples. The following examples illus-ning with the date of sale. This applies regard- trate how real estate taxes are divided between 1. Enter the total real estate taxes forless of the lien dates under local law. Generally, buyer and seller. the real property tax year ..... $732this information is included on the settlement
statement provided at the closing. 2. Enter the number of days in theExample 1. Dennis and Beth White’s realIf you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until real property tax year that youproperty tax year for both their old home andthey are paid because you use the cash method owned the property ......... 2 4 3their new home is the calendar year, with pay-of accounting, and the buyer of your property is 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leapment due August 1. The tax on their old home,personally liable for the tax, you are considered years, divide line 2 by 366) .... .666sold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their newto have paid your part of the tax at the time of the home, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis and 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This issale. This lets you deduct the part of the tax to Beth are considered to have paid a proportion- your deduction. Enter it onthe date of sale even though you did not actually ate share of the real estate taxes on the old Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $488pay it. However, you must also include the home even though they did not actually payamount of that tax in the selling price of the Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes onthem to the taxing authority. On the other hand,property. The buyer must include the same the new home, they add $244 ($732 paid lessthey can claim only a proportionate share of theamount in his or her cost of the property. $488 deduction) to their cost of the new home.taxes they paid on their new property evenYou figure your deduction for taxes on each (The sellers add this $244 to their selling pricethough they paid the entire amount.property bought or sold during the real property and deduct the $244 as a real estate tax.)Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur-tax year as follows.
Dennis and Beth’s real estate tax deductioning the real property tax year for 126 days (Janu-
for their old and new homes is the sum of $214ary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). TheyWorksheet 22-1. and $488, or $702. They will enter this amountfigure their deduction for taxes on their old homeKeep for Your Records on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6.as follows.
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for Example 2. George and Helen BrownTaxes On Old Homethe real property tax year ..... bought a new home on May 3, 2006. Their real
2. Enter the number of days in the 1. Enter the total real estate taxes for property tax year for the new home is the calen-
real property tax year that you the real property tax year ..... $620 dar year. Real estate taxes for 2005 were as-
owned the property ......... sessed in their state on January 1, 2006. The2. Enter the number of days in the
taxes became due on May 31, 2006, and Octo-3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap real property tax year that you
ber 31, 2006.years, divide line 2 by 366) .... . owned the property ......... 1 2 6
Page 140 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 143 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due after Divorced individuals. If your divorce or sepa- • A periodic charge for a residential service
ration agreement states that you must pay the (such as a $20 per month or $240 annualthe date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2005
real estate taxes for a home owned by you and fee charged to each homeowner for trashwere $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2006,
your spouse, part of your payments may be collection), orand $340 on October 31, 2006. These taxes
deductible as alimony and part as real estatewere for the 2005 real property tax year. The • A flat fee charged for a single service pro-taxes. See Taxes and insurance  in chapter 18Browns cannot deduct them since they did not vided by your government (such as a $30for more information.own the property until 2006. Instead, they must charge for mowing your lawn because itadd $680 to the cost of their new home. was allowed to grow higher than permittedMinister’s and military personnel housing al-In January 2007, the Browns receive their under your local ordinance).lowances. If you are a minister or a member of2006 property tax statement for $752, which the uniformed services and receive a housingthey will pay in 2007. The Browns owned their allowance that you can exclude from income, You must look at your real estate taxnew home during the 2006 real property tax year you still can deduct all of the real estate taxes bill to determine if any nondeductiblefor 243 days (May 3 to December 31). They will you pay on your home. itemized charges, such as those listedCAUTION
!
figure their 2007 deduction for taxes as follows. above, are included in the bill. If your taxingRefund (or rebate). If you receive a refund or authority (or mortgage lender) does not furnish1. Enter the total real estate taxes for rebate in 2006 of real estate taxes you paid in you a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it.the real property tax year ..... $752 2006, you must reduce your deduction by the
2. Enter the number of days in the amount refunded to you. If you receive a refund Exception. Service charges used to main-
real property tax year that you or rebate in 2006 of real estate taxes you de- tain or improve services (such as trash collec-owned the property ......... 2 4 3 ducted in an earlier year, you generally must tion or police and fire protection) are deductible
include the refund or rebate in income in the as real estate taxes if:3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap
year you receive it. However, you only need toyears, divide line 2 by 366) .... .666 • The fees or charges are imposed at a likeinclude the amount of the deduction that re-4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is rate against all property in the taxing juris-duced your tax in the earlier year. For moreyour deduction. Claim it on diction,information, see Recoveries in chapter 12.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $501 • The funds collected are not earmarked;If you did not itemize deductions in the instead, they are commingled with generalThe remaining $251 ($752 paid less $501 de- year you paid the tax, do not report the revenue funds, andduction) of taxes paid in 2007, along with the refund as income.
TIP
$680 paid in 2006, is added to the cost of their • Funds used to maintain or improve serv-new home. ices are not limited to or determined by theBecause the taxes up to the date of sale are amount of these fees or charges collected.Real Estate-Related Itemsconsidered paid by the seller on the date of sale,
You Cannot Deductthe seller is entitled to a 2006 tax deduction of
Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes). Transfer$931. This is the sum of the $680 for 2005 and
taxes and similar taxes and charges on the salePayments for the following items generally arethe $251 for the 122 days the seller owned the
of a personal home are not deductible. If theynot deductible as real estate taxes.home in 2006. The seller must also include the
are paid by the seller, they are expenses of the$931 in the selling price when he or she figures • Taxes for local benefits. sale and reduce the amount realized on the sale.the gain or loss on the sale. The seller should
If paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost• Itemized charges for services (such ascontact the Browns in January 2007 to find out
basis of the property.trash and garbage pickup fees).how much real estate tax is due for 2006.
• Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).Form 1099-S. For certain sales or ex- Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
changes of real estate, the person responsible If your landlord increases your rent in the form of• Rent increases due to higher real estate
for closing the sale (generally the settlement a tax surcharge because of increased real es-taxes.
agent) prepares Form 1099-S, Proceeds From tate taxes, you cannot deduct the increase as• Homeowners’ association charges.Real Estate Transactions, to report certain infor- taxes.
mation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop-
Homeowners’ association charges. Theseerty. Box 2 of the form is for the gross proceeds Taxes for local benefits. Deductible real es- charges are not deductible because they areof the sale and should include the portion of the tate taxes generally do not include taxes imposed by the homeowners’ association,seller’s real estate tax liability that the buyer will charged for local benefits and improvements rather than the state or local government.pay after the date of sale. The buyer includes tending to increase the value of your property.
these taxes in the cost basis of the property, and These include assessments for streets, side-
the seller both deducts this amount as a tax paid walks, water mains, sewer lines, public parking
and includes it in the sales price of the property. facilities, and similar improvements. You should
Personal PropertyFor a real estate transaction that involves a increase the basis of your property by the
home, any real estate tax the seller paid in amount of the assessment.
Taxesadvance but that is the liability of the buyer Local benefit taxes are deductible only if they
appears on Form 1099-S, box 5. The buyer are for maintenance, repair, or interest charges
Personal property tax is deductible if it is a statededucts this amount as a real estate tax, and the related to those benefits. If only a part of the
or local tax that is:seller reduces his or her real estate tax deduc- taxes is for maintenance, repair, or interest, you
tion (or includes it in income) by the same must be able to show the amount of that part to • Charged on personal property,amount. See Refund (or rebate), later. claim the deduction. If you cannot determine
• Based only on the value of the personalwhat part of the tax is for maintenance, repair, or
property, andinterest, none of it is deductible.Taxes placed in escrow. If your monthly
Taxes for local benefits may be included inmortgage payment includes an amount placed • Charged on a yearly basis, even if it isyour real estate tax bill. If your taxing authorityin escrow (put in the care of a third party) for real collected more or less than once a year.(or mortgage lender) does not furnish you a copyestate taxes, you may not be able to deduct the
of your real estate tax bill, ask for it. You shouldtotal amount placed in escrow. You can deduct A tax that meets the above requirements canuse the rules above to determine if the localonly the real estate tax that the third party actu- be considered charged on personal propertybenefit tax is deductible.ally paid to the taxing authority. If the third party even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. For
does not notify you of the amount of real estate example, a yearly tax based on value qualifiesItemized charges for services.  An itemizedtax that was paid for you, contact the third party as a personal property tax even if it is called acharge for services assessed against specificor the taxing authority to find the proper amount registration fee and is for the privilege of regis-property or certain people is not a tax, even if theto show on your return. tering motor vehicles or using them on the high-charge is paid to the taxing authority. For exam- ways.ple, you cannot deduct the charge as a realTenants by the entirety. If you and your If the tax is partly based on value and partlyestate tax if it is:spouse held property as tenants by the entirety based on other criteria, it may qualify in part.
and you file separate federal returns, each of • A unit fee for the delivery of a service
you can deduct only the taxes each of you paid (such as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000 Example. Your state charges a yearly mo-
on the property. gallons of water you use), tor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 141

Page 144 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cents per hundredweight. You paid $32 based Foreign income taxes. Generally, income Use Table 23-1 to find out where to get more
taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. pos-on the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) of information on various types of interest, includ-
session can be claimed as an itemized deduc-your car. You can deduct $15 (1% × $1,500) as ing investment interest.
tion on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8, or as aa personal property tax because it is based on
credit against your U.S. income tax on Formthe value. The remaining $17 ($.50 × 34), based Useful Items1040, line 47. To claim the credit, you may haveon the weight, is not deductible. You may want to see:to complete and attach Form 1116. For more
information, see chapter 37, the Form 1040 in-
structions, or Publication 514. Publication
❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest DeductionTaxes and Fees Real estate taxes and personal property
taxes.  These taxes are deducted on Sched-
You Cannot Deduct ule A (Form 1040), lines 6 and 7, respectively,
unless they are paid on property used in your
Many federal, state, and local government taxes business, in which case they are deducted on
are not deductible because they do not fall within Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Schedule F Home Mortgage
the categories discussed earlier. Other taxes (Form 1040). Taxes on property that produces
and fees, such as federal income taxes, are not rent or royalty income are deducted on Sched- Interestdeductible because the tax law specifically pro- ule E (Form 1040).
hibits a deduction for them. See Table 22-1. Generally, home mortgage interest is any inter-Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half ofTaxes and fees that are generally not de- est you pay on a loan secured by your homeyour self-employment tax on Form 1040, line 27.ductible include the following items. (main home or a second home). The loan may
be a mortgage to buy your home, a second• Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes- Other taxes. All other deductible taxes are
sion taxes. However, you can deduct the mortgage, a line of credit, or a home equity loan.deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8.
estate tax attributable to income in respect You can deduct home mortgage interest only
of a decedent if you, as a beneficiary, if you meet all the following conditions.
must include that income in your gross
• You must file Form 1040 and itemize de-income. In that case, deduct the estate tax
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).as a miscellaneous deduction that is not
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross- • You must be legally liable for the loan.income limit. For more information, see You cannot deduct payments you make23.Publication 559. for someone else if you are not legally
liable to make them. Both you and the• Federal income taxes. This includes
taxes withheld from your pay. However, lender must intend that the loan be repaid.
one-half of any self-employment tax you In addition, there must be a true
Interest
pay is deductible. debtor-creditor relationship between you
and the lender.• Fines and penalties. You cannot deduct Expensefines and penalties paid to a government • The mortgage must be a secured debt on
for violation of any law, including related a qualified home. (Generally, your mort-
amounts forfeited as collateral deposits. gage is a secured debt if you put your
Reminders home up as collateral to protect the inter-• Gift taxes. ests of the lender. The term “qualified
• License fees. You cannot deduct license home” means your main home or secondPersonal interest. Personal interest is not de-fees for personal purposes (such as mar- home. For details, see Publication 936.)ductible. Examples of personal interest includeriage, driver’s, and dog license fees). interest on a loan to purchase an automobile for
personal use and credit card and installment• Per capita taxes. You cannot deduct Amount Deductibleinterest incurred for personal expenses.state or local per capita taxes.
But you may be able to deduct interest you In most cases, you will be able to deduct all of• Social security taxes. This includes so- pay on a qualified student loan. For details, seecial security, Medicare, and railroad retire- your home mortgage interest. Whether it is allPublication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.ment taxes withheld from your pay. deductible depends on the date you took out the
mortgage, the amount of the mortgage, and yourLimit on itemized deductions.  If your ad-• Social security and other employment use of its proceeds.justed gross income is more than $150,500taxes for household workers. However,
($75,250 if you are married filing separately), thethe social security and other employment Fully deductible interest. If all of your mort-overall amount of your itemized deductions maytaxes you pay on the wages of a house- gages fit into one or more of the following threebe limited. See chapter 29 for more informationhold worker may qualify as medical or categories at all times during the year, you canabout this limit.child care expenses. For more informa- deduct all of the interest on those mortgages. (Iftion, see chapters 21 and 32.
any one mortgage fits into more than one cate-
gory, add the debt that fits in each category toMany taxes and fees other than those listed
your other debt in the same category.)above are also nondeductible, unless they are Introductionordinary and necessary expenses of a business The three categories are:
or income producing activity. For other nonde- This chapter discusses interest. Interest is the 1. Mortgages you took out on or before Octo-ductible items, see Real Estate-Related Items amount you pay for the use of borrowed money. ber 13, 1987 (called grandfathered debt).You Cannot Deduct, earlier. The following are types of interest you can
2. Mortgages you took out after October 13,deduct as itemized deductions on Schedule A
1987, to buy, build, or improve your home(Form 1040).
(called home acquisition debt), but only if• Home mortgage interest, including certainWhere To Deduct throughout 2006 these mortgages plus anypoints. grandfathered debt totaled $1 million orYou deduct taxes on the following schedules. less ($500,000 or less if married filing sep-• Investment interest.
arately).This chapter explains these deductions. It alsoState and local income taxes.  These taxes
explains where to deduct other types of interest 3. Mortgages you took out after October 13,are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5,
and lists some types of interest you cannot de- 1987, other than to buy, build, or improveeven if your only source of income is from busi-
duct.ness, rents, or royalties. your home (called home equity debt), but
Page 142 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 145 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
only if throughout 2006 these mortgages Mortgage assistance payments. If you qual- to obtain a home mortgage. Points may also be
totaled $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if ify for mortgage assistance payments for called loan origination fees, maximum loan
married filing separately) and totaled no lower-income families under section 235 of the charges, loan discount, or discount poin ts.
more than the fair market value of your National Housing Act, part or all of the interest A borrower is treated as paying any points
home reduced by (1) and (2). on your mortgage may be paid for you. You that a home seller pays for the borrower’s mort-
cannot deduct the interest that is paid for you. gage. See Points paid by the seller, later.The dollar limits for the second and third
categories apply to the combined mortgages on No other effect on taxes. Do not include
your main home and second home. these mortgage assistance payments in your General RuleSee Part II of Publication 936 for more de- income. Also, do not use these payments to
tailed definitions of grandfathered, home acqui- reduce other deductions, such as real estate You generally cannot deduct the full amount ofsition, and home equity debt. taxes. points in the year paid. Because they are pre-You can use Figure 23-A to check whether paid interest, you generally deduct them ratablyDivorced or separated individuals. If a di-your home mortgage interest is fully deductible. over the life (term) of the mortgage. See Deduc-vorce or separation agreement requires you or
tion Allowed Ratably.Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deduct your spouse or former spouse to pay home
For exceptions to the general rule, see De-interest on a mortgage that does not fit into any mortgage interest on a home owned by both of
duction Allowed in Year Paid.of the three categories listed above. If this ap- you, the payment of interest may be alimony.
plies to you, see Part II of Publication 936 to See the discussion of Payments for
figure the amount of interest you can deduct. jointly-owned home in chapter 18.
Deduction Allowed in Year PaidRedeemable ground rents. If you make an-
nual or periodic rental payments on a redeem- You can fully deduct points in the year paid if youSpecial Situations able ground rent, you can deduct them as meet all the following tests. (You can use Figure
mortgage interest. 23-B as a quick guide to see whether your pointsThis section describes certain items that can be
Payments made to end the lease and to buy are fully deductible in the year paid.) included as home mortgage interest and others
the lessor’s entire interest in the land are notthat cannot. It also describes certain special
1. Your loan is secured by your main home.ground rents. You cannot deduct them. Forsituations that may affect your deduction.
(Your main home is the one you live inmore information, see Publication 936.
Late payment charge on mortgage payment. most of the time.)Nonredeemable ground rents. PaymentsYou can deduct as home mortgage interest a 2. Paying points is an established businesson a nonredeemable ground rent are not mort-late payment charge if it was not for a specific practice in the area where the loan wasgage interest. You can deduct them as rent ifservice performed in connection with your mort- made.they are a business expense or if they are forgage loan.
rental property. 3. The points paid were not more than theMortgage prepayment penalty. If you pay off points generally charged in that area.Rental payments. If you live in a house beforeyour home mortgage early, you may have to pay
final settlement on the purchase, any paymentsa penalty. You can deduct that penalty as home 4. You use the cash method of accounting.you make for that period are rent and not inter-mortgage interest provided the penalty is not for This means you report income in the yearest. This is true even if the settlement papers calla specific service performed or cost incurred in you receive it and deduct expenses in thethem interest. You cannot deduct these pay-connection with your mortgage loan. year you pay them. (If you want more infor-ments as home mortgage interest. mation about this method, see AccountingSale of home. If you sell your home, you can Methods in chapter 1.)Mortgage proceeds invested in tax-exemptdeduct your home mortgage interest (subject to
securities. You cannot deduct the home mort-any limits that apply) paid up to, but not includ- 5. The points were not paid in place ofgage interest on grandfathered debt or homeing, the date of sale. amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa-equity debt if you used the proceeds of the rately on the settlement statement, such asmortgage to buy securities or certificates thatExample. John and Peggy Harris sold their appraisal fees, inspection fees, title fees,produce tax-free income. “Grandfathered debt”home on May 7. Through April 30, they made attorney fees, and property taxes.and “home equity debt” are defined earlier underhome mortgage interest payments of $1,220. 6. The funds you provided at or before clos-Amount Deductible.The settlement sheet for the sale of the home ing, plus any points the seller paid, were atshowed $50 interest for the 6-day period in May Refunds of interest. If you receive a refund of least as much as the points charged. Theup to, but not including, the date of sale. Their interest in the same tax year you paid it, you funds you provided do not have to havemortgage interest deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 + must reduce your interest expense by the been applied to the points. They can in-$50). amount refunded to you. If you receive a refund clude a down payment, an escrow deposit,of interest you deducted in an earlier year, youPrepaid interest. If you pay interest in ad- earnest money, and other funds you paidgenerally must include the refund in income invance for a period that goes beyond the end of at or before closing for any purpose. Youthe year you receive it. However, you need tothe tax year, you must spread this interest over cannot have borrowed these funds frominclude it only up to the amount of the deductionthe tax years to which it applies. You can deduct your lender or mortgage broker.that reduced your tax in the earlier year. This isin each year only the interest that qualifies as 7. You use your loan to buy or build yourtrue whether the interest overcharge was re-home mortgage interest for that year. However, main home.funded to you or was used to reduce the out-see Points, later.
standing principal on your mortgage. 8. The points were computed as a percent-Mortgage interest credit. You may be able to If you received a refund of interest you over- age of the principal amount of the mort-claim a mortgage interest credit if you were paid in an earlier year, you generally will receive gage.issued a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) by a a Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement,
state or local government. Figure the credit on 9. The amount is clearly shown on the settle-showing the refund in box 3. For information
Form 8396, Mortgage Interest Credit. If you take ment statement (such as the Settlementabout Form 1098, see Mortgage Interest State-
this credit, you must reduce your mortgage inter- Statement, Form HUD-1) as pointsment, later.
est deduction by the amount of the credit. charged for the mortgage. The points mayFor more information on how to treat refunds
For more information on the credit, see chap- be shown as paid from either your funds orof interest deducted in earlier years, see Recov-
ter 37. the seller’s.eries in chapter 12.
Ministers’ and military housing allowance.
If you are a minister or a member of the uni- Note. If you meet all of these tests, you canPoints
formed services and receive a housing allow- choose to either fully deduct the points in the
ance that is not taxable, you can still deduct your The term “points” is used to describe certain year paid, or deduct them over the life of the
home mortgage interest. charges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrower loan.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 143

Page 146 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 23-A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
Were your total mortgage balances $100,000 or less
2
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at all
times during the year?
Start Here
No
/H17075
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before 10-13-87?
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after
10-13-87 used to buy, build, or improve the main
home secured by that main home mortgage or
used to buy, build, or improve the second home
secured by that second home mortgage, or both?
Were the mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less
($500,000 or less if married filing separately) at 
all times during the year?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
Yes
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home.)
Yes
/H17073
Yes
/H17076
/H17076
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You do not need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
Were your grandfathered debt plus home
acquisition debt balances $1,000,000 or less
3
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)
at all times during the year?
Were your home equity debt balances $100,000 or
less
2
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at
all times during the year?
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married filing separately) qualify as home equity debt if they are not more than  the total home equity debt
limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
Do you meet the conditions to deduct home
mortgage interest?
/H17074
Yes
You cannot deduct the interest payments as home
mortgage interest.
4/H17075
No
You must itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) and be legally liable for the loan. The loan must be a secured debt on a qualified home. See Home
Mortgage Interest.
See Table 23-1 for where to deduct other types of interest payments.
4
3
2
1
1
Page 144 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 147 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 23-B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Start Here
/H17075
/H17074Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
*The funds you provided do not have to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, ear nest money, and other
funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Is the payment of points an established
business practice in your area?
Were the points paid more than the amount
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Did you take out the loan to improve your
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build
your new home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Were the funds you provided (other than
those you borrowed from your lender or
mortgage broker), plus any points the seller
paid, at least as much as the points charged?*
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
You cannot fully deduct the points this year. See the
discussion on Points.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
/H17075
Yes
Were the points paid in place of amounts that
ordinarily are separately stated on the
settlement sheet?
/H17074
/H17075
Yes
No
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 145

Page 148 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Home improvement loan. You can also fully 1. You use the cash method of accounting. buyer can deduct the points in the year paid. If
deduct in the year paid points paid on a loan to This means you report income in the year any of those tests is not met, the buye r deducts
improve your main home, if tests (1) through (6) you receive it and deduct expenses in the the points over the life of the loan.
are met. year you pay them. Most individuals use For information about basis, see chapter 13.
this method.Second home.  You cannot fully de- Funds provided are less than points. If youduct in the year paid points you pay on 2. Your loan is secured by a home. (The meet all the tests in Deduction Allowed in Yearloans secured by your second home. home does not need to be your main
CAUTION
!
Paid, earlier, except that the funds you providedYou can deduct these points only over the life of home.) were less than the points charged to you (test 6),the loan. you can deduct the points in the year paid, up to3. Your loan period is not more than 30
the amount of funds you provided. In addition,years.Refinancing. Generally, points you pay to you can deduct any points paid by the seller.4. If your loan period is more than 10 years,refinance a mortgage are not deductible in full in
the terms of your loan are the same asthe year you pay them. This is true even if the Example 1. When you took out a $100,000other loans offered in your area for thenew mortgage is secured by your main home. mortgage loan to buy your home in December,same or longer period. you were charged one point ($1,000). You meetHowever, if you use part of the refinanced
all the tests for deducting points in the year paid,mortgage proceeds to improve your main home 5. Either your loan amount is $250,000 or
except the only funds you provided were a $750and you meet the first 6 tests listed under De- less, or the number of points is not more
down payment. Of the $1,000 charged forduction Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, you can than:
points, you can deduct $750 in the year paid.fully deduct the part of the points related to the
a. 4, if your loan period is 15 years or less, You spread the remaining $250 over the life ofimprovement in the year you paid them with your
or the mortgage.own funds. You can deduct the rest of the points
over the life of the loan. b. 6, if your loan period is more than 15 Example 2. The facts are the same as inyears. Example 1, except that the person who sold youExample 1. In 1993, Bill Fields got a mort-
your home also paid one point ($1,000) to helpgage to buy a home. In 2006, Bill refinanced that
you get your mortgage. In the year paid, you canmortgage with a 15-year $100,000 mortgage
deduct $1,750 ($750 of the amount you wereloan. The mortgage is secured by his home. To Special Situations charged plus the $1,000 paid by the seller). Youget the new loan, he had to pay three points
spread the remaining $250 over the life of the($3,000). Two points ($2,000) were for prepaid This section describes certain special situations
mortgage. You must reduce the basis of yourinterest, and one point ($1,000) was charged for that may affect your deduction of points.
home by the $1,000 paid by the seller.services, in place of amounts that ordinarily are
Original issue discount. If you do not qualifystated separately on the settlement statement.
to either deduct the points in the year paid or Excess points. If you meet all the tests inBill paid the points out of his private funds, rather
deduct them ratably over the life of the loan, or if Deduction Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, exceptthan out of the proceeds of the new loan. The
you choose not to use either of these methods, that the points paid were more than are gener-payment of points is an established practice in
the points reduce the issue price of the loan. ally paid in your area (test 3), you deduct in thethe area, and the points charged are not more
This reduction results in original issue discount, year paid only the points that are generallythan the amount generally charged there. Bill’s
which is discussed in chapter 5 of Publication charged. You must spread any additional pointsfirst payment on the new loan was due July 1.
535. over the life of the mortgage.He made six payments on the loan in 2006 and
is a cash basis taxpayer. Amounts charged for services. Amounts Mortgage ending early. If you spread yourBill used the funds from the new mortgage to charged by the lender for specific services con- deduction for points over the life of the mort-repay his existing mortgage. Although the new nected to the loan are not interest. Examples of gage, you can deduct any remaining balance inmortgage loan was for Bill’s continued owner- these charges are: the year the mortgage ends. However, if youship of his main home, it was not for the refinance the mortgage with the same lender,• Appraisal fees,purchase or improvement of that home. He can- you cannot deduct any remaining balance ofnot deduct all of the points in 2006. He can • Notary fees, spread points. Instead, deduct the remainingdeduct two points ($2,000) ratably over the life of balance over the term of the new loan.• Preparation costs for the mortgage note orthe loan. He deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷ 180 A mortgage may end early due to a prepay-deed of trust,months) × 6 payments] of the points in 2006. ment, refinancing, foreclosure, or similar event.The other point ($1,000) was a fee for services • Mortgage insurance premiums, and
and is not deductible. Example. Dan paid $3,000 in points in 1996• VA funding fees.
that he had to spread out over the 15-year life ofExample 2. The facts are the same as in You cannot deduct these amounts as points the mortgage. He had deducted $2,000 of theseExample 1, except that Bill used $25,000 of the either in the year paid or over the life of the points through 2005.loan proceeds to improve his home and $75,000 mortgage. For information about the tax treat- Dan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2006. Heto repay his existing mortgage. Bill deducts 25% ment of these amounts and other settlement can deduct the remaining $1,000 of points in($25,000 ÷ $100,000) of the points ($2,000) in fees and closing costs, get Publication 530, Tax 2006.2006. His deduction is $500 ($2,000 × 25%). Information for First-Time Homeowners.
Bill also deducts the ratable part of the re- Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deduct
Points paid by the seller. The term “points”maining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must be points on a mortgage unless the mortgage fits
includes loan placement fees that the sellerspread over the life of the loan. This is $50 into one of the categories listed earlier under
pays to the lender to arrange financing for the[($1,500 ÷ 180 months) × 6 payments] in 2006. Fully deductible interest. See Publication 936 for
buyer.The total amount Bill deducts in 2006 is $550 details.
($500 + $50). Treatment by seller. The seller cannot de-
duct these fees as interest. But they are a selling Mortgage Interest
expense that reduces the amount realized by StatementDeduction Allowed Ratably the seller. See chapter 15 for information on the
sale of your home.If you do not meet the tests listed under Deduc- If you paid $600 or more of mortgage interest
tion Allowed in Year Paid, the loan is not a home Treatment by buyer. The buyer reduces (including certain points) during the year on any
improvement loan, or you choose not to deduct the basis of the home by the amount of the one mortgage, you generally will receive a Form
your points in full in the year paid, you can seller-paid points and treats the points as if he or 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, or a similar
deduct the points ratably (equally) over the life of she had paid them. If all the tests under Deduc- statement from the mortgage holder. You will
the loan if you meet all the following tests. tion Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, are met, the receive the statement if you pay interest to a
Page 146 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 149 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
person (including a financial institution or a co- Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries. Before making either choice, consider
To determine your investment interest, combine the overall effect on your tax liability.operative housing corporation) in the course of
your share of investment interest from a partner- Compare your tax if you make one orthat person’s trade or business. A governmental
TIP
ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your both of these choices with your tax if you do not.unit is a person for purposes of furnishing the
other investment interest.statement.
The statement for each year should be sent Investment income of child reported on par-
to you by January 31 of the following year. A ent’s return. Investment income includes theAllocation of Interest
copy of this form will also be sent to the IRS. part of your child’s interest and dividend incomeExpenseThe statement will show the total interest you that you choose to report on your return. If the
paid during the year. If you purchased a main child does not have qualified dividends, AlaskaIf you borrow money for business or personalhome during the year, it will also show the de- Permanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distri-purposes as well as for investment, you mustductible points paid during the year, including butions, this is the amount on line 6 of Formallocate the debt among those purposes. Onlyseller-paid points. However, it should not show 8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s Inter-the interest expense on the part of the debt usedany interest that was paid for you by a govern- est and Dividends.for investment purposes is treated as invest-ment agency. ment interest. The allocation is not affected by Child’s qualified dividends. If part of theAs a general rule, Form 1098 will include the use of property that secures the debt. amount you report is your child’s qualified divi-only points that you can fully deduct in the year dends, that part (which is reported on Formpaid. However, certain points not included on
1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-Limit on DeductionForm 1098 also may be deductible, either in the
vestment income. However, you can choose toyear paid or over the life of the loan. See Points, Generally, your deduction for investment inter- include all or part of it in investment income, asearlier, to determine whether you can deduct est expense is limited to the amount of your net explained under Choosing to include qualifiedpoints not shown on Form 1098. investment income. dividends, earlier.
You can carry over the amount of investment Your investment income also includes thePrepaid interest on Form 1098. If you pre- interest that you could not deduct because of amount on Form 8814, line 6, (or, if applicable,paid interest in 2006 that accrued in full by Janu- this limit to the next tax year. The interest carried the reduced amount figured next under Child’sary 15, 2007, this prepaid interest may be over is treated as investment interest paid or Alaska Permanent Fund dividends).included in box 1 of Form 1098. However, you accrued in that next year.cannot deduct the prepaid amount for January Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.You can carry over disallowed investment2007 in 2006. (See Prepaid interest, earlier.) If part of the amount you report is your child’sinterest to the next tax year even if it is more thanYou will have to figure the interest that accrued Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that partyour taxable income in the year the interest wasfor 2007 and subtract it from the amount in box paid or accrued. does not count as investment income. To figure1. You will include the interest for January 2007 the amount of your child’s income that you canwith the other interest you pay for 2007. See consider your investment income, start with theHow To Report, later. Net Investment Income amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that
amount by a percentage that is equal to theRefunded interest. If you received a refund of Determine the amount of your net investment Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided bymortgage interest you overpaid in an earlier income by subtracting your investment ex- the total amount of interest and dividend incomeyear, you generally will receive a Form 1098 penses (other than interest expense) from your on Form 8814, lines 1a and 2a. Subtract theshowing the refund in box 3. See Refunds of investment income. result from the amount on Form 8814, line 6.interest, earlier.
Investment income. This generally includes Child’s capital gain distributions. If part
your gross income from property held for invest- of the amount you report is your child’s capital
ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and gain distributions, that part (which is reported on
royalties). Investment income does not include Schedule D, line 13 or Form 1040, line 13)Investment Interest Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does generally does not count as investment income.
not include qualified dividends or net capital gain However, you can choose to include all or part ofThis section discusses the interest expenses unless you choose to include them. it in investment income, as explained in Choos-you may be able to deduct as an investor.
ing to include net capital gain, earlier.Choosing to include qualified dividends.If you borrow money to buy property you hold
Your investment income also includes theInvestment income generally does not includefor investment, the interest you pay is invest-
amount on Form 8814, line 6, (or, if applicable,qualified dividends (discussed in chapter 8).ment interest. You can deduct investment inter-
the reduced amount figured under Child’sHowever, you can choose to include all or part ofest subject to the limit discussed later. However,
your qualified dividends in investment income. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-
You make this choice by completing Formduce tax-exempt income. Nor can you deduct
4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.interest expenses on straddles. Investment expenses. Investment expenses
If you choose to include any amount of your include all income-producing expenses (otherInvestment interest does not include any
qualified dividends in investment income, you than interest expense) relating to investmentqualified home mortgage interest or any interest
must reduce your qualified dividends that aretaken into account in computing income or loss property that are allowable deductions after ap-
eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates byfrom a passive activity. plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneous
the same amount. itemized deductions. Use the smaller of:
Choosing to include net capital gain. In-Investment Property 1. The investment expenses included onvestment income generally does not include net Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22, orcapital gain from disposing of investment prop-Property held for investment includes property
erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-that produces interest, dividends, annuities, or 2. The amount on Schedule A, line 26.
tual funds). However, you can choose to includeroyalties not derived in the ordinary course of a
all or part of your net capital gain in investmenttrade or business. It also includes property that
Losses from passive activities. Income orincome.produces gain or loss (not derived in the ordi-
expenses that you used in computing income ornary course of a trade or business) from the sale You make this choice by completing Form
loss from a passive activity are not included inor trade of property producing these types of 4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.
determining your investment income or invest-income or held for investment (other than an If you choose to include any amount of your
ment expenses (including investment interestinterest in a passive activity). Investment prop- net capital gain in investment income, you must
expense). See Publication 925, Passive Activityerty also includes an interest in a trade or busi- reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for
and At-Risk Rules, for information about passiveness activity in which you did not materially the lower capital gains tax rates by the same
participate (other than a passive activity). activities.amount.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 147

Page 150 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• FHA mortgage insurance premiums and this by tracing disbursements of the debt pro-Form 4952
VA funding fees. ceeds to specific uses. For details on how to do
Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense this, see chapter 5 of Publication 535.• Interest to purchase or carry tax-exemptDeduction, to figure your deduction for invest- securities.ment interest.
Exception to use of Form 4952. You do not Penalties. You cannot deduct fines and pen- How To Reporthave to complete Form 4952 or attach it to your alties paid to a government for violations of law,
return if you meet all of the following tests. regardless of their nature. You must file Form 1040 to deduct any home
• Your investment interest expense is not mortgage interest expense on your tax return.
more than your investment income from Personal Interest Where you deduct your interest expense gener-
interest and ordinary dividends minus any ally depends on how you use the loan proceeds.
Personal interest is not deductible. Personal in-qualified dividends. See Table 23-1 for a summary of where to de-
terest is any interest that is not home mortgage duct your interest expense.• You do not have any other deductible in- interest, investment interest, business interest,vestment expenses. or other deductible interest. It includes the fol- Home mortgage interest and points. Deduct
• You have no carryover of investment inter- lowing items. the home mortgage interest and points reported
est expense from 2005. to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A (Form• Interest on car loans (unless you use the 1040), line 10. If you paid more deductible inter-If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct all car for business). est to the financial institution than the amountof your investment interest. • Interest on federal, state, or local income shown on Form 1098, show the larger deducti-
tax. ble amount on line 10. Attach a statement ex-More Information plaining the difference and print “See attached”• Finance charges on credit cards, retail in- next to line 10.For more information on investment interest, stallment contracts, and revolving charge
 Deduct home mortgage interest that was notsee Interest Expenses in chapter 3 of Publica- accounts incurred for personal expenses.
reported to you on Form 1098 on Schedule Ation 550. • Late payment charges by a public utility. (Form 1040), line 11. If you paid home mortgage
interest to the person from whom you bought
your home, show that person’s name, address,You may be able to deduct interest you
and taxpayer identification number (TIN) on thepay on a qualified student loan. ForItems You dotted lines next to line 11. The seller must givedetails, see Publication 970.
TIP
you this number and you must give the sellerCannot Deduct your TIN. A Form W-9, Request for Taxpayer
Identification Number and Certification, can beSome interest payments are not deductible. used for this purpose. Failure to meet any ofCertain expenses similar to interest also are not these requirements may result in a $50 penaltyAllocation of Interestdeductible. Nondeductible expenses include the for each failure. The TIN can be either a socialfollowing items. security number, an individual taxpayer identifi-If you use the proceeds of a loan for more than
• Personal interest (discussed later). cation number (issued by the Internal Revenueone purpose (for example, personal and busi-
Service), or an employer identification number.ness), you must allocate the interest on the loan• Service charges (however, see Other Ex- See Social Security Number in chapter 1 forto each use. However, you do not have to allo-penses in chapter 28). more information about TINs.cate home mortgage interest if it is fully deducti-
• Annual fees for credit cards. ble, regardless of how the funds are used. If you can take a deduction for points that
You allocate interest (other than fully deduct- were not reported to you on Form 1098, deduct• Loan fees. ible home mortgage interest) on a loan in the those points on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
• Credit investigation fees. same way as the loan itself is allocated. You do 12.
More than one borrower. If you and atTable 23-1.  Where To Deduct Your Interest Expense least one other person (other than your spouse if
you file a joint return) were liable for and paid
AND for more interest on a mortgage that was for your home,
IF you have ... THEN deduct it on ... information go to ... and the other person received a Form 1098
showing the interest that was paid during theDeductible student loan interest Form 1040, line 33 or Publication 970 year, attach a statement to your return explain-Form 1040A, line 18
ing this. Show how much of the interest each of
Deductible home mortgage interest and Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936 you paid, and give the name and address of the
points reported on Form 1098 line 10 person who received the form. Deduct your
share of the interest on Schedule A (FormDeductible home mortgage interest not Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936 1040), line 11, and print “See attached” next toreported on Form 1098 line 11 the line.
Deductible points not reported on Form Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936 Similarly, if you are the payer of record on a
1098 line 12 mortgage on which there are other borrowers
entitled to a deduction for the interest shown onDeductible investment interest (other Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 550
the Form 1098 you received, deduct only yourthan interest incurred to produce rents or line 13
share of the interest on Schedule A (Formroyalties)
1040), line 10. You should let each of the other
Deductible business interest (non-farm) Schedule C or C-EZ (Form Publication 535 borrowers know what his or her share is.
1040)
Mortgage proceeds used for business or
Deductible farm business interest Schedule F (Form 1040) Publications 225 and 535 investment. If your home mortgage interest
deduction is limited but all or part of the mort-Deductible interest incurred to produce Schedule E (Form 1040) Publications 527 and 535 gage proceeds were used for business, invest-rents or royalties
ment, or other deductible activities, see Table
Personal interest Not Deductible 23-1. It shows where to deduct the part of your
excess interest that is for those activities.
Page 148 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 151 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Investment interest. Deduct investment in- Taxidermy property. New rules limit deduc- • How much you can deduct.
terest, subject to certain limits discussed in Pub- tions for contributions of taxidermy property after • What records to keep.lication 550, on Schedule A (Form 1040), line July 25, 2006. See Publication 526 for more
• How to report your charitable contribu-13. information.
tions.
Recapture of certain deductions. Part of theAmortization of bond premium. There are
deduction for certain contributions of tangiblevarious ways to treat the premium you pay to A charitable contribution is a donation or gift
personal property after September 1, 2006, willbuy taxable bonds. See Bond Premium Amorti- to, or for the use of, a qualified organization. It isbe recaptured, or the amount of the deductionzation in Publication 550. voluntary and is made without getting, or expect-limited, if the recipient organization sells the ing to get, anything of equal value.property within 3 years and does not certify itsIncome-producing rental or royalty interest.
exempt use. See Publication 526 for more infor-Deduct interest on a loan for income-producing
Form 1040 required. To deduct a charitablemation.rental or royalty property that is not used in your
contribution, you must file Form 1040 and item-business in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). Fractional interests in property. New rules ize deductions on Schedule A. The amount of
apply to the contribution of fractional interests in your deduction may be limited if certain rulesExample. You rent out part of your home tangible personal property after August 17, and limits explained in this chapter apply to you.and borrow money to make repairs. You can 2006. See Publication 526 for more information.deduct only the interest payment for the rented
part in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). Deduct Useful Items
the rest of the interest payment on Schedule A You may want to see:(Form 1040) if it is deductible home mortgage
interest. What’s New for 2007 Publication
❏ 78 Cumulative List of OrganizationsNew recordkeeping requirements for cash
contributions. You cannot deduct a cash ❏ 526 Charitable Contributionscontribution, regardless of the amount, unless
❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donatedyou keep as a record of the contribution a bank
Propertyrecord (such as a canceled check, a bank copy
of a canceled check, or a bank statement con-24.
Form (and Instructions)taining the name of the charity, the date, and the
amount) or a written communication from the ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemizedcharity. The written communication must include Deductionsthe name of the charity, date of the contribution,Contributions
❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributionsand amount of the contribution.
What’s New for 2006
RemindersQualified charitable distributions from IRAs. Organizations That
If you were at least age 70 1/2 when you had a Contributions of cars, boats, and airplanes.qualified charitable distribution (QCD) from your Qualify To ReceiveIf you donate a car, boat, or airplane to a quali-IRA made directly by the trustee to a charitable fied organization, your deduction generally isorganization, the QCD may be nontaxable. Deductiblelimited to the gross proceeds from its sale by theHowever, you cannot take a charitable contribu- organization. This rule applies if the claimedtion deduction for the QCD on your Schedule A Contributionsvalue of the donated vehicle is more than $500.(Form 1040). See chapter 17 for more informa- For exceptions and more information, seetion about QCDs. You can deduct your contributions only if youCars, boats, and airplanes  under Contributions make them to a qualified organization. To be-of Property.Clothing and household items. You cannot come a qualified organization, most organiza-take a deduction for clothing or household items tions other than churches and governments, asWritten acknowledgment required. You canyou donate after August 17, 2006, unless the described below, must apply to the IRS.claim a deduction for a contribution of $250 orclothing or household items are in good used more only if you have a written acknowledgmentcondition or better. See Clothing and household You can ask any organization whetherof your contribution from the qualified organiza-items under Contributions of Property  in this it is a qualified organization, and mosttion or if you have certain payroll deduction rec-chapter. will be able to tell you. Or you can
TIP
ords. For more information, see Records To check IRS Publication 78, which lists most quali-Keep, later in this chapter.Food inventory. The special rules that apply fied organizations. You may find Publication 78
to contributions of food inventory were due to in your local library’s reference section, or on theLimit on itemized deductions. If your ad-expire at the end of 2005 but have been ex- Internet at www.irs.gov. You can also call thejusted gross income is more than $150,500tended to contributions made in 2006 and 2007. IRS Tax Exempt/Government Entities Customer($75,250 if you are married filing separately), theSee Publication 526 for more information. Service at 1-877-829-5500 to find out if an or-overall amount of your itemized deductions may
ganization is qualified.be limited. See chapter 29 for more informationLimit on qualified conservation contribu-
about this limit.tions increased. The limit on the deduction
for certain contributions of capital gain property Types of Qualifiedhas been increased from 30% of adjusted gross
Organizationsincome (AGI) to 50% of AGI in the case of
qualified conservation contributions. The limit is
Introduction Generally, only the five following types of organi-100% of AGI for certain farmers and ranchers.
This chapter explains how to claim a deduction zations can be qualified organizations.See Publication 526 for more information.
for your charitable contributions. It discusses the
1. A community chest, corporation, trust,Easements on buildings in historic districts. following topics.
fund, or foundation organized or created inNew requirements apply to contributions after • Organizations that are qualified to receive or under the laws of the United States, anyJuly 25, 2006, of certain easements on buildings deductible charitable contributions. state, the District of Columbia, or any pos-in registered historic districts. See Publication
session of the United States (including526 for more information. • The types of contributions you can deduct.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 149

Page 152 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
contribution, as explained later under Con-Table 24-1. Examples of Charitable Contributions—A Quick Check
tributions You Cannot Deduct.
Use the following lists for a quick check of contributions you can or cannot deduct. See the • Nonprofit hospitals and medical researchrest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that may apply. organizations.
Deductible As Not Deductible • Utility company emergency energy pro-Charitable Contributions As Charitable Contributions grams, if the utility company is an agent
for a charitable organization that assistsMoney or property you give to: Money or property you give to:
individuals with emergency energy needs.• Churches, synagogues, temples, • Civic leagues, social and sports clubs,
mosques, and other religious labor unions, and chambers of • Nonprofit volunteer fire companies.
organizations commerce • Public parks and recreation facilities (but• Federal, state, and local governments, if • Foreign organizations (except certain not entry or usage fees).your contribution is solely for public Canadian, Israeli, and Mexican
purposes (for example, a gift to reduce charities) • Civil defense organizations.
the public debt) • Groups that are run for personal profit
• Nonprofit schools and hospitals • Groups whose purpose is to lobby for Certain foreign charitable organizations.• Public parks and recreation facilities (but law changes Under income tax treaties with Canada, Israel,not entry or usage fees) • Homeowners’ associations and Mexico, you may be able to deduct contribu-• Salvation Army, Red Cross, CARE, • Individuals tions to certain Canadian, Israeli, or MexicanGoodwill Industries, United Way, Boy • Political groups or candidates for charitable organizations. Generally, you mustScouts, Girl Scouts, Boys and Girls public office have income from sources in that country. ForClubs of America, etc. additional information on the deduction of contri-
• War veterans groups butions to Canadian charities, see Publication
597, Information on the United States–CanadaCosts you pay for a student living with you, Noncharitable payments to federal, state, Income Tax Treaty. If you need more informa-sponsored by a qualified organization and local governments tion on how to figure your contribution to Mexi-
can and Israeli charities, see Publication 526.
Out-of-pocket expenses when you serve a Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets
qualified organization as a volunteer
Dues, fees, or bills paid to country clubs,
Contributionslodges, fraternal orders, or similar
groups
You Can DeductTuition
Generally, you can deduct your contributions ofValue of your time or services
money or property that you make to, or for the
Value of blood given to a blood bank use of, a qualified organization. A gift or contri-
bution is “for the use of” a qualified organization
when it is held in a legally enforceable trust for
Puerto Rico). It must be organized and op- Note. Your contribution to this type of the qualified organization or in a similar legal
erated only for one or more of the following organization is not deductible if it can be arrangement.
purposes. used for the care of a specific lot or mauso- If you give property to a qualified organiza-
leum crypt. tion, you generally can deduct the fair marketa. Religious. value of the property at the time of the contribu-5. The United States or any state, the District tion. See Contributions of Property, later in thisb. Charitable. of Columbia, a U.S. possession (including chapter.Puerto Rico), a political subdivision of ac. Educational. Your deduction for charitable contributions isstate or U.S. possession, or an Indian tribal
generally limited to 50% of your adjusted grossgovernment or any of its subdivisions thatd. Scientific. income, but in some cases 20% and 30% limitsperform substantial government functions.
may apply. See Limits on Deductions, later.e. Literary. Note. To be deductible, your contribution
Table 24-1 lists some examples of contribu-to this type of organization must be madef. The prevention of cruelty to children or tions you can deduct and some that you cannotsolely for public purposes. animals. deduct.
Certain organizations that foster national Examples.   Qualified organizations include:or international amateur sports competition
Contributions From• Churches, a convention or association ofalso qualify.
churches, temples, synagogues, Which You Benefit2. War veterans’ organizations, including mosques, and other religious organiza-posts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foundations, or- If you receive a benefit as a result of making ations.ganized in the United States or any of its contribution to a qualified organization, you can• Most nonprofit charitable organizationspossessions. deduct only the amount of your contribution thatsuch as the Red Cross and the United is more than the value of the benefit you receive.3. Domestic fraternal societies, orders, and Way. If you pay more than fair market value to aassociations operating under the lodge sys-
• Most nonprofit educational organizations, qualified organization for merchandise, goods,tem.
including the Boy and Girl Scouts of or services, the amount you pay that is moreNote. Your contribution to this type of America, colleges, museums, and than the value of the item can be a charitableorganization is deductible only if it is to be day-care centers if substantially all the contribution. For the excess amount to qualify,used solely for charitable, religious, scien- child care provided is to enable individuals you must pay it with the intent to make a charita-tific, literary, or educational purposes, or for (the parents) to be gainfully employed and ble contribution.the prevention of cruelty to children or ani- the services are available to the generalmals. public. However, if your contribution is a Example 1. You pay $65 for a ticket to a
4. Certain nonprofit cemetery companies or substitute for tuition or other enrollment dinner-dance at a church. All of the proceed s of
corporations. fee, it is not deductible as a charitable the function go to the church. The ticket to the
Page 150 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 153 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 24-2. Volunteers’ Questions and Answers
If you do volunteer work for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules explained in
this chapter also apply. See, in particular, Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services.
Question Answer
I do volunteer work 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified No, you cannot deduct the value of your time or services.
organization. The receptionist is paid $10 an hour to do the same
work I do. Can I deduct $60 a week for my time?
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly r elated
expenses for these trips? to getting to and from the place where you are a volunteer. If you
don’t want to figure your actual costs, you can deduct 14 cents for
each mile.
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse’s aide at a hospital. Can I deduct Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your uni forms
the cost of uniforms that I must wear? if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms are not
suitable for everyday use, and you must wear them when
volunteering.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I do volunteer work for No, you cannot deduct payments for child care expenses as a
a qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs? charitable contribution, even if they are necessary so you can do
volunteer work for a qualified organization. (If you have child care
expenses so you can work for pay, see chapter 32.)
dinner-dance has a fair market value of $25. value of the privileges or other benefits you that you can use frequently while you are a
member, such as:When you buy your ticket, you know that its receive.
value is less than your payment. To figure the If there is an established charge for the a. Free or discounted admission to the or-amount of your charitable contribution, you sub- event, that charge is the value of your benefit. If ganization’s facilities or events,tract the value of the benefit you receive ($25) there is no established charge, your contribution
from your total payment ($65). You can deduct b. Free or discounted parking,is that part of your payment that is more than the
$40 as a contribution to the church. reasonable value of the right to attend the event. c. Preferred access to goods or services,Whether you use the tickets or other privileges andExample 2. At a fund-raising auction con- has no effect on the amount you can deduct.
ducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a week’s d. Discounts on the purchase of goodsHowever, if you return the ticket to the qualifiedstay at a beach house. The amount you pay is and services.organization for resale, you can deduct the en-no more than the fair rental value. You have not tire amount you paid for the ticket.made a deductible charitable contribution. 2. Admission, while you are a member, to
Even if the ticket or other evidence of events that are open only to members of
payment indicates that the payment is the organization, if the organization rea-Athletic events. If you make a payment to, or
a “contribution,” this does not meanCAUTION
!
sonably projects that the cost per personfor the benefit of, a college or university and, as
you can deduct the entire amount. If the ticket (excluding any allocated overhead) is nota result, you receive the right to buy tickets to an
shows the price of admission and the amount of more than $8.60.athletic event in the athletic stadium of the col-
the contribution, you can deduct the contributionlege or university, you can deduct 80% of the
amount.payment as a charitable contribution. Token items. You can deduct your entire pay-
If any part of your payment is for tickets ment to a qualified organization as a charitable
Example. You pay $40 to see a special contribution if both of the following are true.(rather than the right to buy tickets), that part is
showing of a movie for the benefit of a qualifiednot deductible. In that case, subtract the price of • You get a small item or other benefit oforganization. Printed on the ticket is “Contribu-the tickets from your payment. 80% of the re- token value.tion—$40.” If the regular price for the movie ismaining amount is a charitable contribution.
$8, your contribution is $32 ($40 payment − $8 • The qualified organization correctly deter-
mines that the value of the item or benefitregular price).Example 1. You pay $300 a year for mem-
you received is not substantial and informsbership in an athletic scholarship program main-
you that you can deduct your payment intained by a university (a qualified organization). Membership fees or dues. You may be able
full.The only benefit of membership is that you have to deduct membership fees or dues you pay to a
the right to buy one season ticket for a seat in a qualified organization. However, you can deduct
designated area of the stadium at the univer- only the amount that is more than the value of Written statement. A qualified organizationsity’s home football games. You can deduct the benefits you receive. You cannot deduct must give you a written statement if you make a$240 (80% of $300) as a charitable contribution. dues, fees, or assessments paid to country payment to it that is more than $75 and is partly
clubs and other social organizations. They are a contribution and partly for goods or services.
not qualified organizations. The statement must tell you that you can deductExample 2. The facts are the same as in
only the amount of your payment that is moreExample 1 except that your $300 payment in- Certain membership benefits can be disre-
than the value of the goods or services youcluded the purchase of one season ticket for the garded. Both you and the organization can
received. It must also give you a good faithstated ticket price of $120. You must subtract disregard certain membership benefits you get
estimate of the value of those goods or services.the usual price of a ticket ($120) from your $300 in return for an annual payment of $75 or less to The organization can give you the statementpayment. The result is $180. Your deductible the qualified organization. You can pay more either when it solicits or when it receives thecharitable contribution is $144 (80% of $180). than $75 to the organization if the organization payment from you.does not require a larger payment for you to get
Charity benefit events. If you pay a qualified the benefits. The following benefits are covered Exception. An organization will not have to
organization more than fair market value for the under this rule. give you this statement if one of the following is
right to attend a charity ball, banquet, show, true.
1. Any rights or privileges, other than thosesporting event, or other benefit event, you can
deduct only the amount that is more than the discussed under Athletic events, earlier, 1. The organization is:
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 151

Page 154 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. The type of organization described in while away from home overnight in connection The deduction for travel expenses will not b e
(5) under Types of Qualified Organiza- with the convention. However, see Travel, later. denied simply because you enjoy providing
tions, earlier, or You cannot deduct personal expenses for services to the charitable organization. Even if
sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tickets, or you enjoy the trip, you can take a charitableb. Formed only for religious purposes, and nightclubs. You also cannot deduct travel, meals contribution deduction for your travel expensesthe only benefit you receive is an intan- and lodging, and other expenses for your if you are on duty in a genuine and substantialgible religious benefit (such as admis- spouse or children.sion to a religious ceremony) that sense throughout the trip. However, if you have You cannot deduct your expenses in attend-generally is not sold in commercial only nominal duties, or if for significant parts ofing a church convention if you go only as atransactions outside the donative con- the trip you do not have any duties, you cannotmember of your church rather than as a chosentext. deduct your travel expenses.representative. You can deduct unreimbursed
expenses that are directly connected with giving2. You receive only items whose value is not Example 1. You are a troop leader for aservices for your church during the convention.substantial. See Token items, earlier. tax-exempt youth group and you help take the
Uniforms. You can deduct the cost and up- group on a camping trip. You are responsible for3. You receive only membership benefits that
keep of uniforms that are not suitable for every-can be disregarded, as described earlier. overseeing the setup of the camp and for provid-
day use and that you must wear while ing adult supervision for other activities during
performing donated services for a charitable or- the entire trip. You participate in the activities ofganization.Expenses Paid for Student the group and really enjoy your time with them.
You oversee the breaking of camp and you helpLiving With You Foster parents. You may be able to deduct as
transport the group home. You can deduct youra charitable contribution some of the costs ofYou may be able to deduct some expenses of travel expenses.being a foster parent (foster care provider) if youhaving a student live with you. You can deduct have no profit motive in providing the foster carequalifying expenses for a foreign or American Example 2. You sail from one island to an-and are not, in fact, making a profit. A qualifiedstudent who: other and spend 8 hours a day counting whalesorganization must designate the individuals you
and other forms of marine life. The project istake into your home for foster care.1. Lives in your home under a written agree- You can deduct expenses that meet both of sponsored by a charitable organization. In mostment between you and a qualified organi- the following requirements. circumstances, you cannot deduct your ex-zation as part of a program of the
penses.organization to provide educational oppor- 1. They are unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex-tunities for the student, penses to feed, clothe, and care for the Example 3. You work for several hoursfoster child.2. Is not your relative or dependent, and each morning on an archaeological dig spon-
2. They must be mainly to benefit the quali-3. Is a full-time student in the twelfth or any sored by a charitable organization. The rest of
fied organization.lower grade at a school in the United the day is free for recreation and sightseeing.
States. You cannot take a charitable contribution deduc-Unreimbursed expenses that you cannot de-
tion even though you work very hard duringduct as charitable contributions may be consid-You can deduct up to $50 a month for ered support provided by you in determining those few hours.each full calendar month the student whether you can claim the foster child as alives with you. Any month when condi-
TIP
dependent. For details, see chapter 3. Example 4. You spend the entire day at-tions (1) through (3) above are met for 15 days tending a charitable organization’s regionalor more counts as a full month. Example.  You cared for a foster child be- meeting as a chosen representative. In the eve-For additional information, see Expenses cause you wanted to adopt her, not to benefit the ning you go to the theater. You can claim yourPaid for Student Living With You in Publication agency that placed her in your home. Your un- travel expenses as charitable contributions, but526. reimbursed expenses are not deductible as you cannot claim the cost of your evening at thecharitable contributions.Mutual exchange program. You cannot de- theater.
duct the costs of a foreign student living in your Car expenses. You can deduct unreimbursed Daily allowance (per diem). If you providehome under a mutual exchange program out-of-pocket expenses, such as the cost of gas services for a charitable organization and re-through which your child will live with a family in and oil, that are directly related to the use of your ceive a daily allowance to cover reasonablea foreign country. car in giving services to a charitable organiza- travel expenses, including meals and lodgingtion. You cannot deduct general repair and while away from home overnight, you must in-maintenance expenses, depreciation, registra-Out-of-Pocket Expenses in clude in income the amount of the allowancetion fees, or the costs of tires or insurance.Giving Services that is more than your deductible travel ex-  If you do not want to deduct your actual
penses. You can deduct your necessary travelexpenses, you can use a standard mileage rateYou may be able to deduct some amounts you expenses that are more than the allowance.of 14 cents a mile to figure your contribution.pay in giving services to a qualified organization. You can deduct parking fees and tollsThe amounts must be: Deductible travel expenses. These in-whether you use your actual expenses or the clude:• Unreimbursed, standard mileage rate.
• Air, rail, and bus transportation,You must keep reliable written records of• Directly connected with the services, your car expenses. For more information, see • Out-of-pocket expenses for your car,• Expenses you had only because of the Car expenses under Records To Keep, later.
services you gave, and • Taxi fares or other costs of transportation
Travel. Generally, you can claim a charitable between the airport or station and your• Not personal, living, or family expenses. contribution deduction for travel expenses nec- hotel,
essarily incurred while you are away from homeTable 24-2 contains questions and answers • Lodging costs, andperforming services for a charitable organizationthat apply to some individuals who volunteer only if there is no significant element of personal • The cost of meals.their services. pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the travel.
Because these travel expenses are not busi-Conventions. If you are a chosen representa- This applies whether you pay the expenses di-
ness-related, they are not subject to the sametive attending a convention of a qualified organi- rectly or indirectly. You are paying the expenses
limits as business-related expenses. For infor-zation, you can deduct actual unreimbursed indirectly if you make a payment to the charita-
mation on business travel expenses, see Travelexpenses for travel and transportation, including ble organization and the organization pays for
a reasonable amount for meals and lodging, your travel expenses. Expenses in chapter 26.
Page 152 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 155 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Chambers of commerce and other busi- • Blood donations to the Red Cross or to
ness leagues or organizations (but see blood banks, andContributions chapter 28).
• The value of income lost while you work
3. Civic leagues and associations.You Cannot Deduct as an unpaid volunteer for a qualified or-
ganization.4. Communist organizations.There are some contributions you cannot de-
5. Country clubs and other social clubs.duct, such as those made to specific individuals
and those made to nonqualified organizations. Personal Expenses6. Foreign organizations other than:(See Contributions to Individuals and Contribu-
You cannot deduct personal, living, or familytions to Nonqualified Organizations, next). a. A U.S. organization that transfers funds
expenses, such as:There are others you can deduct only part of, as to a charitable foreign organization if
the U.S. organization controls the usediscussed later under Contributions From Which • The cost of meals you eat while you per-
of the funds or if the foreign organiza-You Benefit. form services for a qualified organization
tion is only an administrative arm of the unless it is necessary for you to be awayU.S. organization, or from home overnight while performing theContributions to
services, orb. Certain Canadian, Israeli, or MexicanIndividuals charitable organizations. See Certain • Adoption expenses, including fees paid toforeign charitable organizations under an adoption agency and the costs of keep-You cannot deduct contributions to specific indi- Organizations That Qualify To Receive ing a child in your home before adoption isviduals, including the following: Deductible Contributions, earlier. final (but see Adoption Credit in chapter 37,• Contributions to fraternal societies made and the instructions for Form 8839, Quali-7. Homeowners’ associations.for the purpose of paying medical or burial fied Adoption Expenses).expenses of deceased members. 8. Labor unions (but see chapter 28). You also may be able to claim an exemp-
tion for the child. See Adopted child  in• Contributions to individuals who are needy 9. Political organizations and candidates. chapter 3.or worthy. This includes contributions to a
qualified organization if you indicate that
your contribution is for a specific person.
Contributions From Appraisal FeesBut you can deduct a contribution that you Which You Benefitgive to a qualified organization that in turn Fees that you pay to find the fair market value ofhelps needy or worthy individuals if you do If you receive or expect to receive a financial or donated property are not deductible as contribu-not indicate that your contribution is for a economic benefit as a result of making a contri- tions (but see chapter 28).specific person. bution to a qualified organization, you cannot
deduct the part of the contribution that repre-• Payments to a member of the clergy that sents the value of the benefit you receive. Thesecan be spent as he or she wishes, such as contributions include the following.for personal expenses. Contributions• Contributions for lobbying. This includes• Expenses you paid for another person who amounts that you earmark for use in, or in of Propertyprovided services to a qualified organiza- connection with, influencing specific legis-
tion. lation. If you contribute property to a qualified organiza-Example. Your son does missionary work. tion, the amount of your charitable contribution• Contributions to a retirement home thatYou pay his expenses. You cannot claim a is generally the fair market value of the propertyare clearly for room, board, maintenance,deduction for your son’s unreimbursed ex- at the time of the contribution. However, if theor admittance. Also, if the amount of yourpenses related to his contribution of serv- property has increased in value, you may havecontribution depends on the type or size ofices. to make some adjustments to the amount ofapartment you will occupy, it is not a chari-
your deduction. See Giving Property That Hastable contribution.• Payments to a hospital that are for serv-
Increased in Value, later.ices for a specific patient. You cannot de- • Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc. You For information about the records you mustduct these payments even if the hospital is cannot deduct as a charitable contribution keep and the information you must furnish withoperated by a city, a state, or other quali- amounts you pay to buy raffle or lottery your return if you donate property, see Recordsfied organization. tickets or to play bingo or other games of To Keep and How To Report, later.chance. For information on how to report
gambling winnings and losses, see chap-Contributions to Clothing and household items. You cannotters 12 and 28.
take a deduction for clothing or household itemsNonqualified • Dues to fraternal orders and similar you donate after August 17, 2006, unless the
groups. However, see Membership fees orOrganizations clothing or household items are in good useddues, earlier, under Contributions You condition or better.Can Deduct.You cannot deduct contributions to organiza-
Household items. Household items in-tions that are not qualified to receive • Tuition, or amounts you pay instead of tui- clude:tax-deductible contributions, including the fol- tion, even if you pay them for children tolowing. • Furniture,attend parochial schools or qualifying non-
profit day-care centers. You also cannot • Furnishings,1. Certain state bar associations if: deduct any fixed amount you may be re-
• Electronics,quired to pay in addition to the tuition feea. The state bar is not a political subdivi-
to enroll in a private school, even if it ission of a state, • Appliances,designated as a “donation.”
b. The bar has private, as well as public, • Linens, and
purposes, such as promoting the pro- • Other similar items.fessional interests of members, and Value of Time or Services
c. Your contribution is unrestricted and Household items do not include:You cannot deduct the value of your time orcan be used for private purposes. • Food,services, including:
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 153

Page 156 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Paintings, antiques, and other objects of The Form 1098-C (or other statement) will show Partial interest in property. Generally, you
art, whether the qualified organization makes a sig- cannot deduct a charitable contribution (not
nificant intervening use of or material improve- made by a transfer in trust) of less than your• Jewelry and gems, and ment to the car. entire interest in property.
• Collections. If you do not attach Form 1098-C (or other Right to use property. A contribution of the
statement), you cannot deduct your contribu- right to use property is a contribution of less thanAppraisal for items more than $500. You tion. your entire interest in that property and is notcan take a deduction for a contribution of an item You must get Form 1098-C (or other state- deductible. For exceptions and more informa-of clothing or household item that is not in good ment) within 30 days of your donation. tion, see Partial Interest in Property Not in Trustused condition or better if you deduct more than in Publication 561.$500 for it and include a qualified appraisal of it Exception 2—vehicle given or sold to
with your return. needy individual. If the qualified organization Future interests in tangible personal prop-
will give the car, or sell it for a price well below erty. You can deduct the value of a charitable
Cars, boats, and airplanes. The following fair market value, to a needy individual to further contribution of a future interest in tangible per-
rules apply to any donation of a car to a qualified the organization’s charitable purpose, and you sonal property only after all intervening interests
organization after December 31, 2004. These claim a deduction of more than $500, the follow- in and rights to the actual possession or enjoy-
rules also apply to any donation of a boat, air- ing rules apply. ment of the property have either expired or been
plane, or any motor vehicle manufactured turned over to someone other than yourself, a• You generally can deduct the car’s fairmainly for use on public streets, roads, and related person, or a related organization.market value at the time of the contribu-highways. tion. But if the car’s fair market value was Future interest. This is any interest that is
Deduction more than $500. If the qualified more than your cost or other basis, you to begin at some future time, regardless of
organization sells the car and you claim a de- may have to reduce the fair market value whether it is designated as a future interest
duction of more than $500, the following rules to get the deductible amount, as described under state law.
apply. under Giving Property That Has Increased
in Value in Publication 526. Determining1. You can deduct the smaller of:
• You must attach to your return a copy of Fair Market Valuea. The gross proceeds from the sale of the Form 1098-C (or other statement contain-
car by the organization, or ing the same information as Form This section discusses general guidelines for1098-C). determining the fair market value of variousb. The car’s fair market value on the date
types of donated property.of the contribution. If the car’s fair mar- The Form 1098-C (or other statement) will show
Fair market value is the price at which prop-ket value was more than your cost or whether this exception applies.
erty would change hands between a willingother basis, you may have to reduce If you do not attach Form 1098-C (or other buyer and a willing seller, neither having to buythe fair market value to get the deducti- statement), you cannot deduct your contribu- or sell, and both having reasonable knowledgeble amount, as described under Giving tion. of all the relevant facts. Publication 561 containsProperty That Has Increased in Value in You must get Form 1098-C (or other state- a more complete discussion.Publication 526. ment) within 30 days of your donation.
Used clothing and household items. Gener-2. You must attach to your return the copy of ally, the fair market value of used clothing andExample. Anita donates a used car to athe Form 1098-C, Contributions of Motor household goods is far less than its original cost.qualified organization. A used car guide showsVehicles, Boats, and Airplanes, (or other For used clothing, you should claim as thethe fair market value for this type of car isstatement containing the same information value the price that buyers of used items actually$6,000. However, Anita gets a Form 1098-Cas Form 1098-C) you received from the pay in used clothing stores, such as consign-from the organization showing the car was soldorganization. The Form 1098-C (or other ment or thrift shops. See Household Goods infor $900. Neither exception 1 nor exception 2statement) will show the gross proceeds Publication 561 for information on the valuationapplies. If Anita itemizes her deductions, shefrom the sale of the car. of household goods, such as furniture, appli-can deduct $900 for her donation. She must
However, different rules apply if exception 1 or ances, and linens.attach the Form 1098-C to her return.
exception 2 (described next) applies. Deduction $500 or less. If the qualified or- Example. Dawn Greene donated a coat to aIf you do not attach Form 1098-C (or other ganization sells the car for $500 or less and thrift store operated by her church. She paidstatement), you cannot deduct your contribu- exceptions 1 and 2 (described earlier) do not $300 for the coat 3 years ago. Similar coats intion. apply, the following rules apply. the thrift store sell for $50. The fair market valueYou must get Form 1098-C (or other state-
of the coat is reasonably determined to be $50.ment) within 30 days of the sale of the car. 1. You can deduct the smaller of:
Dawn’s donation is limited to $50.Exception 1—vehicle used or improved by a. $500, or Cars, boats, and aircraft. If you contribute aorganization. If the qualified organization
Car, boat, or aircraft to a charitable organization,makes a significant intervening use of or mate- b. The car’s fair market value on the date
you must determine its fair market value.  Cer-rial improvement to the car before transferring it of the contribution. But if the car’s fair
tain commercial firms and trade organizationsand you claim a deduction of more than $500, market value was more than your cost
publish used car pricing guides, commonlythe following rules apply. or other basis, you may have to reduce
called “blue books,” containing complete dealerthe fair market value to get the deducti-• You generally can deduct the car’s fair sale prices or dealer average prices for recentble amount, as described under Givingmarket value at the time of the contribu- model years. The guides may be publishedProperty That Has Increased in Value intion. But if the car’s fair market value was monthly or seasonally and for different regionsPublication 526.more than your cost or other basis, you of the country. These guides also provide esti-may have to reduce the fair market value 2. If the car’s fair market value is $250 or mates for adjusting for unusual equipment, unu-to get the deductible amount, as described more, you must have a written statement sual mileage, and physical condition. The pricesunder Giving Property That Has Increased from the qualified organization acknowl- are not “official” and these publications are notin Value in Publication 526. edging your donation. The statement must considered an appraisal of any specific donated
• You must attach to your return a copy of contain the information and meet the tests property. But they do provide clues for makin g
Form 1098-C (or other statement contain- for an acknowledgement described under an appraisal and suggest relative prices for
ing the same information as Form Deductions of At Least $250 But Not More comparison with current sales and offerings in
1098-C). Than $500 under Records To Keep, later. your area.
Page 154 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 157 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You donate a used car in poor Amount of deduction — general rule.
condition to a local high school for use by stu- When figuring your deduction for a gift of capital Limits on Deductionsdents studying car repair. A used car guide gain property, you usually can use the fair mar-
shows the dealer retail value for this type of car ket value of the gift. If your total contributions for the year are 20% orin poor condition is $1,600. However, the guide less of your adjusted gross income, you do notExceptions. In certain situations, you mustshows the price for a private party sale of the car need to read this section. The limits discussedreduce the fair market value by any amount thatis only $750. The fair market value of the car is here do not apply to you.would have been long-term capital gain if youconsidered to be $750. The amount of your deduction is limited tohad sold the property for its fair market value. 50% of your adjusted gross income and may beGenerally, this means reducing the fair marketLarge quantities. If you contribute a large limited to 30% or 20% of your adjusted grossnumber of the same item, fair market value is the value to the property’s cost or other basis. income, depending on the type of property youprice at which comparable numbers of the item give and the type of organization you give it to.are being sold. Bargain sales. A bargain sale of property to a These limits are described below.qualified organization (a sale or exchange for If your contributions are more than any of theless than the property’s fair market value) isGiving Property That limits that apply, see Carryovers, later.partly a charitable contribution and partly a sale
Has Decreased in Value or exchange. A bargain sale may result in a
50% Limittaxable gain.If you contribute property with a fair market value
that is less than your basis in it, your deduction is This limit applies to the total of all charitableMore information. For more information onlimited to its fair market value. You cannot claim contributions you make during the year. Thisdonated appreciated property, see Giving Prop-a deduction for the difference between the prop- means that your deduction for charitable contri-erty That Has Increased in Value in Publicationerty’s basis and its fair market value. butions cannot be more than 50% of your ad-526. justed gross income for the year.
Generally, the 50% limit is the only limit thatGiving Property That applies to gifts to organizations listed below
Has Increased in Value under 50% limit organizations. But there is one
exception. A 30% limit also applies to these giftsWhen To DeductIf you contribute property with a fair market value if they are gifts of capital gain property for whichthat is more than your basis in it, you may have you figure your deduction using fair marketYou can deduct your contributions only in theto reduce the fair market value by the amount of value without reduction for appreciation. (Seeyear you actually make them in cash or otherappreciation (increase in value) when you figure Special 30% Limit for Capital Gain Property,property (or in a later carryover year, as ex-your deduction. later.)plained later under Carryovers). This appliesYour basis in property is generally what you whether you use the cash or an accrual method 50% limit organizations. You can ask anypaid for it. See chapter 13 if you need more of accounting. organization whether it is a 50% limit organiza-information about basis.
tion and most will be able to tell you. Or you canDifferent rules apply to figuring your deduc- Time of making contribution. Usually, you check IRS Publication 78 or call the IRS Taxtion, depending on whether the property is: make a contribution at the time of its uncondi- Exempt/Government Entities Customer Service
tional delivery.1. Ordinary income property, or at the number listed earlier under Organizations
that Qualify To Receive Deductible Contribu-Checks. A check that you mail to a charity is2. Capital gain property. tions. The following is a partial list of the types ofconsidered delivered on the date you mail it.
organizations that are 50% limit organizations.Ordinary income property. Property is ordi- Credit card.  Contributions charged on your
• Churches and conventions or associationsnary income property if its sale at fair market credit card are deductible in the year you make
of churches. value on the date it was contributed would have the charge.
resulted in ordinary income or in short-term capi- • Educational organizations with a regularPay-by-phone account.  If you use atal gain. Examples of ordinary income property faculty and curriculum that normally havepay-by-phone account, the date you make aare inventory, works of art created by the donor, a regularly enrolled student body attendingcontribution is the date the financial institutionmanuscripts prepared by the donor, and capital classes on site. pays the amount. This date should be shown onassets held 1 year or less.
the statement the financial institution sends to • Hospitals and certain medical research or-Amount of deduction. The amount you you. ganizations associated with these hospi-can deduct for a contribution of ordinary income tals. Stock certificate. A gift to a charity of aproperty is its fair market value minus the
properly endorsed stock certificate is completed • Publicly supported charities.amount that would be ordinary income or
on the date of mailing or other delivery to theshort-term capital gain if you sold the property • Private operating foundations.charity or to the charity’s agent. However, if youfor its fair market value. Generally, this rule limits
• Private nonoperating foundations thatgive a stock certificate to your agent or to thethe deduction to your basis in the property.
make qualifying distributions of 100% ofissuing corporation for transfer to the name of
contributions within 21/2 months followingthe charity, your gift is not completed until theExample. You donate stock that you held
the year they receive the contributions.for 5 months to your church. The fair market date the stock is transferred on the books of the
value of the stock on the day you donate it is corporation. • Certain private foundations whose contri-$1,000, but you paid only $800 (your basis). butions are pooled in a common fund, thePromissory note. If you issue and deliver aBecause the $200 of appreciation would be income and principal of which are paid topromissory note to a charitable organization asshort-term capital gain if you sold the stock, your public charities.a contribution, it is not a contribution until youdeduction is limited to $800 (fair market value make the note payments.minus the appreciation).
Option.  If you grant an option to buy real 30% LimitCapital gain property. Property is capital property at a bargain price to a charitable organi-gain property if its sale at fair market value on zation, you cannot take a deduction until the A 30% limit applies to the following gifts.the date of the contribution would have resulted organization exercises the option.in long-term capital gain. It includes capital as- • Gifts to all qualified organizations other
Borrowed funds. If you make a contribu-sets held more than 1 year, as well as certain than 50% limit organizations. This includes
tion with borrowed funds, you can deduct thereal property and depreciable property used in gifts to veterans’ organizations, fraternal
contribution in the year you make it, regardlessyour trade or business and, generally, held more societies, nonprofit cemeteries, and cer-
of when you repay the loan.than 1 year. tain private nonoperating foundations.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 155

Page 158 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Gifts for the use of any organization. How- next 5 years until it is used up, but not beyond 2. A receipt (or a letter or other wr itten com-
ever, if these gifts are of capital gain prop- munication) from the charitable organiza-that time. For more information, see Carryovers
erty, they are subject to the 20% limit, tion showing the name of the organization,in Publication 526.
described later, rather than the 30% limit. the date of the contribution, and the
amount of the contribution.
Student living with you. Amounts you spend 3. Other reliable written records that include
on behalf of a student living with you are subject the information described in (2). RecordsRecords To Keep
to the 30% limit. These amounts are considered may be considered reliable if they were
a contribution for the use of a qualified organiza- made at or near the time of the contribu-You must keep records to prove the amount of
tion. See Expenses Paid for Student Living With tion, and were regularly kept by you, or if,the cash and noncash contributions you make
You, earlier. in the case of small donations, you haveduring the year. The kind of records you must
emblems, buttons, or other tokens that arekeep depends on the amount of your contribu-
regularly given to persons making smalltions and whether they are cash or noncash
Special 30% Limit for cash contributions.contributions.Capital Gain Property
Car expenses. If you claim expenses directlyNote. An organization generally must give youA special 30% limit applies to gifts of capital gain related to the use of your car in giving services toa written statement if it receives a payment fromproperty to 50% limit organizations. (For gifts of a qualified organization, you must keep reliableyou that is more than $75 and is partly a contri-capital gain property to other organizations, see written records of your expenses. Whether yourbution and partly for goods or services. (See20% Limit, later.) However, the special 30% limit records are considered reliable depends on allContributions From Which You Benefit underdoes not apply when you choose to reduce the the facts and circumstances. Generally, theyContributions You Can Deduct,  earlier.) Keepfair market value of the property by the amount may be considered reliable if you made themthat would have been long-term capital gain if the statement for your records. It may satisfy all regularly and at or near the time you had theyou had sold the property. Instead, only the 50% or part of the recordkeeping requirements ex- expenses.limit applies. plained in the following discussions. Your records must show the name of the
organization you were serving and the dateQualified conservation contribution. The
each time you used your car for a charitablespecial 30% limit does not apply to qualified Cash Contributions
purpose. If you use the standard mileage rate ofconservation contributions (QCCs). Instead, a
14 cents a mile, your records must show theCash contributions include those paid by cash,50% limit applies. For qualified farmers and
miles you drove your car for the charitable pur-check, credit card, or payroll deduction. Theyranchers, QCCs are deductible up to 100% of
pose. If you deduct your actual expenses, youralso include your out-of-pocket expenses whenadjusted gross income. See Publication 526 for
records must show the costs of operating the cardetails. donating your services.
that are directly related to a charitable purpose.For a contribution made in cash, the recordsTwo separate 30% limits. This special 30% See Car expenses, earlier, underyou must keep depend on whether the contribu-limit for capital gain property is separate from the Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services, fortion is:other 30% limit. Therefore, the deduction of a the expenses you can deduct.
contribution subject to one 30% limit does not • Less than $250, or
reduce the amount you can deduct for contribu-
• $250 or more.tions subject to the other 30% limit. However, Contributions of $250 or More
the total you deduct cannot be more than 50% of
your adjusted gross income. You can claim a deduction for a contribution ofAmount of contribution. In figuring whether
$250 or more only if you have an acknowledg-your contribution is $250 or more, do not com-
Example. Your adjusted gross income is ment of your contribution from the qualified or-bine separate contributions. For example, if you
$50,000. During the year, you gave capital gain ganization or certain payroll deduction records.gave your church $25 each week, your weeklyproperty with a fair market value of $15,000 to a If you made more than one contribution ofpayments do not have to be combined. Each50% limit organization. You do not choose to $250 or more, you must have either a separatepayment is a separate contribution.reduce the property’s fair market value by its acknowledgment for each or one acknowledg- If contributions are made by payroll deduc-appreciation in value. You also gave $10,000 ment that shows your total contributions.tion, the deduction from each paycheck iscash to a qualified organization that is not a 50%
treated as a separate contribution. Acknowledgment. The acknowledgmentlimit organization. The $15,000 gift of property is
must meet these tests.If you made a payment that is partly forsubject to the special 30% limit. The $10,000
goods and services, as described earlier undercash gift is subject to the other 30% limit. Both 1. It must be written.Contributions From Which You Benefit , yourgifts are fully deductible because neither is more
2. It must include:contribution is the amount of the payment that isthan the 30% limit that applies ($15,000 in each
case) and together they are not more than the more than the value of the goods and services.
a. The amount of cash you contributed,50% limit ($25,000).
For more information, see the rules for elect- b. Whether the qualified organization gave
ing the 50% limit for capital gain property under Contributions of Less Than $250 you any goods or services as a result of
How To Figure Your Deduction When Limits your contribution (other than certain to-For each cash contribution that is less thanApply in Publication 526. ken items and membership benefits),
$250, you must keep one of the following items. and
20% Limit 1. A canceled check, or a legible and reada- c. A description and good faith estimate of
ble account statement that shows: the value of any goods or services de-This limit applies to all gifts of capital gain prop- scribed in (b). If the only benefit youerty to or for the use of qualified organizations a. If payment was by check: the check received was an intangible religious(other than gifts of capital gain property to 50% number, amount, date posted, and to benefit (such as admission to a relig-limit organizations). whom paid. ious ceremony) that generally is not
sold in a commercial transactionb. If payment was by electronic funds
outside the donative context, the ac-Carryovers transfer: the amount, date posted, and knowledgment must say so and doesto whom paid.You can carry over your contributions that you not need to describe or estimate the
c. If payment was charged to a creditare not able to deduct in the current year be- value of the benefit.
card: the amount, transaction date, andcause they exceed your adjusted-gross-income
to whom paid.limits. You can deduct the excess in each of the 3. You must get it on or before the earlier of:
Page 156 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 159 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. The date you file your return for the • The terms of any conditions attached toDeductions of Less Than $250
year you make the contribution, or the gift of property.
If you make any noncash contribution, you mustb. The due date, including extensions, for get and keep a receipt from the charitable organ-filing the return. Deductions of At Least $250ization showing:
But Not More Than $500
1. The name of the charitable organization,Payroll deductions. If you make a contribu- If you claim a deduction of at least $250 but not2. The date and location of the charitabletion by payroll deduction, you do not need an more than $500 for a noncash charitable contri-contribution, andacknowledgment from the qualified organiza- bution, you must get and keep an acknowledg-
tion. But if your employer deducted $250 or ment of your contribution from the qualified3. A reasonably detailed description of themore from a single paycheck, you must keep: organization. If you made more than one contri-property.
bution of $250 or more, you must have either a• A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document
separate acknowledgment for each or one ac-A letter or other written communicationfurnished by your employer that proves
knowledgment that shows your total contribu-from the charitable organization ac-the amount withheld, and
tion.knowledging receipt of the contribution
TIP
• A pledge card or other document from the and containing the information in (1), (2), and (3) The acknowledgment must contain the infor-qualified organization that states the or- will serve as a receipt. mation in items (1) through (3) listed under De-ganization does not provide goods or serv- ductions of Less Than $250, earlier, and yourYou are not required to have a receipt whereices in return for any contribution made to written records must include the informationit is impractical to get one (for example, if youit by payroll deduction. listed in that discussion under Additional rec-leave property at a charity’s unattended drop
ords.site).
Out-of-pocket expenses. If you render serv- The acknowledgment must also meet these
ices to a qualified organization and have un- tests.Additional records. You must also keep reli-reimbursed out-of-pocket expenses related to able written records for each item of donatedthose services, you can satisfy the written ac- 1. It must be written.property. Your written records must include theknowledgment requirement just discussed if: following information. 2. It must include:
1. You have adequate records to prove the • The name and address of the organization a. A description (but not necessarily theamount of the expenses, and to which you contributed. value) of any property you contributed,
2. By the required date, you get an acknowl- • The date and location of the contribution. b. Whether the qualified organization gaveedgment from the qualified organization you any goods or services as a result of• A description of the property in detail rea-that contains: your contribution (other than certain to-sonable under the circumstances. For a
ken items and membership benefits),a. A description of the services you pro- security, keep the name of the issuer, the
andvided, type of security, and whether it is regularly
traded on a stock exchange or in an c. A description and good faith estimate ofb. A statement of whether or not the or- over-the-counter market. the value of any goods or services de-ganization provided you any goods or
scribed in (b). If the only benefit youservices to reimburse you for the ex- • The fair market value of the property at the received was an intangible religiouspenses you incurred, time of the contribution and how you fig- benefit (such as admission to a relig-ured the fair market value. If it was deter-c. A description and a good faith estimate ious ceremony) that generally is notmined by appraisal, keep a signed copy ofof the value of any goods or services sold in a commercial transactionthe appraisal. (other than intangible religious benefits) outside the donative context, the ac-
provided to reimburse you, and • The cost or other basis of the property if knowledgment must say so and does
you must reduce its fair market value by not need to describe or estimate thed. A statement of any intangible religious
appreciation. Your records should also in- value of the benefit.benefits provided to you.
clude the amount of the reduction and how
3. You must get it on or before the earlier of:you figured it. If you choose the 50% limit
instead of the special 30% limit on certainNoncash Contributions a. The date you file your return for thecapital gain property, you must keep a re- year you make the contribution, orcord showing the years for which youFor a contribution not made in cash, the records made the choice, contributions for the cur- b. The due date, including extensions, foryou must keep depend on whether your deduc- rent year to which the choice applies, and filing the return.tion for the contribution is: carryovers from preceding years to which
the choice applies. See How To Figure1. Less than $250,
Your Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub-2. At least $250 but not more than $500, lication 526 for information on how to Deductions Over $500
make the capital gain property election.3. Over $500 but not more than $5,000, or
You are required to give additional information if
• The amount you claim as a deduction for4. Over $5,000. you claim a deduction over $500 for noncash
the tax year as a result of the contribution, charitable contributions. See Records To Keep
if you contribute less than your entire inter-Amount of deduction. In figuring whether in Publication 526 for more information.
est in the property during the tax year.your deduction is $500 or more, combine your
Your records must include the amount youclaimed deductions for all similar items of prop-
claimed as a deduction in any earliererty donated to any charitable organization dur- Qualified Conservation
years for contributions of other interests ining the year. If you received goods or services in Contributionthis property. They must also include thereturn, as described earlier in Contributions
name and address of each organization toFrom Which You Benefit, reduce your contribu- If the gift was a qualified conservation contribu-
which you contributed the other interests,tion by the value of those goods or services. If tion, your records must also include the fair
the place where any such tangible prop-you figure your deduction by reducing the fair market value of the underlying property before
erty is located or kept, and the name ofmarket value of the donated property by its ap- and after the gift and the conservation purpose
any person in possession of the property,preciation, as described earlier in Giving Prop- furthered by the gift. See Qualified conservation
other than the organization to which youerty That Has Increased in Value,  your contribution in Publication 526 for more informa-
contributed.contribution is the reduced amount. tion.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 157

Page 160 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Condemnations. For information on condem- • Mine cave-ins.nations of property, see Involuntary Conver-How To Report • Shipwrecks.sions in chapter 1 of Publication 544.
Report your charitable contributions on Sched- • Sonic booms.Workbook for casualties and thefts. Publi-ule A (Form 1040).
cation 584 is available to help you make a list ofIf your total deduction for all noncash contri- • Storms, including hurricanes and torna-
your stolen or damaged personal-use propertybutions for the year is over $500, you must also does.
and figure your loss. It includes schedules tofile Form 8283. See How To Report in Publica-
help you figure the loss on your home, its con- • Terrorist attacks.tion 526 for more information.
tents, and your motor vehicles.
• Vandalism.
Other sources of information. For informa- • Volcanic eruptions.tion on a casualty or theft loss of business or
income-producing property, see Publication
Nondeductible losses. A casualty loss is not547.
deductible if the damage or destruction is25.
caused by the following.Useful Items
• Accidentally breaking articles such asYou may want to see:
glassware or china under normal condi-Nonbusiness
tions.Publication
• A family pet (explained below).❏ 544 Sales and Other DispositionsCasualty and of Assets • A fire if you willfully set it or pay someone
else to set it.❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, andTheft Losses Thefts
• A car accident if your willful negligence or
❏ 584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft willful act caused it. The same is true if the
Loss Workbook (Personal-Use willful act or willful negligence of someoneReminder Property) acting for you caused the accident.
Limits on personal casualty or theft losses Form (and Instructions) • Progressive deterioration (explained be-
caused by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, or low).❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) ItemizedWilma. The following losses to personal use
Deductionsproperty are not subject to the $100 rule or 10% Family pet. Loss of property due to damage
rule. For more information, see Deduction Limits by a family pet is not deductible as a casualty❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
later. loss unless the requirements discussed earlierand Losses
under Casualty are met.• Losses that arose in the Hurricane Katrina ❏ 4684 Casualties and Thefts
disaster area after August 24, 2005, and
Example. Your antique oriental rug wasthat were caused by Hurricane Katrina.
damaged by your new puppy before it was
• Losses that arose in the Hurricane Rita housebroken. Because the damage was not un-
disaster area after September 22, 2005, expected and unusual, the loss is not deductibleCasualtyand that were caused by Hurricane Rita. as a casualty loss.
• Losses that arose in the Hurricane Wilma Progressive deterioration. Loss of prop-A casualty is the damage, destruction, or loss of
disaster area after October 22, 2005, and erty due to progressive deterioration is not de-property resulting from an identifiable event that
that were caused by Hurricane Wilma. ductible as a casualty loss. This is because theis sudden, unexpected, or unusual.
damage results from a steadily operating cause• A sudden event is one that is swift, not or a normal process, rather than from a suddengradual or progressive. event. The following are examples of damage
due to progressive deterioration.• An unexpected event is one that is ordi-Introduction narily unanticipated and unintended. • The steady weakening of a building due toThis chapter explains the tax treatment of per- normal wind and weather conditions.• An unusual event is one that is not asonal (not business related) casualty losses, day-to-day occurrence and that is not typi- • The deterioration and damage to a watertheft losses, and losses on deposits. cal of the activity in which you were en- heater that bursts. However, the rust andThe chapter also explains the following top- gaged. water damage to rugs and drapes causedics.
by the bursting of a water heater does• How to figure the amount of your loss. qualify as a casualty.Deductible losses. Deductible casualty
• How to treat insurance and other reim- losses can result from a number of different • Most losses of property caused bybursements you receive. causes, including the following. droughts. To be deductible, a
• The deduction limits. • Car accidents (but see Nondeductible drought-related loss generally must be in-
losses, next, for exceptions). curred in a trade or business or in a trans-• When and how to report a casualty or
action entered into for profit.theft. • Earthquakes.
• Termite or moth damage.• Fires (but see Nondeductible losses, next,Forms to file.   When you have a casualty or for exceptions). • The damage or destruction of trees,theft, you have to file Form 4684. You will also
shrubs, or other plants by a fungus, dis-have to file one or both of the following forms. • Floods.
ease, insects, worms, or similar pests.• Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deduc- • Government-ordered demolition or reloca- However, a sudden destruction due to antions tion of a home that is unsafe to use be- unexpected or unusual infestation of beet-
cause of a disaster as discussed under les or other insects may result in a casu-• Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains
alty loss.and Losses Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.
Page 158 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 161 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bankrupt financial institution. The choice is gen- Theft loss proof. For a theft loss, your rec-
erally made on the return you file for that year ords should show all the following.Theft and applies to all your losses on deposits for the • When you discovered that your propertyyear in that particular financial institution. If youA theft is the taking and removing of money or was missing.treat the loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, youproperty with the intent to deprive the owner of it. • That your property was stolen.cannot treat the same amount of the loss as aThe taking of property must be illegal under the nonbusiness bad debt when it actually becomeslaws of the state where it occurred and it must • That you were the owner of the property.worthless. However, you can take a nonbusi-have been done with criminal intent. • Whether a claim for reimbursement existsness bad debt deduction for any amount of lossTheft includes the taking of money or prop- for which there is a reasonable expecta-that is more than the estimated amount youerty by the following means. tion of recovery.deducted as a casualty or ordinary loss. Once
you make this choice, you cannot change it• Blackmail.
without permission from the Internal Revenue• Burglary. Service.
If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as a• Embezzlement.
Figuring a Lossmiscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule• Extortion. A (Form 1040), line 22. The maximum amount
Figure the amount of your loss using the follow-you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are• Kidnapping for ransom. ing steps. married filing separately) reduced by any ex-
• Larceny. pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is 1. Determine your adjusted basis in the prop-subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income• Robbery. erty before the casualty or theft.limit. For more information on this limit, see
2. Determine the decrease in fair marketchapter 28. You cannot choose to claim an ordi-The taking of money or property through fraud value of the property as a result of thenary loss if any part of the deposit is federallyor misrepresentation is theft if it is illegal under casualty or theft.insured.state or local law.
3. From the smaller of the amounts you de-Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not chooseDecline in market value of stock. You can- termined in (1) and (2), subtract any insur-to deduct the loss as a casualty loss or as annot deduct as a theft loss the decline in market ance or other reimbursement you receivedordinary loss, you must wait until the year thevalue of stock acquired on the open market for or expect to receive.actual loss is determined and deduct the loss asinvestment if the decline is caused by disclosure For personal-use property and property used ina nonbusiness bad debt in that year.of accounting fraud or other illegal misconduct performing services as an employee, apply theby the officers or directors of the corporation that deduction limits, discussed later, to determineHow to report. The kind of deduction youissued the stock. However, you can deduct as a the amount of your deductible loss.choose for your loss on deposits determinescapital loss the loss you sustain when you sell or how you report your loss. If you choose:exchange the stock or the stock becomes com- Leased property. If you are liable for casualtypletely worthless. You report a capital loss on • Casualty loss — report it on Form 4684 damage to property you lease, your loss is theSchedule D (Form 1040). For more information first and then on Schedule A (Form 1040). amount you must pay to repair the propertyabout stock sales, worthless stock, and capital minus any insurance or other reimbursement• Ordinary loss — report it on Schedule Alosses, see chapter 4 of Publication 550. you receive or expect to receive.(Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized
deduction.Mislaid or lost property. The simple disap-
Decrease inpearance of money or property is not a theft. • Nonbusiness bad debt — report it onHowever, an accidental loss or disappearance Schedule D (Form 1040). Fair Market Valueof property can qualify as a casualty if it results
from an identifiable event that is sudden, unex- Fair market value (FMV) is the price for whichMore information. For more information, seepected, or unusual. Sudden, unexpected, and you could sell your property to a willing buyerSpecial Treatment for Losses on Deposits inunusual events are defined earlier. when neither of you has to sell or buy and both ofInsolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institutions in you know all the relevant facts.the Instructions for Form 4684.Example. A car door is accidentally The decrease in FMV used to figure theslammed on your hand, breaking the setting of amount of a casualty or theft loss is the differ-your diamond ring. The diamond falls from the ence between the property’s fair market valuering and is never found. The loss of the diamond immediately before and immediately after theis a casualty. casualty or theft.Proof of Loss
FMV of stolen property. The FMV of propertyTo deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must be
immediately after a theft is considered to beable to prove that you had a casualty or theft.
zero, since you no longer have the property.You must be able to support the amount youLoss on Deposits
claim for the loss as discussed next.
Example. Several years ago, you pur-A loss on deposits can occur when a bank, credit
chased silver dollars at face value for $150. Thisunion, or other financial institution becomes in- Casualty loss proof. For a casualty loss, your
is your adjusted basis in the property. Your silversolvent or bankrupt. If you incurred this type of records should show all the following.
dollars were stolen this year. The FMV of theloss, you can choose one of the following ways • The type of casualty (car accident, fire, coins was $1,000 just before they were stolen,to deduct the loss. storm, etc.) and when it occurred. and insurance did not cover them. Your theft• As a casualty loss. loss is $150.• That the loss was a direct result of the
• As an ordinary loss. casualty.
Recovered stolen property. Recovered sto-• As a nonbusiness bad debt. • That you were the owner of the property len property is your property that was stolen andor, if you leased the property from some- later returned to you. If you recovered propertyone else, that you were contractually liableCasualty loss or ordinary loss. You can after you had already taken a theft loss deduc-to the owner for the damage.choose to deduct a loss on deposits as a casu- tion, you must refigure your loss using the
alty loss or as an ordinary loss for any year in • Whether a claim for reimbursement exists smaller of the property’s adjusted basis (ex-
which you can reasonably estimate how much of for which there is a reasonable expecta- plained later) or the decrease in FMV from  the
your deposits you have lost in an insolvent or tion of recovery. time just before it was stolen until the time it was
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 159

Page 162 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
recovered. Use this amount to refigure your total • Replanting necessary to restore the prop- property damaged as a result of a casualty are
erty to its approximate value before the not a part of the loss. You can claim these costsloss for the year in which the loss was deducted.
casualty. as a miscellaneous itemized deduction subjectIf your refigured loss is less than the loss you
to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit ondeducted, you generally have to report the dif-
Schedule A (Form 1040). For information aboutference as income in the recovery year. But Car value.  Books issued by various automo- miscellaneous deductions, see chapter 28.report the difference only up to the amount of the bile organizations that list your car may be useful
loss that reduced your tax. For more information in figuring the value of your car. You can use the
on the amount to report, see Recoveries in book’s retail values and modify them by such Adjusted Basis
chapter 12. factors as mileage and the condition of your car
Adjusted basis is your basis in the property (usu-to figure its value. The prices are not official, but
ally cost) increased or decreased by variousthey may be useful in determining value and
Figuring Decrease in FMV— events, such as improvements and casualtysuggesting relative prices for comparison with
losses. For more information, see chapter 13.current sales and offerings in your area. If yourItems To Consider
car is not listed in the books, determine its value
To figure the decrease in FMV because of a from other sources. A dealer’s offer for your car Insurance and Othercasualty or theft, you generally need a compe- as a trade-in on a new car is not usually a
tent appraisal. But other measures can also be Reimbursementsmeasure of its true value.
used to establish certain decreases.
If you receive an insurance payment or other
type of reimbursement, you must subtract theAppraisal. An appraisal to determine the dif- Figuring Decrease in FMV—
reimbursement when you figure your loss. Youference between the FMV of the property imme- Items Not To Consider do not have a casualty or theft loss to the extentdiately before a casualty or theft and
you are reimbursed.You generally should not consider the followingimmediately afterward should be made by a
If you expect to be reimbursed for part or allitems when attempting to establish the decreasecompetent appraiser. The appraiser must rec-
of your loss, you must subtract the expectedin FMV of your property.ognize the effects of any general market decline
reimbursement when you figure your loss. Youthat may occur along with the casualty. This Cost of protection. The cost of protecting must reduce your loss even if you do not receiveinformation is needed to limit any deduction to your property against a casualty or theft is not payment until a later tax year. See Reimburse-the actual loss resulting from damage to the part of a casualty or theft loss. The amount you ment Received After Deducting Loss, later.property. spend on insurance or to board up your house
Several factors are important in evaluating against a storm is not part of your loss. Failure to file a claim for reimbursement. Ifthe accuracy of an appraisal, including the fol- If you make permanent improvements to your property is covered by insurance, you mustlowing. your property to protect it against a casualty or file a timely insurance claim for reimbursementtheft, add the cost of these improvements to• The appraiser’s familiarity with your prop- of your loss. Otherwise, you cannot deduct thisyour basis in the property. An example would beerty before and after the casualty or theft. loss as a casualty or theft loss. However, thisthe cost of a dike to prevent flooding. rule does not apply to the portion of the loss not• The appraiser’s knowledge of sales of
Related expenses. Any incidental expenses covered by insurance (for example, a deducti-comparable property in the area.
you have due to a casualty or theft, such as ble).
• The appraiser’s knowledge of conditions in expenses for the treatment of personal injuries,
the area of the casualty. for temporary housing, or for a rental car, are not Example. You have a car insurance policy
part of your casualty or theft loss. with a $500 deductible. Because your insurance• The appraiser’s method of appraisal.
did not cover the first $500 of an auto collision,Replacement cost. The cost of replacing sto- the $500 would be deductible (subject to thelen or destroyed property is not part of a casualtyCost of cleaning up or making repairs. The deduction limits discussed later). This is trueor theft loss.cost of repairing damaged property is not part of even if you do not file an insurance claim, be-a casualty loss. Neither is the cost of cleaning up cause your insurance policy would never haveSentimental value. Do not consider senti-after a casualty. But you can use the cost of reimbursed you for the deductible.mental value when determining your loss. If acleaning up or making repairs after a casualty as family portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is dam-a measure of the decrease in FMV if you meet aged, destroyed, or stolen, you must base your Gain from reimbursement. If your reim-all the following conditions. loss on its FMV. bursement is more than your adjusted basis in
the property, you have a gain. This is true even if• The repairs are actually made. Decline in market value of property in or near the decrease in the FMV of the property is• The repairs are necessary to bring the casualty area. A decrease in the value of your smaller than your adjusted basis. If you have aproperty back to its condition before the property because it is in or near an area that gain, you may have to pay tax on it, or you maycasualty. suffered a casualty, or that might again suffer a be able to postpone reporting the gain. Seecasualty, is not to be taken into consideration.• The amount spent for repairs is not exces- Publication 547 for more information on how toYou have a loss only for actual casualty damagesive. treat a gain from a reimbursement for a casualtyto your property. However, if your home is in a or theft.• The repairs take care of the damage only. federally declared disaster area, see Disaster
Area Losses in Publication 547.• The value of the property after the repairs
is not, due to the repairs, more than the Costs of photographs and appraisals. Pho- Types of Reimbursements
value of the property before the casualty. tographs taken after a casualty will be helpful in
The most common type of reimbursement is anestablishing the condition and value of the prop-
insurance payment for your stolen or damagedLandscaping. The cost of restoring land- erty after it was damaged. Photographs showing
property. Other types of reimbursements arescaping to its original condition after a casualty the condition of the property after it was re-
discussed next. Also see the Instructions formay indicate the decrease in FMV. You may be paired, restored, or replaced may also be help-
Form 4684.able to measure your loss by what you spend on ful.
the following.    Appraisals are used to figure the decrease
Employer’s emergency disaster fund. If youin FMV because of a casualty or theft. See• Removing destroyed or damaged trees receive money from your employer’s emergencyAppraisal, earlier, under Figuring Decrease inand shrubs minus any salvage you re- disaster fund and you must use that money toFMV — Items To Consider , for informationceive. rehabilitate or replace property on which you areabout appraisals.
• Pruning and other measures taken to pre- claiming a casualty loss deduction, you mustThe costs of photographs and appraisals
serve damaged trees and shrubs. used as evidence of the value and condition of take that money into consideration in computing
Page 160 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 163 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the casualty loss deduction. Take into consider- Normal living expenses consist of these same you receive your actual reimburseme nt. This
expenses that you would have incurred but didation only the amount you used to replace your section explains the adjustment you may have
not because of the casualty or the threat of one.destroyed or damaged property. to make.
Example. As a result of a fire, you vacatedExample. Your home was extensively dam- Actual reimbursement less than expected.your apartment for a month and moved to aaged by a tornado. Your loss after reimburse-
If you later receive less reimbursement than youmotel. You normally pay $525 a month for rent.ment from your insurance company was
expected, include that difference as a loss withNone was charged for the month the apartment$10,000. Your employer set up a disaster relief
your other losses (if any) on your return for thewas vacated. Your motel rent for this month wasfund for its employees. Employees receiving
year in which you can reasonably expect no$1,200. You normally pay $200 a month formoney from the fund had to use it to rehabilitate
food. Your food expenses for the month you more reimbursement.or replace their damaged or destroyed property.
lived in the motel were $400. You receivedYou received $4,000 from the fund and spent
Example. Your personal car had an FMV of$1,100 from your insurance company to coverthe entire amount on repairs to your home. In
your living expenses. You determine the pay- $2,000 when it was destroyed in a collision withfiguring your casualty loss, you must reduce
ment you must include in income as follows. another car in 2005. The accident was due to theyour unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the $4,000
you received from your employer’s fund. Your negligence of the other driver. At the end of
1) Insurance payment for livingcasualty loss before applying the deduction lim- 2005, there was a reasonable prospect that theexpenses .................. $1,100its discussed later is $6,000. owner of the other car would reimburse you in2) Actual expenses during the full. You did not have a deductible loss in 2005.month you are unable to useCash gifts. If you receive excludable cash In January 2006, the court awarded you ayour home because of fire . . . 1,600gifts as a disaster victim and there are no limits 3) Normal living expenses ..... 7 2 5 judgment of $2,000. However, in July it becameon how you can use the money, you do not 4) Temporary increase in living apparent that you will be unable to collect anyreduce your casualty loss by these excludable expenses: Subtract line 3 amount from the other driver. You can deductcash gifts. This applies even if you use the from line 2 .................. 8 7 5 the loss in 2006 subject to the limits discussedmoney to pay for repairs to property damaged in 5) Amount of payment includible later.the disaster. in income: Subtract line 4
from line 1 .................. $  2 2 5
Example. Your home was damaged by a Actual reimbursement more than expected.
hurricane. Relatives and neighbors made cash Tax year of inclusion. You include the tax- If you later receive more reimbursement than
gifts to you that were excludable from your in- able part of the insurance payment in income for you expected after you claimed a deduction forcome. You used part of the cash gifts to pay for the year you regain the use of your main home the loss, you may have to include the extrarepairs to your home. There were no limits or or, if later, for the year you receive the taxable reimbursement in your income for the year yourestrictions on how you could use the cash gifts. part of the insurance payment. receive it. However, if any part of the originalBecause it was an excludable gift, the money deduction did not reduce your tax for the earlieryou received and used to pay for repairs to your Example. Your main home was destroyed year, do not include that part of the reimburse-home does not reduce your casualty loss on the by a tornado in August 2004. You regained use
ment in your income. You do not refigure yourdamaged home. of your home in November 2005. The insurance
tax for the year you claimed the deduction. Forpayments you received in 2004 and 2005 were
more information, see Recoveries in chapter 12.$1,500 more than the temporary increase inInsurance payments for living expenses.
your living expenses during those years. YouYou do not reduce your casualty loss by insur- If the total of all the reimbursements
include this amount in income on your 2005ance payments you receive to cover living ex- you receive is more than your adjusted
Form 1040. If, in 2006, you receive further pay-penses in either of the following situations. basis in the destroyed or stolen prop-CAUTION
!
ments to cover the living expenses you had in erty, you will have a gain on the casualty or theft.• You lose the use of your main home be- 2004 and 2005, you must include those pay- If you have already taken a deduction for a losscause of a casualty. ments in income on your 2006 Form 1040. and you receive the reimbursement in a later• Government authorities do not allow you year, you may have to include the gain in yourDisaster relief. Food, medical supplies, andaccess to your main home because of a income for the later year. Include the gain asother forms of assistance you receive do notcasualty or threat of one. ordinary income up to the amount of your deduc-reduce your casualty loss unless they are
tion that reduced your tax for the earlier year.replacements for lost or destroyed property.Inclusion in income. If these insurance See Publication 547 for more information onpayments are more than the temporary increase Qualified disaster relief payments you how to treat a gain from the reimbursement of ain your living expenses, you must include the receive for expenses you incurred as a casualty or theft.excess in your income. Report this amount on result of a Presidentially declared dis-
TIP
Form 1040, line 21. However, if the casualty aster, are not taxable income to you. For moreoccurs in a Presidentially declared disaster information, see Disaster Area Losses in Publi- Actual reimbursement same as expected. Ifarea, none of the insurance payments are tax- cation 547. you receive exactly the reimbursement you ex-able. See Qualified disaster relief payments , Disaster unemployment assistance pay- pected to receive, you do not have to includeunder Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. ments are unemployment benefits that are tax- any of the reimbursement in your income andA temporary increase in your living expenses able. you cannot deduct any additional loss.is the difference between the actual living ex- Generally, disaster relief grants and qualifiedpenses you and your family incurred during the disaster mitigation payments made under the Example. In December 2006, you had a col-period you could not use your home and your Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer- lision while driving your personal car. Repairs tonormal living expenses for that period. Actual gency Assistance Act or the National Flood In- the car cost $950. You had $100 deductibleliving expenses are the reasonable and neces- surance Act (as in effect on April 15, 2005) are collision insurance. Your insurance companysary expenses incurred because of the loss of not includible in your income. See Disaster Area agreed to reimburse you for the rest of the dam-your main home. Generally, these expenses in- Losses in Publication 547. age. Because you expected a reimbursementclude the amounts you pay for the following.
from the insurance company, you did not have a• Rent for suitable housing. casualty loss deduction in 2006.Reimbursement Received After• Transportation. Due to the $100 rule (discussed later underDeducting Loss Deduction Limits), you cannot deduct the $100• Food.
you paid as the deductible. When you receiveIf you figured your casualty or theft loss using• Utilities. the $850 from the insurance company in 2007,your expected reimbursement, you may have to
do not report it as income.• Miscellaneous services. adjust your tax return for the tax year in which
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 161

Page 164 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Single Casualty on 10% Rule Deduction LimitsMultiple Properties
This rule does not apply if your loss
arose in the Hurricane Katrina disasterThe $100 and 10% rules (defined later)Personal property. Personal property is any area after August 24, 2005, the Hurri-do not apply if your loss arose in the
TIP
property that is not real property. If your personal cane Rita disaster area after September 22,Hurricane Katrina disaster area after
TIP
property is stolen or is damaged or destroyed by 2005, or the Hurricane Wilma disaster area afterAugust 24, 2005, the Hurricane Rita disastera casualty, you must figure your loss separately October 22, 2005, and the loss was caused byarea after September 22, 2005, or the Hurricanefor each item of property. Then combine these the hurricane.Wilma disaster area after October 22, 2005, andseparate losses to determine your total loss
You must reduce the total of all your casualtyyour loss was caused by the hurricane.from that casualty or theft.
or theft losses on personal-use property by 10%After you have figured your casualty or theft
of your adjusted gross income. Apply this ruleExample. A fire in your home destroyed an loss, you must figure how much of the loss you
after you reduce each loss by $100. If you haveupholstered chair, an oriental rug, and an an- can deduct. If the loss was to property for your both gains and losses from casualties or thefts,tique table. You did not have fire insurance to personal use or your family’s use, there are two see Gains and losses, later in this discussion.cover your loss. (This was the only casualty or limits on the amount you can deduct for your
theft you had during the year.) You paid $750 for casualty or theft loss. Example 1. In June, you discovered thatthe chair and you established that it had an FMV
your house had been burglarized. Your loss1. You must reduce each casualty or theftof $500 just before the fire. The rug cost $3,000
after insurance reimbursement was $2,000.loss by $100 ($100 rule).and had an FMV of $2,500 just before the fire.
Your adjusted gross income for the year youYou bought the table at an auction for $100 2. You must further reduce the total of all discovered the theft is $29,500. You first applybefore discovering it was an antique. It had been your casualty or theft losses by 10% of the $100 rule and then the 10% rule. Figure yourappraised at $900 before the fire. You figure your adjusted gross income (10% rule). theft loss deduction as follows.your loss on each of these items as follows:
You make these reductions on Form 4684. 1) Loss after insurance ........... $2,000Chair Rug Table These rules are explained next and Table 2) Subtract $100 ............... 1 0 025-1 summarizes how to apply the $100 rule and1) Basis (cost) ...... $750 $3,000 $100 3) Loss after $100 rule ........... $1,900the 10% rule in various situations. For more 4) Subtract 10% × $29,500 AGI ..... 2,9502) FMV before fire . . . $500 $2,500 $900 detailed explanations and examples, see Publi- 5) Theft loss deduction ......... –0–3) FMV after fire ..... – 0 – – 0 – – 0 – cation 547. You do not have a theft loss deduction be-4) Decrease in FMV . . $500 $2,500 $900
cause your loss after you apply the $100 rule5) Loss (smaller of (1) or
Property used partly for business and partly ($1,900) is less than 10% of your adjusted gross(4)) ............ $500 $2,500 $100
for personal purposes. When property is income ($2,950).
used partly for personal purposes and partly for6) Total loss ....... $3,100
Example 2. In March, you had a car acci-business or income-producing purposes, the
dent that totally destroyed your car. You did notcasualty or theft loss deduction must be figuredReal property. In figuring a casualty loss on have collision insurance on your car, so you didseparately for the personal-use part and for thepersonal-use real property, treat the entire prop- not receive any insurance reimbursement. Yourbusiness or income-producing part. You musterty (including any improvements, such as build- loss on the car was $1,200. In November, a firefigure each loss separately because the $100ings, trees, and shrubs) as one item. Figure the damaged your basement and totally destroyedrule and the 10% rule apply only to the loss onloss using the smaller of the adjusted basis or the furniture, washer, dryer, and other itemsthe personal-use part of the property.the decrease in FMV of the entire property. stored there. Your loss on the basement items
after reimbursement was $1,700. Your adjustedExample. You bought your home a few $100 Rule gross income for the year that the accident andyears ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for the fire occurred is $25,000. You figure your casu-land and $140,000 for the house). You also alty loss deduction as follows.This rule does not apply if your lossspent $2,000 for landscaping. This year a fire arose in the Hurricane Katrina disasterdestroyed your home. The fire also damaged Base-area after August 24, 2005, the Hurri-
TIP
the shrubbery and trees in your yard. The fire Car ment cane Rita disaster area after September 22,was your only casualty or theft loss this year. 2005, or the Hurricane Wilma disaster area after 1) Loss .............. $1,200 $1,700Competent appraisers valued the property as a October 22, 2005, and the loss was caused by 2) Subtract $100 per incident 100 100whole at $200,000 before the fire, but only the hurricane. 3) Loss after $100 rule .... $1,100 $1,600$30,000 after the fire. (The loss to your house-
After you have figured your casualty or thefthold furnishings is not shown in this example. It 4) Total loss ................ $2,700
loss on personal-use property, you must reducewould be figured separately on each item, as 5) Subtract 10% × $25,000 AGI . . . 2,500
that loss by $100. This reduction applies to eachexplained earlier under Personal property. ) 6) Casualty loss deduction ..... $200
total casualty or theft loss. It does not matterShortly after the fire, the insurance company
how many pieces of property are involved in anpaid you $155,000 for the loss. You figure your Gains and losses. If you had both gains and
casualty loss as follows: event. Only a single $100 reduction applies. losses from casualties or thefts to personal-use
property, you must compare your total gains to
1) Adjusted basis of the entire Example. A hailstorm damages your home your total losses. Do this after you have reduced
property (land, building, and and your car. Determine the amount of loss, as each loss by any reimbursements and by $100.
landscaping) ............ $162,000 discussed earlier, for each of these items. Since Casualty or theft gains do not includethe losses are due to a single event, you com-2) FMV of entire property before gains you choose to postpone. Seebine the losses and reduce the combinedfire ................... $200,000 Publication 547 for information on theCAUTION
!
amount by $100.3) FMV of entire property after fire 30,000 postponement of gain.4) Decrease in FMV of entire
property ............... $170,000 Single event. Generally, events closely re- Losses more than gains. If your losses are
lated in origin cause a single casualty. It is a more than your recognized gains, subtract your5) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)) . . . $162,000
single casualty when the damage is from two or gains from your losses and reduce the result by6) Subtract insurance ........ 155,000
more closely related causes, such as wind and 10% of your adjusted gross income. The rest, if7) Amount of loss after
flood damage caused by the same storm.reimbursement .......... $7,000 any, is your deductible loss.
Page 162 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 165 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 25-1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits for Personal-Use Property
$100 Rule* 10% Rule*
General Application You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by You must reduce your total casualty or theft
$100 when figuring your deduction. Apply this loss by 10% of your adjusted gross income.
rule after you have figured the amount of your Apply this rule after you reduce each loss by
loss. $100 (the $100 rule).
Single Event Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces Apply this rule only once, even if many
of property are affected. pieces of property are affected.
More Than One Event Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all
events.
More Than One Person— Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.
With Loss From the
Same Event
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Filing Jointly Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.Married Couple—
With Loss From the Filing Separately Apply separately to each spouse. Apply separately to each spouse.Same Event
More Than One Owner Apply separately to each owner of jointly Apply separately to each owner of jointly
(other than a married owned property. owned property.
couple filing jointly)
*The $100 and 10% rules do not apply if your loss arose in the Hurricane Katrina disaster area after August 24, 2005, the Hurricane Rita disaster
area after September 22, 2005, or the Hurricane Wilma disaster area after October 22, 2005, and your loss was caused by the hurricane.
Gains more than losses. If your recog- area, you can choose to deduct the loss on your Who is eligible. If the IRS postpones a tax
nized gains are more than your losses, subtract deadline, the following taxpayers are eligible fortax return or amended return for either of the
your losses from your gains. The difference is the postponement.following years.
treated as capital gain and must be reported on • Any individual whose main home is lo-• The year the disaster occurred.Schedule D (Form 1040). The 10% rule does not cated in a covered disaster area (definedapply to your gains. • The year immediately preceding the year next).the disaster occurred.
• Any business entity or sole proprietor
whose principal place of business is lo-Gains.  Special rules apply if you choose to cated in a covered disaster area.When To Report postpone reporting gain on property damaged or
• Any individual who is a relief worker affili-destroyed in a Presidentially declared disaster
Gains and Losses ated with a recognized government or phil-area. For those special rules, see Publication
anthropic organization who is assisting in547.
a covered disaster area.Gains. If you receive an insurance or other
reimbursement that is more than your adjusted • Any individual, business entity, or solePostponed tax deadlines. The IRS maybasis in the destroyed or stolen property, you proprietor whose records are needed topostpone for up to 1 year certain tax deadlines ofhave a gain from the casualty or theft. You must meet a postponed deadline, providedtaxpayers who are affected by a Presidentiallyinclude this gain in your income in the year you those records are maintained in a covereddeclared disaster. The tax deadlines the IRSreceive the reimbursement, unless you choose disaster area. The main home or principalmay postpone include those for filing incometo postpone reporting the gain as explained in place of business does not have to beand employment tax returns, paying income andPublication 547. located in the covered disaster area.employment taxes, and making contributions toIf you have a loss, see Table 25-2. a traditional IRA or Roth IRA. • Any estate or trust that has tax records
necessary to meet a postponed tax dead-If any tax deadline is postponed, the IRS willLosses. Generally, you can deduct a casualty
line, provided those records are main-loss that is not reimbursable only in the tax year publicize the postponement in your area by pub- tained in a covered disaster area.in which the casualty occurred. This is true even lishing a news release, revenue ruling, revenue
if you do not repair or replace the damaged procedure, notice, announcement, or other gui-
property until a later year. dance in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB).
You can deduct theft losses that are not
reimbursable only in the year you discover your Table 25-2.  When To Deduct a Loss
property was stolen.
If you are not sure whether part of your casu- IF you have a loss... THEN deduct it in the year...
alty or theft loss will be reimbursed, do not de-
from a casualty, the loss occurred.duct that part until the tax year when you
become reasonably certain that it will not be in a Presidentially declared disaster the disaster occurred or the year immediately before the
reimbursed. area, disaster.
from a theft,  the theft was discovered.Loss on deposits. If your loss is a loss on
deposits in an insolvent or bankrupt financial on a deposit treated as a:institution, see Loss on Deposits, earlier.
• casualty, • a reasonable estimate can be made.
Disaster Area Loss • bad debt, • deposits are totally worthless.
• ordinary loss, • a reasonable estimate can be made.If you have a casualty loss from a disaster that
occurred in a Presidentially declared disaster
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 163

Page 166 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You fully accounted to your employer for• The spouse on a joint return with a tax-
your work-related expenses.payer who is eligible for postponements.
• You received full reimbursement for your• Any other person determined by the IRS 26.
expenses.to be affected by a Presidentially declared
disaster. • Your employer required you to return any
excess reimbursement and you did so.Car ExpensesCovered disaster area. This is an area of a
• There is no amount shown with a code “L”Presidentially declared disaster area in which
in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage andthe IRS has decided to postpone tax deadlines and Other Tax Statement.for up to 1 year.
If you meet all of these conditions, there is noAbatement of interest and penalties. The
Employee need to show the expenses or the reimburse-IRS may abate the interest and penalties on
ments on your return. See Reimbursements,underpaid income tax for the length of any post-
later, if you would like more information on reim-ponement of tax deadlines. Business bursements and accounting to your employer.More information. For more information, see
Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. If you meet these conditions and yourExpenses
employer included reimbursements on
your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-
TIP
ployer for a corrected Form W-2.
What’s NewHow To Report
Useful ItemsGains and Losses Standard mileage rate. For 2006, the stan- You may want to see:dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your
Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a deductible car for business use is 441/2 cents per mile. Publicationloss from a casualty or theft. If you have more Car expenses and use of the standard mile-
than one casualty or theft, use a separate Form ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carage rate are explained under Transportation Ex-
4684 to determine your gain or loss for each Expensespenses, later.
event. Combine the gains and losses on one ❏ 535 Business ExpensesMeal expenses when subject to “hours ofForm 4684. Follow the form instructions as to
service” limits. Generally, you can deduct ❏ 1542 Per Diem Rateswhich lines to fill out. In addition, you must use
only 50% of your business-related meal ex-the appropriate schedule to report a gain or loss.
Form (and Instructions)penses while traveling away from home for busi-The schedule you use depends on whether you
ness purposes. You can deduct a higherhave a gain or loss. ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemizedpercentage if the meals take place during or Deductionsincident to any period subject to the DepartmentIf you have a: Report it on:
❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Lossof Transportation’s “hours of service” limits.Gain .......... Schedule D (Form From Business(These limits apply to certain workers who are1040) under certain federal regulations.) The percent- ❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net ProfitLoss .......... Schedule A (Form age is 75% for 2006. See Exceptions to the 50% From Business1040) Limit under 50% Limit, later.
❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or LossAdjustments to basis. If you have a casualty From Farmingor theft loss, you must decrease your basis in
❏ Form 2106 Employee Businessthe property by any insurance or other reim-
Introduction Expensesbursement you receive, and by any deductible
loss. Amounts you spend to restore your prop- You may be able to deduct the ordinary and ❏ Form 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee
erty after a casualty increase your adjusted ba- necessary business-related expenses you have Business Expensessis. See Adjusted Basis in chapter 13 for more for:
information. • Travel,
Net operating loss (NOL). If your casualty or • Entertainment,theft loss deduction is more than your income,
• Gifts, or Travel Expensesyou may have an NOL. You can use an NOL to
lower your tax in an earlier year, allowing you to • Transportation. If you temporarily travel away from your taxget a refund for tax you have already paid. Or,
An ordinary expense is one that is common and home, you can use this section to determine ifyou can use it to lower your tax in a later year. accepted in your field of trade, business, or you have deductible travel expenses. This sec-You do not have to be in business to have an profession. A necessary expense is one that is tion discusses:NOL from a casualty or theft loss. For more helpful and appropriate for your business. Aninformation, see Publication 536, Net Operating • Traveling away from home,expense does not have to be required to beLosses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and considered necessary. • Tax home,Trusts.
This chapter explains the following. • Temporary assignment or job, and
• What expenses are deductible. • What travel expenses are deductible.
• How to report your expenses on your re- It also discusses the standard meal allowance,turn. rules for travel inside and outside the United
• What records you need to prove your ex- States, and deductible convention expenses.
penses.
Travel expenses defined. For tax purposes,• How to treat any expense reimbursements travel expenses are the ordinary and necessaryyou may receive.
expenses (defined earlier) of traveling away
from home for your business, profession, or job.Who does not need to use this chapter. If
You will find examples of deductible travelyou are an employee, you will not need to read
this chapter if all of the following are true. expenses in Table 26-1.
Page 164 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 167 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
itinerant; your tax home is wherever you work later) substantially longer than an ordinaryTax Home day’s work, andand you cannot deduct travel expenses.
To determine whether you are traveling away • You need to sleep or rest to meet theExample. You are single and live in Bostonfrom home, you must first determine the location demands of your work while away fromin an apartment you rent. You have worked forof your tax home. home.your employer in Boston for a number of years.Generally, your tax home is your regular This rest requirement is not satisfied by merelyYour employer enrolls you in a 12-month execu-place of business or post of duty, regardless of napping in your car. You do not have to be awaytive training program. You do not expect to re-where you maintain your family home. It in- from your tax home for a whole day or from duskturn to work in Boston after you complete yourcludes the entire city or general area in which to dawn as long as your relief from duty is longtraining.your business or work is located. enough to get necessary sleep or rest.During your training, you do not do any workIf you have more than one regular place of
in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andbusiness, your tax home is your main place of Example 1. You are a railroad conductor.on-the-job training throughout the United States.business. See Main place of business or work, You leave your home terminal on a regularlyYou keep your apartment in Boston and return tolater. scheduled round-trip run between two cities andit frequently. You use your apartment to conductIf you do not have a regular or a main place return home 16 hours later. During the run, youyour personal business. You also keep up yourof business because of the nature of your work, have 6 hours off at your turnaround point wherecommunity contacts in Boston. When you com-then your tax home may be the place where you you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to getplete your training, you are transferred to Losregularly live. See No main place of business or necessary sleep before starting the return trip.Angeles.work, later. You are considered to be away from home. If you do not have a regular place of busi- You do not satisfy factor (1) because you did
ness or post of duty and there is no place where not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be- Example 2. You are a truck driver. Youyou regularly live, you are considered an itiner- cause you had duplicate living expenses. You leave your terminal and return to it later theant (a transient) and your tax home is wherever also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban- same day. You get an hour off at your turn-you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim a don your apartment in Boston as your main around point to eat. Because you are not off totravel expense deduction because you are home, you kept your community contacts, and get necessary sleep and the brief time off is notnever considered to be traveling away from you frequently returned to live in your apartment. an adequate rest period, you are not travelinghome. You have a tax home in Boston. away from home.
Main place of business or work. If you have Tax home different from family home. If you Members of the Armed Forces. If you are amore than one place of business or work, con- (and your family) do not live at your tax home member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-sider the following when determining which one (defined earlier), you cannot deduct the cost of nent duty assignment overseas, you are notis your main place of business or work. traveling between your tax home and your family traveling away from home. You cannot deduct
home. You also cannot deduct the cost of meals• The total time you ordinarily spend in each your expenses for meals and lodging. You can-
and lodging while at your tax home. See Exam-place. not deduct these expenses even if you have to
ple 1 that follows. maintain a home in the United States for your• The level of your business activity in each If you are working temporarily in the same family members who are not allowed to accom-place. city where you and your family live, you may be pany you overseas. If you are transferred from
• Whether your income from each place is considered as traveling away from home. See one permanent duty station to another, you may
significant or insignificant. Example 2, below. have deductible moving expenses, which are
explained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
Example 1. You are a truck driver and you A naval officer assigned to permanent dutyExample. You live in Cincinnati where you and your family live in Tucson. You are em- aboard a ship that has regular eating and livinghave a seasonal job for 8 months each year and ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travelearn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return expense purposes.Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.
to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend oneCincinnati is your main place of work because
night there before returning home. You cannotyou spend most of your time there and earn Temporary Assignmentdeduct any expenses you have for meals andmost of your income there.
or Joblodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from
No main place of business or work. You Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is
You may regularly work at your tax home andmay have a tax home even if you do not have a your tax home.
also work at another location. It may not beregular or main place of business or work. Your
practical to return to your tax home from thistax home may be the home where you regularly Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-
other location at the end of each work day.live. burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The
rest of the year you work for the same employerFactors used to determine tax home. If Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign-in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurantsyou do not have a regular or main place of ment. If your assignment or job away fromand sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is thebusiness or work, use the following three factors your main place of work is temporary, your taxsame whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-to determine where your tax home is. home does not change. You are considered tomore. be away from home for the whole period you are1. You perform part of your business in the Because you spend most of your working away from your main place of work. You canarea of your main home and use that time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore, deduct your travel expenses if they otherwisehome for lodging while doing business in that city is your tax home. You cannot deduct qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporarythe area. any expenses you have for meals and lodging assignment in a single location is one that isthere. However, when you return to work in realistically expected to last (and does in fact2. You have living expenses at your main Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax home last) for one year or less.home that you duplicate because your even though you stay at your family home. You However, if your assignment or job is indefi-business requires you to be away from that can deduct the cost of your round trip between nite, the location of the assignment or job be-home. Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct comes your new tax home and you cannot3. You have not abandoned the area in which your part of your family’s living expenses for deduct your travel expenses while there. Anboth your historical place of lodging and meals and lodging while you are living and work- assignment or job in a single location is consid-your claimed main home are located; you ing in Pittsburgh. ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to lasthave a member or members of your family for more than one year, whether or not it actuallyliving at your main home; or you often use lasts for more than one year.Traveling Away Fromthat home for lodging. If your assignment is indefinite, you mustHomeIf you satisfy all three factors, your tax home include in your income any amounts you receive
is the home where you regularly live. If you from your employer for living expenses, even ifYou are traveling away from home if:satisfy only two factors, you may have a tax they are called travel allowances and you ac-
• Your duties require you to be away fromhome depending on all the facts and circum- count to your employer for them. You may be
the general area of your tax home (definedstances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are an able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 165

Page 168 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-Table 26-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
penses of returning home up to the amount you This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you would have spent for meals had you stayed attravel away from home for business purposes. your temporary place of work.
Probationary work period. If you take a job
that requires you to move, with the understand-IF you have ing that you will keep the job if your work isexpenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of... satisfactory during a probationary period, the job
is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of your
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-your business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or bationary period.you are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar
program, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury What Travel Expenses AreWater Travel and Cruise ships (under Conventions) in
Deductible?Publication 463 for additional rules and limits.
taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you Once you have determined that you are travel-
ing away from your tax home, you can determinebus, and airport between:
what travel expenses are deductible.limousine • The airport or station and your hotel, and You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-• The hotel and the work location of your customers or penses you have when you travel away from
clients, your business meeting place, or your temporary home on business. The type of expense you can
work location. deduct depends on the facts and your circum-
stances.baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your Table 26-1 summarizes travel expenses you
shipping regular and temporary work locations. may be able to deduct. You may have other
deductible travel expenses that are not coveredcar operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from there, depending on the facts and your circum-home on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stances.
standard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls and When you travel away from home onparking. If you rent a car while away from home on business, business, you should keep records ofyou can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses. all the expenses you have and anyRECORDS
advances you receive from your employer. Youlodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherenough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly written record to keep track of your expenses.perform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, The types of expenses you need to record,beverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals and Incidental along with supporting documentation, are de-
Expenses for additional rules and limits. scribed in Table 26-2, later.
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry. Separating costs. If you have one expense
that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes and other services (such as lodging or transpor-business communication by fax machine or other tation), you must allocate that expense betweencommunication devices. the cost of meals and entertainment and the cost
of other services. You must have a reasonabletips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. basis for making this allocation. For example,
you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
cludes one or more meals in its room charge.business travel. These expenses might include transportation
to or from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, Travel expenses for another individual. If a
computer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a house spouse, dependent, or other individual goes with
trailer. you (or your employee) on a business trip or to a
business convention, you generally cannot de-
duct his or her travel expenses.
tax home as a moving expense. See Publication temporary or indefinite when you start work. If Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-
521 for more information. you expect an assignment or job to last for one penses of someone who goes with you if that
year or less, it is temporary unless there are person:Exception for federal crime investigations or facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.prosecutions. If you are a federal employee 1. Is your employee,An assignment or job that is initially temporaryparticipating in a federal crime investigation or may become indefinite due to changed circum- 2. Has a bona fide business purpose for theprosecution, you are not subject to the one-year stances. A series of assignments to the same travel, andrule. This means you may be able to deduct location, all for short periods but that togethertravel expenses even if you are away from your 3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct thecover a long period, may be considered an in-tax home for more than one year. travel expenses.definite assignment.For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or
his or her designee) must certify that you are Business associate. If a business associ-Going home on days off. If you go back totraveling: ate travels with you and meets the conditions inyour tax home from a temporary assignment on
(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel
• For the federal government, your days off, you are not considered away from expenses you have for that person. A businesshome while you are in your hometown. You• In a temporary duty status, and associate is someone with whom you could rea-cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-• To investigate, prosecute, or provide sup- sonably expect to actively conduct business. Aing there. However, you can deduct your travelport services for the investigation or prose- business associate can be a current or prospec-expenses, including meals and lodging, whilecution of a federal crime. tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier,traveling between your temporary place of work employee, agent, partner, or professional advi-and your tax home. You can claim these ex-You can deduct your otherwise allowable travel sor.penses up to the amount it would have cost youexpenses throughout the period of certification.
to stay at your temporary place of work. Bona fide business purpose. A bona fide
If you keep your hotel room during your visitDetermining temporary or indefinite. You business purpose exists if you can prove a real
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotelmust determine whether your assignment is business purpose for the individual’s presence.
Page 166 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 169 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Incidental services, such as typing notes or as- you travel. In this chapter, “standard meal allow- rate. For travel in 2006, the  rate for most small
sisting in entertaining customers, are not ance” refers to the federal rate for M&IE, dis- localities in the United States is $39 a day from
enough to make the expenses deductible. cussed later under Amount of standard meal January 1 through December 31, 2006.
allowance. If you use the standard meal allow- Most major cities and many other localities in
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- ance, you still must keep records to prove the the United States are designated as high-cost
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is time, place, and business purpose of your travel. areas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-
not Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally types See Recordkeeping, later. lowances. Locations qualifying for these rates
notes, performs similar services, and accompa- are listed in Publication 1542 which is availableIncidental expenses. The term “incidentalnies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- on the Internet at www.irs.gov.expenses” means:formance of these services does not establish You can also find this information (or-• Fees and tips given to porters, baggagethat her presence on the trip is necessary to the ganized by state) on the Internet atcarriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewardsconduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses are www.gsa.gov . Click on “Per Diemor stewardesses and others on ships, andnot deductible. Rates,” then select “2006” for the period Januaryhotel servants in foreign countries,Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A 1, 2006 – September 30, 2006, and selectsingle room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the • Transportation between places of lodging “2007” for the period October 1, 2006 – Decem-total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago, or business and places where meals are ber 31, 2006. However, you can apply the ratesbut only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he uses taken, if suitable meals can be obtained at in effect before October 1, 2006, for expenses ofpublic transportation, he can deduct only his the temporary duty site, and all travel within the United States for 2006 in-fare. stead of the updated rates. You must consist-• Mailing costs associated with filing travel ently use either the rates for the first 9 monthsvouchers and payment of em-Meals and Incidental Expenses for all of 2006 or the updated rates for the periodployer-sponsored charge card billings. of October 1, 2006, through December 31,You can deduct the cost of meals in either of the Incidental expenses do not include expenses for 2006.following situations. laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg- If you travel to more than one location in one• It is necessary for you to stop for substan- ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone day, use the rate in effect for the area where youtial sleep or rest to properly perform your calls. stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-duties while traveling away from home on tation industry, however, see Special rate forIncidental expenses only method. Youbusiness. transportation workers, later.can use an optional method (instead of actual
• The meal is business-related entertain- cost) for deducting incidental expenses only. Standard meal allowance for areas outsidement. The amount of the deduction is $3 a day for the continental United States.  The standard
incidental expenses paid or incurred for travel meal allowance rates do not apply to travel inBusiness-related entertainment is discussed away from home in 2006. You can use this Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outsideunder Entertainment Expenses,  later. The fol- method only if you did not pay or incur any meal the continental United States. The federal perlowing discussion deals only with meals (and expenses. You cannot use this method on any diem rates for these locations are publishedincidental expenses) that are not busi- day that you use the standard meal allowance. monthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al-ness-related entertainment. lowances for Foreign Areas.Federal employees should refer to the
Federal Travel Regulations atLavish or extravagant. You cannot deduct You can access foreign per diem rates
www.gsa.gov. Click on “Federal Travelexpenses for meals that are lavish or extrava- CAUTION
!
at: www.state.gov/m/a/als/prdm.
Regulation (FTR)” for changes affecting claimsgant. An expense is not considered lavish or
for reimbursement of these expenses.extravagant if it is reasonable based on the facts
and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal- 50% limit may apply. If you use the stan-lowed merely because they are more than a Your employer may have these ratesdard meal allowance method for meal expensesfixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res- available, or you can purchase theand you are not reimbursed or you are reim-taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. publication from the:bursed under a nonaccountable plan, you can
50% limit on meals. You can figure your meal generally deduct only 50% of the standard meal Superintendent of Documentsexpenses using either of the following methods. allowance. If you are reimbursed under an ac- U.S. Government Printing Officecountable plan and you are deducting amounts• Actual cost. P.O. Box 371954that are more than your reimbursements, you Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954• The standard meal allowance. can deduct only 50% of the excess amount. The
50% limit is explained later under Entertainment You can also order it by calling theBoth of these methods are explained below. But, Expenses. Accountable and nonaccountable Government Printing Office atregardless of the method you use, you generally plans are discussed later under Reimburse- 1-202-512-1800 (not a toll-free num-can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost ments. ber).of your meals.
There is no optional standard lodgingIf you are reimbursed for the cost of your Special rate for transportation workers.amount similar to the standard mealmeals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on You can use a special standard meal allowanceallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-CAUTION
!
whether your employer’s reimbursement plan if you work in the transportation industry. Youpense deduction is your actual cost.was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are are in the transportation industry if your work:
not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether Who can use the standard meal allowance. • Directly involves moving people or goodsthe unreimbursed meal expense is for business You can use the standard meal allowance by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, ortravel or business entertainment. The 50% limit whether you are an employee or self-employed, truck, andis explained later under Entertainment Ex- and whether or not you are reimbursed for yourpenses. Accountable and nonaccountable plans • Regularly requires you to travel away fromtraveling expenses.are discussed later under Reimbursements. home and, during any single trip, usually
involves travel to areas eligible for differ-Use of the standard meal allowance for otherActual cost. You can use the actual cost of ent standard meal allowance rates.travel. You can use the standard meal allow-your meals to figure the amount of your expense ance to figure your meal expenses when youbefore reimbursement and application of the If this applies to you, you can claim a standardtravel in connection with investment and other50% deduction limit. If you use this method, you meal allowance of $52 a day ($58 for travelincome-producing property. You can also use itmust keep records of your actual cost. outside the continental United States) from Jan-to figure your meal expenses when you travel for uary 1 through December 31, 2006.Standard meal allowance. Generally, you qualifying educational purposes. You cannot
can use the “standard meal allowance” method Using the special rate for transportation work-use the standard meal allowance to figure the
as an alternative to the actual cost method. It ers eliminates the need for you to determine thecost of your meals when you travel for medical
allows you to use a set amount for your daily standard meal allowance for every area whereor charitable purposes.
meals and incidental expenses (M&IE), instead you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to use
of keeping records of your actual costs. The set Amount of standard meal allowance. The the special rate for any trip, you must use the
amount varies depending on where and when standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE special rate (and not use the regular stand ard
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 167

Page 170 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
meal allowance rates) for all trips you take that round-trip transportation to and from New Orle- How much of your travel expense s you can
deduct depends in part upon how much of youryear. ans. The deduction for your meals is subject to
trip outside the United States was business re-the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.
lated.Travel for days you depart and return. For
See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for informa-both the day you depart for and the day you
tion on luxury water travel.Trip Primarily forreturn from a business trip, you must prorate the
standard meal allowance (figure a reduced Personal Reasons
amount for each day). You can do so by one of
If your trip was primarily for personal reasons, Travel Entirely for Businesstwo methods.
such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a or Considered Entirely• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- nondeductible personal expense. However, you for Businessdard meal allowance. can deduct any expenses you have while at your
destination that are directly related to your busi- You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-• Method 2: You can prorate using any
ness. ting to and from your business destination if yourmethod that you consistently apply and
trip is entirely for business or considered entirely   A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may bethat is in accordance with reasonable busi-
for business.a vacation even if the promoter advertises that itness practice.
is primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-
dental business activities during a trip, such as Travel entirely for business. If you travelExample. Jen is employed in New Orleans outside the United States and you spend theviewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingas a convention planner. In March, her employer entire time on business activities, you can de-with general subjects, will not change what issent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to duct all of your travel expenses.really a vacation into a business trip.attend a planning seminar. She left her home in
New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and Travel considered entirely for business.arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After Even if you did not spend your entire time onPart of Trip Outsidespending two nights there, she flew back to New business activities, your trip is considered en-the United StatesOrleans on Friday and arrived back home at tirely for business if you meet at least one of the8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amount If part of your trip is outside the United States, following four exceptions.to cover her expenses and included it with her use the rules described later under Travel Exception 1 - No substantial control.wages. Outside the United States for that part of the trip. Your trip is considered entirely for business ifUnder Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days of For the part of your trip that is inside the United you did not have substantial control over arrang-the standard meal allowance for Washington, States, use the rules for travel in the United ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing ofDC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday and States. Travel outside the United States does your trip does not, by itself, mean that you haveFriday (the days she departed and returned), not include travel from one point in the United substantial control over arranging your trip.and the full daily rate for Thursday. States to another point in the United States. The You do not have substantial control overUnder Method 2, Jen could also use any following discussion can help you determine your trip if you:method that she applies consistently and that is whether your trip was entirely within the United
in accordance with reasonable business prac- • Are an employee who was reimbursed orStates.
tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of the paid a travel expense allowance,
standard meal allowance even though a federal Public transportation. If you travel by public • Are not related to your employer, andemployee would have to use method 1 and be transportation, any place in the United States
• Are not a managing executive.limited to only 21/2 days. where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
point in the United States. Once the vehicle
“Related to your employer” is defined later inleaves the last scheduled stop in the UnitedTravel in the this chapter under Per Diem and Car Al-States on its way to a point outside the United
lowances.United States States, you apply the rules under Travel Outside
A “managing executive” is an employee whothe United States.
The following discussion applies to travel in the has the authority and responsibility, without be-
United States. For this purpose, the United ing subject to the veto of another, to decide onExample. You fly from New York to Puerto
States includes the 50 states and the District of the need for the business travel.Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return
Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-  A self-employed person generally has sub-to New York nonstop. The flight from New York
penses depends on how much of your trip was stantial control over arranging business trips.to Miami is in the United States, so only the flight
business related and on how much of your trip from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United Exception 2 - Outside United States nooccurred within the United States. See Part of States. Because there are no scheduled stops more than a week. Your trip is consideredTrip Outside the United States, later. between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the entirely for business if you were outside thereturn trip is outside the United States. United States for a week or less, combining
business and nonbusiness activities. One weekTrip Primarily for Business Private car. Travel by private car in the United means seven consecutive days. In counting theStates is travel between points in the United days, do not count the day you leave the UnitedYou can deduct all your travel expenses if your States, even when you are on your way to a States, but do count the day you return to thetrip was entirely business related. If your trip was destination outside the United States. United States.primarily for business and, while at your busi-
ness destination, you extended your stay for a Exception 3 - Less than 25% of time onExample. You travel by car from Denver tovacation, made a personal side trip, or had other personal activities. Your trip is consideredMexico City and return. Your travel from Denverpersonal activities, you can deduct your busi- entirely for business if:to the border and from the border back to Den-
ness-related travel expenses. These expenses ver is travel in the United States, and the rules in • You were outside the United States forinclude the travel costs of getting to and from this section apply. The rules under Travel more than a week, andyour business destination and any busi- Outside the United States apply to your trip from
ness-related expenses at your business desti- • You spent less than 25% of the total timethe border to Mexico City and back to the border.
nation. you were outside the United States on
nonbusiness activities.Travel OutsideExample. You work in Atlanta and take a For this purpose, count both the day your tripbusiness trip to New Orleans. On your way the United States began and the day it ended.home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.
You spend $1,070 for the 9 days you are away If any part of your business travel is outside the Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-
from home for travel, meals, lodging, and other United States, some of your deductions for the eration. Your trip is considered entirely for
travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo- cost of getting to and from your destination may business if you can establish that a personal
bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, and be limited. For this purpose, the United States vacation was not a major consideration, even if
includes the 50 states and the District of Colum-your total cost would have been $920. You can you have substantial control over arranging the
bia.deduct $920 for your trip, including the cost of trip.
Page 168 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 171 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(defined earlier in the Introduction) and meet other services (such as lodging or transporta-Travel Primarily for Business
one of the following tests. tion), you must allocate that expense between
If you travel outside the United States primarily the cost of entertainment and the cost of other• Directly-related test.for business but spend some of your time on services. You must have a reasonable basis for
nonbusiness activities, you generally cannot de- • Associated test. making this allocation. For example, you must
duct all of your travel expenses. You can only allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-Both of these tests are explained in chapter 2 ofdeduct the business portion of your cost of get- tainment in its lounge on the same bill with yourPublication 463.ting to and from your destination. You must room charge.
allocate the costs between your business and The amount you can deduct for enter- A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter-nonbusiness activities to determine your de- tainment expenses may be limited. tainment includes the cost of a meal you provideductible amount. These travel allocation rules Generally, you can deduct only 50% of to a customer or client, whether the meal is a
CAUTION
!
are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication 463. your unreimbursed entertainment expenses. part of other entertainment or by itself. A mealYou do not have to allocate your travel This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit. expense includes the cost of food, beverages,expense deduction if you meet one of taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-the four exceptions listed earlier under Club dues and membership fees. You can-
TIP
tainment-related meal, you or your employeeTravel considered entirely for business. In those not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for must be present when the food or beverages arecases, you can deduct the total cost of getting to membership in any club organized for: provided.and from your destination.
• Business, You cannot claim the cost of your meal
both as an entertainment expense and• Pleasure, as a travel expense.CAUTION
!
Travel Primarily for Personal • Recreation, or
Reasons Taking turns paying for meals or entertain-• Other social purpose.
ment. If a group of business acquaintancesIf you travel outside the United States primarily This rule applies to any membership organiza- take turns picking up each others’ meal or enter-for vacation or for investment purposes, the en- tion if one of its principal purposes is either: tainment checks without regard to whether anytire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal
business purposes are served, no member of• To conduct entertainment activities forexpense. If you spend some time attending brief
the group can deduct any part of the expense.members or their guests, orprofessional seminars or a continuing education
program, you can deduct your registration fees Trade association meetings.  You can de-• To provide members or their guests withand other expenses you have that are directly access to entertainment facilities. duct entertainment expenses that are directlyrelated to your business. related to, and necessary for, attending busi-
The purposes and activities of a club, not its ness meetings or conventions of certain exempt
name, will determine whether or not you canConventions organizations if the expenses of your attend-
deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid ance are related to your active trade or busi-
You can deduct your travel expenses when you to: ness. These organizations include business
attend a convention if you can show that your leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate• Country clubs,attendance benefits your trade or business. You boards, trade associations, and professional as-
cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam- • Golf and athletic clubs, sociations.
ily. • Airline clubs, If the convention is for investment, political, Additional information. For more information• Hotel clubs, andsocial, or other purposes unrelated to your trade on entertainment expenses, including discus-or business, you cannot deduct the expenses. sions of the directly-related and associated• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
tests, see chapter 2 of Publication 463.cumstances generally considered to beYour appointment or election as a dele-
conducive to business discussions.gate does not, in itself, determine
whether you can deduct travel ex-CAUTION
!
50% Limitpenses. You can deduct your travel expenses Entertainment.  Entertainment includes anyonly if your attendance is connected to your own In general, you can deduct only 50% of youractivity generally considered to provide enter-trade or business. business-related meal and entertainment ex-tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples
penses. (If you are subject to the Department ofinclude entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-
Convention agenda. The convention agenda Transportation’s “hours of service” limits, youcial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at
or program generally shows the purpose of the can deduct a higher percentage. See Individualssporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-
convention. You can show your attendance at subject to “hours of service” limits, later.)ing, vacation, and similar trips.
the convention benefits your trade or business  You cannot deduct expenses for entertain- The 50% limit applies to employees or theirby comparing the agenda with the official duties ment that are lavish or extravagant. If you buy a employers, and to self-employed persons (in-and responsibilities of your position. The agenda ticket to an entertainment event for a client, you cluding independent contractors) or their clients,does not have to deal specifically with your offi- generally cannot deduct more than the face depending on whether the expenses are reim-cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough value of the ticket, even if you paid a higher bursed.if the agenda is so related to your position that it price.   Figure 26-A summarizes the general rulesshows your attendance was for business pur- explained in this section.Gift or entertainment. Any item that mightposes.
The 50% limit applies to business meals orbe considered either a gift or entertainment gen-
entertainment expenses you have while:erally will be considered entertainment. How-Conventions held outside the North Ameri-
ever, if you give a customer packaged food orcan area. See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for • Traveling away from home (whether eat-beverages that you intend the customer to useinformation on conventions held outside the ing alone or with others) on business,at a later date, treat it as a gift.North American area.
• Entertaining customers at your place ofIf you give a customer tickets to a theater
business, a restaurant, or other location,performance or sporting event and you do not go
orwith the customer to the performance or event,
you have a choice. You can treat the tickets as • Attending a business convention or recep-Entertainment either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to tion, business meeting, or business lunch-your advantage. eon at a club.Expenses If you go with the customer to the event, you
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-You may be able to deduct business-related Included expenses. Expenses subject to thement expense. You cannot choose, in this case,entertainment expenses you have for entertain- 50% limit include:to treat the tickets as a gift.ing a client, customer, or employee.
• Taxes and tips relating to a business mealSeparating costs. If you have one expenseYou can deduct entertainment expenses
or entertainment activity,that includes the costs of entertainment, andonly if they are both ordinary and necessary
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 169

Page 172 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Cover charges for admission to a night- • Interstate truck operators and bus drivers company that is intended for the eventual per-
club, who are under Department of Transporta- sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a
tion regulations. limited class of people will be considered an• Rent paid for a room in which you hold a indirect gift to that particular person or to the• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-dinner or cocktail party, and individuals within that class of people who re-neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- ceive the gift.• Amounts paid for parking at a sports ers, and control operations personnel) If you give a gift to a member of a customer’sarena. who are under Federal Railroad Adminis- family, the gift is generally considered to be antration regulations.However, the cost of transportation to and from indirect gift to the customer. This rule does nota business meal or a business-related entertain- • Certain merchant mariners who are under apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit. Coast Guard regulations. ness connection with that family member and
the gift is not intended for the customer’s even-Application of 50% limit. The 50% limit on tual use.Other exceptions. There are also exceptionsmeal and entertainment expenses applies if the If you and your spouse both give gifts, both offor the self-employed, advertising expenses,expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov- you are treated as one taxpayer. It does notselling meals or entertainment, and charitableered by one of the exceptions discussed later in matter whether you have separate businesses,sports events. These are discussed in Publica-this section. are separately employed, or whether each oftion 463.The 50% limit also applies to certain meal you has an independent connection with the
and entertainment expenses that are not busi- recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
ness-related. It applies to meal and entertain- ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
ment expenses incurred for the production of payer.
income, including rental or royalty income. It Gift Expenses
also applies to the cost of meals included in Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as
deductible educational expenses. engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,If you give gifts in the course of your trade or
and mailing, are generally not included in deter-business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25This section explains the limits and rules for50% limit after determining the amount that limit.deducting the costs of gifts.would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first A cost is incidental only if it does not add
have to determine the amount of meal and en- $25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25 substantial value to the gift. For example, the
tertainment expenses that would be deductible for business gifts you give directly or indirectly to cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-
under the other rules discussed in this chapter. each person during your tax year. A gift to a ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for
Example 1. You spend $200 for a busi-
ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not
allowable because it is lavish and extravagant,
the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit.
Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (.50 ×
$90).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $80 (.50 × $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure 26-A can help you determine if the 50%
limit applies to you.
Your meal or entertainment expense is not
subject to the 50% limit if the expense meets
one of the following exceptions.
Employee’s reimbursed expenses. If you
are an employee, you are not subject to the 50%
limit on expenses for which your employer reim-
burses you under an accountable plan. Account-
able plans are discussed later under
Reimbursements.
Individuals subject to “hours of service” lim-
its. You can deduct a higher percentage of
your meal expenses while traveling away from
your tax home if the meals take place during or
incident to any period subject to the Department
of Transportation’s “hours of service” limits. The
percentage is 75% for 2006.
Individuals subject to the Department of
Transportation’s “hours of service” limits include
the following persons.
• Certain air transportation workers (such as
pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and
control tower operators) who are under
Federal Aviation Administration regula-
tions.
Figure 26-A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
/H17074/H17074
Page 170 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 173 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxi, etc., and the cost of driving and maintaining
your car.
Transportation expenses include the ordi-
nary and necessary costs of all of the following.
• Getting from one workplace to another in
the course of your business or profession
when you are traveling within your tax
home. (Tax home is defined earlier under
Travel Expenses.)
• Visiting clients or customers.
• Going to a business meeting away from
your regular workplace.
• Getting from your home to a temporary
workplace when you have one or more
regular places of work. These temporary
workplaces can be either within the area
of your tax home or outside that area.
Transportation expenses do not include ex-
penses you have while traveling away from
home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-
penses, which are discussed earlier. However, if
you use your car while traveling away from
home overnight, use the rules in this section to
figure your car expense deduction. See Car Ex-
penses, later.
Illustration of transportation expenses.
Figure 26-B illustrates the rules for when you
can deduct transportation expenses when you
have a regular or main job away from your
home. You may want to refer to it when deciding
whether you can deduct your transportation ex-
penses.
Temporary work location. If you have one or
more regular work locations away from your
home and you commute to a temporary work
location in the same trade or business, you can
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for one year or less, the employment is
temporary unless there are facts and circum-
stances that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
or if there is no realistic expectation that the
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
Figure 26-B.
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Neverdeductible
on
adayofffrom
regular
ormain
job
Deductibleif youhavea
regular or mainjob
at another location Alw
ays d
eductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home .)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the if you give a customer packaged food or bever- If employment at a work location initially isages that you intend the customer to use at avalue of the basket is substantial compared to realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,later date, treat it as a gift.the value of the fruit. but at some later date the employment is realisti- If you give a customer tickets to a theater cally expected to last more than 1 year, thatperformance or sporting event and you do not go employment will be treated as temporary (un-Exceptions. The following items are not con- with the customer to the performance or event, less there are facts and circumstances thatsidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the would indicate otherwise) until your expectationtickets as either a gift expense or an entertain- changes. It will not be treated as temporary after1. An item that costs $4 or less and: ment expense, whichever is to your advantage. the date you determine it will last more than 1If you go with the customer to the event, youa. Has your name clearly and permanently year.must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-imprinted on the gift, and If the temporary work location is beyond thement expense. You cannot choose, in this case, general area of your regular place of work andb. Is one of a number of identical items to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense. you stay overnight, you are traveling away fromyou widely distribute. Examples include home. You may have deductible travel ex-pens, desk sets, and plastic bags and
penses as discussed earlier in this chapter.cases.
No regular place of work. If you have noTransportation2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional regular place of work but ordinarily work in thematerial to be used on the business prem- metropolitan area where you live, you can de-Expenses
ises of the recipient. duct daily transportation costs between home
This section discusses expenses you can de- and a temporary work site outside that metropol-
duct for business transportation when you are itan area.
Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be not traveling away from home as defined earlier Generally, a metropolitan area includes the
considered either a gift or entertainment gener- under Travel Expenses . These expenses in- area within the city limits and the suburbs that
ally will be considered entertainment. However, clude the cost of transportation by air, rail, bus, are considered part of that m etropolitan area.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 171

Page 174 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot deduct daily transportation costs personal use to business use. If you use this car • Actual car expenses.
between your home and temporary work sites for commuting or other personal uses, you still
If you use actual car expenses to figure yourwithin your metropolitan area. These are nonde- cannot deduct your expenses for those uses.
deduction for a car you lease, there are rulesductible commuting expenses. Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of that affect the amount of your lease paymentsusing your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do notTwo places of work. If you work at two places that you can deduct. See Leasing a car  underinclude payments you receive from the passen-in one day, whether or not for the same em- Actual Car Expenses, later.gers in your income. These payments are con-ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting In this chapter, “car” includes a van, pickup,sidered reimbursements of your expenses.from one workplace to the other. However, if for or panel truck.However, if you operate a car pool for a profit,some personal reason you do not go directly You may be entitled to a tax credit foryou must include payments from passengers infrom one location to the other, you cannot de- an electric vehicle or an alternative mo-your income. You can then deduct your carduct more than the amount it would have cost tor vehicle that you place in serviceexpenses (using the rules in this chapter).
TIP
you to go directly from the first location to the during the year. The vehicle must meet certainsecond. Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling requirements, and you do not have to use it inTransportation expenses you have in going tools or instruments in your car while commuting your business to qualify for the credit. For morebetween home and a part-time job on a day off to and from work does not make your car ex- information, see chapter 37.from your main job are commuting expenses. penses deductible. However, you can deduct
You cannot deduct them. any additional costs you have for hauling tools or Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mailinstruments (such as for renting a trailer you towArmed Forces reservists. A meeting of an carrier, you may be able to treat the amount ofwith your car).Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of qualified reimbursement you received as the
business if the meeting is held on a day on which Union members’ trips from a union hall. If amount of your allowable expense. Because the
you work at your regular job. You can deduct the you get your work assignments at a union hall qualified reimbursement is treated as paid under
expense of getting from one workplace to the and then go to your place of work, the costs of an accountable plan, your employer should not
other as just discussed under Two places of getting from the union hall to your place of work include the amount of reimbursement in your
work. are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al- income.
You usually cannot deduct the expense if the though you need the union to get your work If your vehicle expenses are more than the
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you assignments, you are employed where you amount of your reimbursement, you can deduct
do not work at your regular job. In this case, your work, not where the union hall is located. the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-
transportation generally is a nondeductible com- duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You must
muting expense. However, you can deduct your Office in the home. If you have an office in complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form
transportation expenses if the location of the your home that qualifies as a principal place of 1040.
meeting is temporary and you have one or more business, you can deduct your daily transporta- A “qualified reimbursement” is the reim-
regular places of work. tion costs between your home and another work bursement you receive that meets both of the
If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol- location in the same trade or business. (See following conditions.
itan area but not at any specific location and the chapter 28 for information on determining if your • It is given as an equipment maintenancereserve meeting is held at a temporary location home office qualifies as a principal place of allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct business.) Postal Service.your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to Examples of deductible transportation. The • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-
attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can following examples show when you can deduct lective bargaining agreement. Any later
deduct your travel expenses. These expenses transportation expenses based on the location agreement cannot increase the qualified
are discussed earlier under Travel Expenses. of your work and your home. reimbursement amount by more than the
If you travel more than 100 miles away from rate of inflation.
home in connection with your performance of Example 1. You regularly work in an office See your employer for information on your reim-services as a member of the reserves, you may in the city where you live. Your employer sends bursement.be able to deduct some of your reserve-related you to a one-week training session at a different
travel costs as an adjustment to income rather office in the same city. You travel directly from If you are a rural mail carrier and re-than as an itemized deduction. See Armed your home to the training location and return ceived a qualified reimbursement, youForces reservists traveling more than 100 miles each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily cannot use the standard mileage rate.CAUTION
!
from home under Special Rules, later. round-trip transportation between your home
and the training location.
Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct
the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, Example 2. Your principal place of business Standard Mileage Rateor of driving a car between your home and your is in your home. You can deduct the cost of
main or regular place of work. These costs are round-trip transportation between your qualify- You may be able to use the standard mileagepersonal commuting expenses. You cannot de- ing home office and your client’s or customer’s rate to figure the deductible costs of operatingduct commuting expenses no matter how far place of business. your car for business purposes. For 2006, theyour home is from your regular place of work. standard mileage rate for each mile of businessYou cannot deduct commuting expenses even if Example 3. You have no regular office, and use is 441/2 cents per mile.you work during the commuting trip. you do not have an office in your home. In this If you use the standard mileage rate forcase, the location of your first business contact a year, you cannot deduct your actualExample. You had a telephone installed in is considered your office. Transportation ex- car expenses for that year, but seeyour car. You sometimes use that telephone to
CAUTION
!
penses between your home and this first contact Parking fees and tolls, later.make business calls while commuting to and are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-
from work. Sometimes business associates ride You generally can use the standard mileageportation expenses between your last business
with you to and from work, and you have a rate whether or not you are reimbursed andcontact and your home are also nondeductible
business discussion in the car. These activities whether any reimbursement is more or less thancommuting expenses. Although you cannot de-
do not change the trip from personal to busi- the amount figured using the standard mileageduct the costs of these first and last trips, you
ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex- rate. See Reimbursements under How To Re-can deduct the costs of going from one client or
penses. port, later.customer to another.
Parking fees. Fees you pay to park your car Choosing the standard mileage rate. If youat your place of business are nondeductible Car Expenses want to use the standard mileage rate for a carcommuting expenses. You can, however, de- you own, you must choose to use it in the firstIf you use your car for business purposes, youduct business-related parking fees when visiting year the car is available for use in your business.may be able to deduct car expenses. You gener-a customer or client. Then in later years, you can choose to use eitherally can use one of the two following methods toAdvertising display on car. Putting display the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.figure your deductible expenses.material that advertises your business on your If you want to use the standard mileage rate
• Standard mileage rate.car does not change the use of your car from for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire
Page 172 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 175 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lease period. For leases that began on or before Business and personal use. If you use your a lease payment that is for personal use of the
car for both business and personal purposes, car, such as commuting.December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate
you must divide your expenses between busi-must be used for the entire portion of the lease You must spread any advance payments
ness and personal use. You can divide yourperiod (including renewals) that is after 1997. over the entire lease period. You cannot deduct
expense based on the miles driven for each any payments you make to buy a car, even if theYou must make the choice to use the stan-
purpose. payments are called lease payments.dard mileage rate by the due date (including
If you lease a car for 30 days or more, youextensions) of your return. You cannot revoke
Example. You are a contractor and drive may have to reduce your lease payment deduc-the choice. However, in a later year, you can
your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000 tion by an “inclusion amount.” For information onswitch from the standard mileage rate to the
miles for business use and 8,000 miles for per- reporting lease inclusion amounts, see Leasingactual expenses method. If you change to the
sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷ a Car in chapter 4 of Publication 463.actual expense method in a later year, but
20,000) of the cost of operating your car as abefore your car is fully depreciated, you have to
business expense.estimate the remaining useful life of the car and
Sale, Trade-In, or Other Dispositionuse straight line depreciation. Interest on car loans. If you are an employee,
For more information about depreciation in- you cannot deduct any interest paid on a car If you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of yourcluded in the standard mileage rate, see the loan. This interest is treated as personal interest car, you may have a taxable gain or a deductibleexception in Methods of depreciation under De- and is not deductible. However, if you are loss. This is true whether you used the standardpreciation Deduction in chapter 4 of Publication self-employed and use your car in that business, mileage rate or actual car expenses to deduct463. see chapter 5 of Publication 535. the business use of your car. Publication 544
has information on sales of property used in aIf you use a home equity loan toStandard mileage rate not allowed. You trade or business, and details on how to reportpurchase your car, you may be able tocannot use the standard mileage rate if you: the disposition.deduct the interest. See chapter 23 for
TIP
• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi), more information.
• Use five or more cars at the same time (as Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em-in fleet operations), ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes Recordkeeping• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter
car using any method other than straight the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-line depreciation, 1040). (See chapter 22 for more information on portation expenses, you must be able to provetaxes.) If you are not an employee, see your (substantiate) certain elements of the expense.• Claimed a section 179 deduction on the form instructions for information on how to de- This section discusses the records you need tocar, duct personal property taxes paid on your car. keep to prove these expenses.• Claimed the special depreciation allow- Sales taxes.  You cannot deduct sales If you keep timely and accurate rec-ance on the car, taxes even if you use your car 100% for busi- ords, you will have support to show the• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 ness. Sales taxes on your car are part of your IRS if your tax return is ever examined.RECORDS
car’s basis and are recovered through deprecia-for a car you leased, or You will also have proof of expenses that yourtion, discussed later. employer may require if you are reimbursed• Are a rural mail carrier who received a
under an accountable plan. These plans areAt the time this publication went toqualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail
discussed later under Reimbursements.print, Congress was considering legis-carriers, earlier.)
lation that would extend the deductionCAUTION
!
for state and local general sales taxes (affectingFive or more cars. If you own or lease five How To Prove Expensesbasis) that expired at the end of 2005. To findor more cars that are used for business at the
out if this legislation was enacted, and for moresame time, you cannot use the standard mile- Table 26-2 is a summary of records you need todetails, go to www.irs.gov, click on More Formsage rate for the business use of any car. How- prove each expense discussed in this chapter.and Publications , and then on What’s Hot inever, you may be able to deduct your actual You must be able to prove the elements listedforms and publications, or see Publication 553,expenses for operating each of the cars in your across the top portion of the chart. You proveHighlights of 2006 Tax Changes.business. See Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4 them by having the information and receiptsof Publication 463 for information on how to (where needed) for the expenses listed in theFines and collateral. You cannot deduct finesfigure your deduction. first column.you pay and forfeited collateral for traffic viola-You are not using five or more cars for busi- tions. You cannot deduct amounts that youness at the same time if you alternate using (use
approximate or estimate.at different times) the cars for business. Depreciation and section 179 deductions.
CAUTION
!
Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and
Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using improvements, is a capital expense. Because
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any the benefits last longer than one year, you gen- You should keep adequate records to provebusiness-related parking fees and tolls. (Parking erally cannot deduct a capital expense. How- your expenses or have sufficient evidence thatfees that you pay to park your car at your place ever, you can recover this cost through the will support your own statement. You must gen-of work are nondeductible commuting ex- section 179 deduction (the deduction allowed by erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-penses.) section 179 of the Internal Revenue Code), and ered adequate. This is because written evidence
depreciation deductions. Depreciation allows is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-
you to recover the cost over more than one year ever, if you prepare a record in a computerActual Car Expenses by deducting part of it each year. The section memory device with the aid of a logging pro-
179 deduction, and the depreciation deduction gram, it is considered an adequate record.If you do not use the standard mileage rate, you are discussed in more detail in chapter 4 ofmay be able to deduct your actual car expenses. Publication 463.
Generally, there are limits on these deduc-If you qualify to use both methods, you What Are Adequate Records?tions. Special rules apply if you use your carmay want to figure your deduction both
50% or less in your work or business.ways to see which gives you a larger You should keep the proof you need in an ac-
TIP
deduction. count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-Leasing a car. If you lease a car, truck, or van ilar record. You should also keep documentarythat you use in your business, you can use the evidence that, together with your records, willActual car expenses include: standard mileage rate or actual expenses to support each element of an expense.figure your deductible car expense.Depreciation Lease Registration
Deductible payments. If you choose to use Documentary evidence. You generally mustpayments fees
actual expenses, you can deduct the part of have documentary evidence, such as receipts,Garage rent Licenses Repairs
each lease payment that is for the use of the car canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-Gas Oil Tires
Insurance Parking fees Tolls in your business. You cannot deduct any part of penses.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 173

Page 176 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception. Documentary evidence is not purpose of an expense. However, the degree of needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or
needed if any of the following conditions apply. proof varies according to the circumstances in reliability of information contained in your rec-
each case. If the business purpose of an ex- ords, statements, testimony, or documentary• You have meals or lodging expenses pense is clear from the surrounding circum- evidence before a deduction is allowed.while traveling away from home for which stances, then you do not need to give a writtenyou account to your employer under an explanation.accountable plan and you use a per diem How Long To Keep
allowance method that includes meals Confidential information. You do not need to Records and Receiptsand/or lodging. (Accountable plans and put confidential information relating to an ele-
per diem allowances are discussed later ment of a deductible expense (such as the You must keep records as long as they may beunder Reimbursements.) place, business purpose, or business relation- needed for the administration of any provision ofship) in your account book, diary, or other re- the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this• Your expense, other than lodging, is less cord. However, you do have to record the means you must keep your records that supportthan $75. information elsewhere at or near the time of the your deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years• You have a transportation expense for expense and have it available to fully prove that from the date you file the income tax return onwhich a receipt is not readily available. element of the expense. which the deduction is claimed. A return filed
early is considered filed on the due date. For aAdequate evidence. Documentary evi- more complete explanation, get Publication 583,dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it What If I Have Incomplete Starting a Business and Keeping Records.shows the amount, date, place, and essential Records?character of the expense. Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whoFor example, a hotel receipt is enough to If you do not have complete records to prove an give their records and documentation to theirsupport expenses for business travel if it has all element of an expense, then you must prove the employers and are reimbursed for their ex-of the following information. element with: penses generally do not have to keep copies of
this information. However, you may have to• The name and location of the hotel. • Your own written or oral statement, con-
prove your expenses if any of the following con-taining specific information about the ele-• The dates you stayed there. ditions apply.ment, and
• Separate amounts for charges such as • You claim deductions for expenses that• Other supporting evidence that is sufficientlodging, meals, and telephone calls. are more than reimbursements.to establish the element.
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an • Your expenses are reimbursed under a
expense for a business meal if it has all of the nonaccountable plan.Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a
following information. receipt because of reasons beyond your control, • Your employer does not use adequate ac-you can prove a deduction by reconstructing• The name and location of the restaurant. counting procedures to verify expense ac-your records or expenses. Reasons beyond counts.• The number of people served. your control include fire, flood, and other casu-
• You are related to your employer, as de-alty.• The date and amount of the expense. fined later under Related to employer.
If a charge is made for items other than food and
beverages, the receipt must show that this is the See the next section, How To Report, for aSeparating and Combining
case. discussion of reimbursements, adequate ac-Expenses counting, and nonaccountable plans.Canceled check. A canceled check, to- This section explains when expenses must begether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es- Additional information. Chapter 5 of Publi-kept separate and when expenses can be com-tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check cation 463 has more information on recordkeep-bined.by itself does not prove a business expense ing, including examples.without other evidence to show that it was for a Separating expenses. Each separate pay-
business purpose. ment is generally considered a separate ex-
pense. For example, if you entertain a customerDuplicate information. You do not have to or client at dinner and then go to the theater, therecord information in your account book or other How To Reportdinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-record that duplicates information shown on a ets are two separate expenses. You must recordreceipt as long as your records and receipts This section explains where and how to reportthem separately in your records.complement each other in an orderly manner. the expenses discussed in this chapter. It dis-You do not have to record amounts your Combining items. You can make one daily cusses reimbursements and how to treat thememployer pays directly for any ticket or other entry in your record for reasonable categories of under accountable and nonaccountable plans. Ittravel item. However, if you charge these items expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone also explains rules for independent contractorsto your employer, through a credit card or other- calls, or other incidental travel costs. Meals and clients, fee-basis officials, certain perform-wise, you must keep a record of the amounts should be in a separate category. You can in- ing artists, Armed Forces reservists, and certainyou spend. clude tips for meal-related services with the disabled employees. This section ends with an
costs of the meals. illustration of how to report travel, entertainment,Timely-kept records. You should record the Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur- gift, and car expenses on Form 2106-EZ.elements of an expense or of a business use at ing the course of a single event are considered aor near the time of the expense or use and single expense. For example, if during entertain- Self-employed. You must report your incomesupport it with sufficient documentary evidence. ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately for and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (FormA timely-kept record has more value than a each serving of refreshments, the total expense 1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched-statement prepared later when generally there is for the refreshments is treated as a single ex- ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do nota lack of accurate recall. pense. use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. See your form in-You do not need to write down the elements structions for information on how to completeof every expense on the day of the expense. If Allocating total cost. If you can prove the your tax return. You can also find information inyou maintain a log on a weekly basis which total cost of travel or entertainment but you can- Publication 535 if you are a sole proprietor, or inaccounts for use during the week, the log is not prove how much it cost for each person who Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide, if you areconsidered a timely-kept record. participated in the event, you may have to allo- a farmer.If you give your employer, client, or customer cate the total cost among you and your guests
an expense account statement, it can also be on a pro rata basis. An allocation would be Both self-employed and an employee.   I fconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true if needed, for example, if you did not have a busi- you are both self-employed and an employee,you copy it from your account book, diary, state- ness relationship with all of your guests. you must keep separate records for each busi-ment of expense, or similar record. ness activity. Report your business expenses forIf your return is examined. If your return is
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or FProving business purpose. You must gener- examined, you may have to provide additional
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report yourally provide a written statement of the business information to the IRS. This information could be
Page 174 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 177 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 26-2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Place or Business Purpose andIF you have
Amount Time Description Business Relationshipexpenses for...
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense for travel, lodging, and returned of your travel (name expense or the business benefit gained or
and meals. Incidental for each trip of city, town, or expected to be gained.
expenses may be totaled in and number of other designation).
reasonable categories such days spent on Relationship: N/A
as taxis, daily meals for business.
traveler, etc.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. Incidental entertainment. or location of place expense or the business benefit gained or
expenses such as taxis, (Also see of entertainment. expected to be gained. For entertainment,
telephones, etc., may be Business Type of the nature of the business discussion or
totaled on a daily basis. Purpose.) entertainment if not activity. If the entertainment was directly
otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the
(Also see Business date, place, nature, and duration of the
Purpose.) business discussion, and the identities of
the persons who took part in both theGifts Cost of the gift. Date of the gift. Description of the business discussion and thegift. entertainment activity.
Relationship: Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or
other designations) about the recipients
that shows their business relationship to
you. For entertainment, you must also
prove that you or your employee was
present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. For car expenses, expense. For destination. expense.
the cost of the car and any car expenses,
improvements, the date you the date of the Relationship: N/A
started using it for business, use of the car.
the mileage for each
business use, and the total
miles for the year.
business expenses for your work as an em- artists) discussed later under Special Rules, do Reimbursementsployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or
next. 2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your de- This section explains what to do when you re-ductible gifts directly on line 20 of Schedule A ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofEmployees. If you are an employee, you gen- (Form 1040). the employee business expenses discussed inerally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your
this chapter.travel, transportation, and entertainment ex- Statutory employees.   If you received a
penses. However, you can use the shorter Form Form W-2 and the “Statutory employee” box in If you received an advance, allowance, or
2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of box 13 was checked, report your income and reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-
the following conditions. expenses related to that income on Schedule C port this amount and your expenses depends on
or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form whether the reimbursement was paid to you• You are an employee deducting expenses 2106 or 2106-EZ. under an accountable plan or a nonaccountableattributable to your job.
Statutory employees include full-time life in- plan.• You were not reimbursed by your em- surance salespersons, certain agent or commis- This section explains the two types of plans,ployer for your expenses (amounts in- sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not homeworkers. ing the amount of your expenses, and the taxconsidered reimbursements). treatment of your reimbursements and ex-If you are entitled to a reimbursement
• If you claim car expenses, you use the penses.from your employer but you do not
standard mileage rate. claim it, you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
!
for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim- No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed
For more information on how to report your bursement applies. or given an allowance for your expenses if youexpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see are paid a salary or commission with the under-Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. standing that you will pay your own expenses. InReimbursement for personal expenses. If
this situation, you have no reimbursement oryour employer reimburses you for nondeduct-Gifts.  If you did not receive any reimburse-
allowance arrangement, and you do not have toible personal expenses, such as for vacationments (or the reimbursements were all included
read this section on reimbursements. Instead,trips, your employer must report the reimburse-in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only business
see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later,ment as wage income in box 1 of your Formexpense you are claiming is for gifts, and the
for information on completing your tax return.W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.rules for certain individuals (such as performing
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 175

Page 178 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A If your employer included reimburse- Per Diem and Car Allowances
ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 andreimbursement or other expense allowance ar-
If your employer reimburses you for your ex-you meet all the rules for accountablerangement is a system or plan that an employer
TIP
penses using a per diem or car allowance, youplans, ask your employer for a corrected Formuses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-
can generally use the allowance as proof of theW-2.penses, advances, reimbursements, and
amount of your expenses. A per diem or caramounts charged to the employer for employee allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-business expenses. Arrangements include per Accountable plan rules not met. Even quirements for the amount of your expensesdiem and car allowances. only if all of the following conditions apply.though you are reimbursed under an accounta-  A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of ble plan, some of your expenses may not meet • Your employer reasonably limits paymentsdaily reimbursement your employer gives you all the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all of your expenses to those that are ordi-for your lodging, meal, and incidental expenses three rules for accountable plans are treated as nary and necessary in the conduct of thewhen you are away from home on business. having been reimbursed under a nonaccount- trade or business.(The term “incidental expenses” is defined ear- able plan (discussed later).lier under Meals and Incidental Expenses.) A car • The allowance is similar in form to and not
Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-allowance is an amount your employer gives more than the federal rate (discussed
penses. You may be reimbursed under youryou for the business use of your car. later).
employer’s accountable plan for expenses re-Your employer should tell you what method • You prove the time (dates), place, andlated to that employer’s business, some of whichof reimbursement is used and what records you business purpose of your expenses toare deductible as employee business expensesmust provide. your employer (as explained in Tableand some of which are not deductible. The reim- 26-2) within a reasonable period of time.bursements you receive for the nondeductible
• You are not related to your employer (asAccountable Plans expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable
defined next). If you are related to yourplans, and they are treated as paid under aTo be an accountable plan, your employer’s employer, you must be able to prove yournonaccountable plan. expenses to the IRS even if you have al-reimbursement or allowance arrangement must
ready adequately accounted to your em-include all of the following rules. Example. Your employer’s plan reimburses ployer and returned any excessyou for travel expenses while away from home1. Your expenses must have a business con- reimbursement.on business and also for meals when you worknection — that is, you must have paid or late at the office, even though you are not away If the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow-incurred deductible expenses while per- ance practices are not based on reasonablyfrom home. The part of the arrangement thatforming services as an employee of your accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-reimburses you for the nondeductible mealsemployer. ognition of cost differences in different areas forwhen you work late at the office is treated as
2. You must adequately account to your em- per diem amounts), you will not be considered topaid under a nonaccountable plan.
have accounted to your employer. In this case,ployer for these expenses within a reason- The employer makes the decision you must be able to prove your expenses to theable period of time. whether to reimburse employees IRS.3. You must return any excess reimburse- under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP
ment or allowance within a reasonable pe- countable plan. If you are an employee who Related to employer. You are related to yourriod of time. receives payments under a nonaccountable employer if: 
plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-See Adequate Accounting  and Returning 1. Your employer is your brother or sister,ments under an accountable plan by voluntarilyExcess Reimbursements, later. half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-accounting to your employer for the expensesAn excess reimbursement or allowance is tor, or lineal descendant,and voluntarily returning excess reimburse-any amount you are paid that is more than the ments to the employer.business-related expenses that you adequately 2. Your employer is a corporation in which
you own, directly or indirectly, more thanaccounted for to your employer.
10% in value of the outstanding stock, orThe definition of reasonable period of time Adequate Accountingdepends on the facts and circumstances of your 3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-
situation. However, regardless of the facts and duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,One of the rules for an accountable plan is thatcircumstances of your situation, actions that a trust, and your employer.you must adequately account to your employertake place within the times specified in the fol- for your expenses. You adequately account by You may be considered to indirectly own stock,lowing list will be treated as taking place within a giving your employer a statement of expense, for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in areasonable period of time. an account book, a diary, or a similar record in corporation, partnership, estate, or trust that
• You receive an advance within 30 days of which you entered each expense at or near the owns the stock or if a member of your family or
the time you have an expense. your partner owns the stock.time you had it, along with documentary evi-
dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage,• You adequately account for your ex- The federal rate. The federal rate can be fig-and other employee business expenses. (Seepenses within 60 days after they were paid ured using any one of the following methods.Table 26-2, earlier, for details you need to enteror incurred.
in your record and documents you need to prove 1. For per diem amounts:• You return any excess reimbursement certain expenses.) A per diem or car allowance
within 120 days after the expense was satisfies the adequate accounting requirement a. The regular federal per diem rate.paid or incurred. under certain conditions. See Per Diem and Car b. The standard meal allowance.Allowances, later.• You are given a periodic statement (at
least quarterly) that asks you to either re- c. The high-low rate.You must account for all amounts you re-
turn or adequately account for outstanding ceived from your employer during the year as
advances and you comply within 120 days 2. For car expenses:advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This
of the statement. includes amounts you charged to your employer a. The standard mileage rate.by credit card or other method. You must give
b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).your employer the same type of records andEmployee meets accountable plan rules. If
supporting information that you would have toyou meet the three rules for accountable plans,
give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductionyour employer should not include any reim- Regular federal per diem rate. The regular
on your return. You must pay back the amount ofbursements in your income in box 1 of your federal per diem rate is the highest amount that
any reimbursement or other expense allowanceForm W-2. If your expenses equal your reim- the federal government will pay to its employees
for which you do not adequately account or thatbursement, you do not complete Form 2106. for lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (or
is more than the amount for which you ac-You have no deduction since your expenses meal and incidental expenses only) while they
and reimbursement are equal. counted. are traveling away from home in a particular
Page 176 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 179 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
area. The rates are different for different loca- a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the your employer must include the allowance
tions. Your employer should have these rates standard meal allowance amount for amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your
available. (Employers can get Publication 1542 that day. Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However,
on the Internet, which gives the rates in the the excess allowance will be included in box 1 ofb. For the day you return, add 
3/4 of thecontinental United States for the current year.) your Form W-2. You must report this part of yourstandard meal allowance amount for allowance as if it were wage income.The standard meal allowance. The stan- the preceding day.
If your actual expenses are less than ordard meal allowance (discussed earlier) is the
equal to the federal rate, you do not complete2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-federal rate for meals and incidental expenses
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses onlowance using any method that you con-(M&IE). The rate for most small localities in the
your return.sistently apply and that is in accordanceUnited States is $39 a day from January 1
However, if your actual expenses are morewith reasonable business practice.through December 31, 2006. Most major cities
than the federal rate, you can complete Formand many other localities qualify for higher rates.
2106 and deduct those excess expenses. YouThe standard mileage rate. This is a setThe rates for all localities within the continental
must report on Form 2106 your reimbursementsrate per mile that you can use to compute yourUnited States are listed in Publication 1542. You
up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of yourdeductible car expenses. For 2006, the standardcan also find this information on the Internet at
Form W-2) and all your expenses. You shouldmileage rate for the cost of operating your car iswww.gsa.gov.
be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.441/2 cents per mile.You receive an allowance only for meals and
incidental expenses when your employer does Fixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is an Example. Joe lives and works in Austin. Inone of the following. allowance your employer may use to reimburse May his employer sent him to San Diego for 4your car expenses. Under this method, your• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in days and paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotelemployer pays an allowance that includes akind). bill. The employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day forcombination of payments covering fixed and va- his meals and incidental expenses. The federal• Reimburses you, based on your receipts, riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to rate for San Diego is $64 a day.for the actual cost of your lodging. cover your variable operating costs (such as Joe can prove that his actual meal expensesgas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your totaled $380. His employer’s accountable planfixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-lodging. will not pay more than $75 a day for travel to Sanments), insurance, etc.). If your employer• Does not have a reasonable belief that Diego, so Joe does not give his employer thechooses to use this method, your employer willyou had (or will have) lodging expenses, records that prove that he actually spent $380.request the necessary records from you.such as when you stay with friends or rela- However, he does account for the time, place,
tives or sleep in the cab of your truck. and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’sReporting your expenses with a per diem or
only business trip this year.car allowance. If your reimbursement is in the• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to
form of an allowance received under an ac- Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 × 4 days),that used in computing your compensa-
countable plan, the following facts affect your which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256tion, such as number of hours worked or
reporting. ($64 × 4 days). His employer includes the $44 asmiles traveled.
income on Joe’s Form W-2 in box 1. His em-• The federal rate. ployer also enters $256 in box 12 of Joe’s FormHigh-low rate. This is a simplified method
• Whether the allowance or your actual ex- W-2.of computing the federal per diem rate for travel
penses were more than the federal rate.within the continental United States. It elimi- Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-
nates the need to keep a current list of the per ductible expenses. He enters the total of hisThe following discussions explain where to re-
diem rate for each city. actual expenses for the year ($380) on Formport your expenses depending upon how the
2106. He also enters the reimbursements thatUnder the high-low method, the per diem amount of your allowance compares to the fed-
were not included in his income ($256). His totalamount for travel during January through Sep- eral rate.
deductible expense, before the 50% limit, istember of 2006 is $226 (including $58 for M&IE) Allowance less than or equal to the federal $124. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-for certain high-cost locations. All other areas rate. If your allowance is less than or equal to reimbursed meals and entertainment, he willhave a per diem amount of $141 (including $45 the federal rate, the allowance will not be in- include the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc-for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542 cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not tion on Schedule A (Form 1040).which gives the areas eligible for the $226 per need to report the related expenses or the allow-diem amount under the high-low method for all ance on your return if your expenses are equalor part of this period.) to or less than the allowance. Returning ExcessEffective October 1, 2006, the per diem  However, if your actual expenses are more Reimbursementsrate under this method for certain than your allowance, you can complete Form
high-cost locations increased to $246 2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-CAUTION
!
Under an accountable plan, you are required to(including $58 for M&IE). The rate for all other ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex- return any excess reimbursement or other ex-locations increased to $148 (including $45 for penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the pense allowances for your business expensesM&IE). However, an employer can continue to total amount of your expenses and reimburse- to the person paying the reimbursement or al-use the rates described in the preceding para- ments for the entire year. If you are using the lowance. Excess reimbursement means anygraph for the remainder of 2006 if those rates standard meal allowance or the standard mile- amount for which you did not adequately ac-and locations are used consistently during Octo- age rate, you do not have to prove that amount. count within a reasonable period of time. Forber, November, and December for all employ- example, if you received a travel advance andees. Employers who did not use the high-low Example. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a year you did not spend all the money on busi-method during the first 9 months of 2006 cannot for business. Under her employer’s accountable ness-related expenses, or you do not have proofbegin to use it before 2007. See Revenue Pro- plan, she accounts for the time (dates), place, of all your expenses, you have an excess reim-cedure 2006-41 for more information. Also see and business purpose of each trip. Her em- bursement.Publication 1542 on the Internet at www.irs.gov. ployer pays her a mileage allowance of 30 cents “Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-a mile. riod of time” were discussed earlier in this chap-Prorating the standard meal allowance on Since Nicole’s $4,450 expenses computed ter.partial days of travel. The standard meal al- under the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles ×lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you 441/2 cents) are more than her $3,000 reim- Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-travel for part of a day, such as on the days you bursement (10,000 miles × 30 cents), she item- vance if your employer provides you with andepart and return, you must prorate the full-day izes her deductions to claim the excess expense allowance before you actually have theM&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em- expenses. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show- expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or ing all of her expenses and reimbursements) pected to be no more than your expense. Underthe high-low rate. and enters $1,450 ($4,450 − $3,000) as an item- an accountable plan, you are required to ade-You can use either of the following methods ized deduction. quately account to your employer for this ad-to figure the federal M&IE for that day.
Allowance more than the federal rate. If vance and to return any excess within a
1. Method 1: your allowance is more than the federal rate, reasonable period of time.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 177

Page 180 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
In addition, even if your employer has anTable 26-3. Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses and
accountable plan, the following payments will beReimbursements treated as being paid under a nonaccountable
plan.
IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee • Excess reimbursements you fail to return
other expense allowance) reports on Form reports on to your employer.
arrangement is under: W-2: Form 2106: * • Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses related to your employer’s busi-An accountable plan with: ness. See Reimbursement of
nondeductible expenses earlier under Ac-Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount.
countable Plans.Adequate accounting made and excess
returned. If you are not sure if the reimbursement or
expense allowance arrangement is an account-Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount No amount.
able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-Adequate accounting and return of as wages in box 1.
ployer.excess both required but excess not
returned.
Reporting your expenses under a nonac-
countable plan. Your employer will combinePer diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount. All expenses and
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-federal rate: reimbursements only
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-Adequate accounting made and excess if excess expenses
countable plan with your wages, salary, or otherreturned. are claimed. pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1Otherwise, form is not of your Form W-2.filed.  You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount No amount.
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-federal rate: as wages in box 1.
tertainment. Your meal and entertainmentAdequate accounting and return of The amount up to expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis-excess both required but excess not the federal rate is cussed earlier under Entertainment Expenses.returned. reported only in box Also, your total expenses will be subject to the12—it is not 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
reported in box 1. to most miscellaneous itemized deductions on
Schedule A (Form 1040).Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds The excess amount All expenses (and
the federal rate: as wages in box 1. reimbursement Example. Kim’s employer gives her $1,000
Adequate accounting up to the federal The amount up to reported on Form a month ($12,000 for the year) for her business
rate only and excess not returned. the federal rate is W-2, box 12) only if expenses. Kim does not have to provide any
reported only in box expenses in excess of proof of her expenses to her employer, and Kim
can keep any funds that she does not spend.12—it is not the federal rate are
reported in box 1. claimed. Otherwise, Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-
countable plan. Her employer will include theform is not required.
$12,000 on Kim’s Form W-2 as if it were wages.
A nonaccountable plan with: If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses,
she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount All expenses. itemize her deductions.excess, or both, not required by plan as wages in box 1.
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount All expenses. Completing Forms
as wages in box 1. 2106 and 2106-EZ
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. This section briefly describes how employees
complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 26-3
explains what the employer reports on FormIf you do not adequately account for or do not W-2. This excess amount is considered paid W-2 and what the employee reports on Formunder a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).return any excess advance within a reasonable 2106. The instructions for the forms have more
period of time, the amount you do not account information on completing them.Example. Your employer sends you on afor or return will be treated as having been paid If you are self-employed, do not file5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you aunder a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report your$400 ($80 × 5 days) advance to cover your
expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or FUnproven amounts. If you do not prove meals and incidental expenses. The federal per
CAUTION
!
(Form 1040). See the instructions for the formdiem for meals and incidental expenses forthat you actually traveled on each day for which
that you must file.Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 3 days.you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-
Under your employer’s accountable plan, youing the elements described in Table 26-2), you
must return the $160 ($80 × 2 days) advance for Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use themust return this unproved amount of the travel the 2 days you did not travel. You do not have to shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employeeadvance within a reasonable period of time. If return the $63 difference between the allowance business expenses. You can use this form if youyou do not do this, the unproved amount will be you received and the federal rate for Phoenix meet all of the following conditions.considered paid under a nonaccountable plan (($80 − $59) × 3 days). However, the $63 will be
(discussed later). • You are an employee deducting expensesreported on your Form W-2 as wages.
attributable to your job.Per diem allowance more than federal rate.
• You were not reimbursed by your em-If your employer’s accountable plan pays you an
Nonaccountable Plans ployer for your expenses (amounts in-allowance that is higher than the federal rate,
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notyou do not have to return the difference between A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or considered reimbursements).the two rates for the period you can prove busi- expense allowance arrangement that does not
ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif- • If you are claiming car expenses, you usemeet one or more of the three rules listed earlier
ference will be reported as wages on your Form under Accountable Plans. the standard mileage rate.
Page 178 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 181 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Car expenses. If you used a car to perform You must allocate that single payment so that 3. Limit on total itemized deductions. If
your job as an employee, you may be able to your adjusted gross income (line 38 of Formyou know how much to enter on Form 2106, line
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener- 1040) is more than $150,500 ($75,250 if you are7, Column A and Column B.
ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then married filing separately), the total of certain
claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A. itemized deductions, including employee busi-Example. Rob’s employer paid him an ex-Car expenses using the standard mileage rate ness expenses, may be limited. See chapter 29pense allowance of $12,000 this year under ancan also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com- for more information on this limit.accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con-pleting Part II and Part I, line 1. sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for enter-
tainment and car expenses. Rob’s employer did Special RulesTransportation expenses. Show your trans- not clearly show how much of the $7,000 was forportation expenses that did not involve overnight the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu- This section discusses special rules that applytravel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on ally spent $14,000 during the year ($5,500 for to Armed Forces reservists, government offi-Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on this airfare, $4,500 for entertainment, and $4,000 for cials who are paid on a fee basis, performingline business expenses you have for parking car expenses). artists, and disabled employees with impair-fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-
Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden- ment-related work expenses.ating your car or expenses of commuting be-
tified, Rob knows that $5,200 of the paymenttween your home and work.
Armed Forces reservists traveling more thangoes in Column A, line 7 of Form 2106. To
100 miles from home. If you are a member ofallocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses theEmployee business expenses other than
a reserve component of the Armed Forces of theworksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.meals and entertainment. Show your other
United States and you travel more than 100His completed worksheet follows.employee business expenses on Form 2106,
miles away from home in connection with yourlines 3 and 4, Column A, or Form 2106-EZ, lines
performance of services as a member of the1. Enter the total amount of3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals and
reimbursements your employer gave reserves, you can deduct your travel expensesentertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex-
you that were not reported to you in as an adjustment to gross income rather than aspenses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui- box 1 of Form W-2 ............ $7,000 a miscellaneous itemized deduction. Thetion and books), office-in-the-home expenses, 2. Enter the total amount of your amount of expenses you can deduct as an ad-and trade and professional publications. expenses for the periods covered by justment to gross income is limited to the regular
If line 4 expenses are the only ones you this reimbursement ............ 8,500 federal per diem rate (for lodging, meals, and3. Of the amount on line 2, enter yourare claiming, you received no reim- incidental expenses) and the standard mileagetotal expense for meals andbursements (or the reimbursements
TIP
rate (for car expenses) plus any parking fees,entertainment ............... 4,500were all included in box 1 of your Form W-2), ferry fees, and tolls. The federal rate is explained4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter theand the Special Rules  discussed later do not earlier under Per Diem and Car Allowances.result as a decimal (rounded to atapply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or
least three places) ............ .529 Member of a reserve component. You are2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on
a member of a reserve component of the ArmedSchedule A (Form 1040), line 20. List the type 5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter the Forces of the United States if you are in theand amount of each expense on the dotted lines result here and in Column B, line 7 3,703
Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coastand include the total on line 20. 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter the
Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard of theresult here and in Column A, line 7 $3,297
United States, the Air National Guard of theMeal and entertainment expenses. Show On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297 United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub-the full amount of your expenses for busi- ($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) in lic Health Service.ness-related meals and entertainment on Form Column A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Column2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals while How to report. If you have reserve-relatedB.away from your tax home overnight and other travel that takes you more than 100 miles from
business meals and entertainment. Enter 50% home, you should first complete Form 2106 orAfter you complete the form. After you haveof the line 8, column B, meal and entertainment Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses forcompleted your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, followexpenses on line 9, Column B. reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up tothe directions on that form to deduct your ex-If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, orpenses on the appropriate line of your tax return.amount of your meals and entertainment on the Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040,For most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule Aline to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on(Form 1040). However, if you are a government50%. Enter the result on line 5. Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, andofficial paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, deduct the balance as an itemized deduction onHours of service limits. If you are subject an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em- Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20.to the Department of Transportation’s “hours of ployee with impairment-related work expenses, You cannot deduct expenses of travel thatservice” limits, use 75% instead of 50% for see Special Rules, later. does not take you more than 100 miles frommeals while away from your tax home. home as an adjustment to gross income. In-
Limits on employee business expenses. stead, you must complete Form 2106 orReimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line Your employee business expenses may be sub- 2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an7, the amounts your employer (or third party) ject to any of the three limits described next. itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040),reimbursed you that were not included in box 1 These limits are figured in the following order on line 20.of your Form W-2. (You cannot use Form the specified form.2106-EZ.) This includes any reimbursement re- Officials paid on a fee basis. Certain1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer-ported under code L in box 12 of Form W-2. fee-basis officials can claim their employee busi-tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub- ness expenses whether or not they itemize theirAllocating your reimbursement. If you ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, you other deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).were reimbursed under an accountable plan and figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 of Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-want to deduct excess expenses that were not Form 2106-EZ. See 50% Limit under Entertain- ployed by a state or local government and whoreimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim- ment Expenses, earlier. are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. Theybursement. This is necessary if your employer
2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc- can deduct their business expenses in perform-pays your reimbursement in the following man-
tions. If you are an employee, deduct em- ing services in that job as an adjustment to grossner:
ployee business expenses (as figured on Form income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized• Pays you a single amount that covers 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 20 of Schedule A deduction.meals and/or entertainment, as well as (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de- If you are a fee-basis official, include yourother business expenses, and ductions, including employee business ex- employee business expenses from Form 2106,
penses, are subject to a 2% limit. This limit is• Does not clearly identify how much is for line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Form 1040,
figured on line 25 of Schedule A (Form 1040).deductible meals and/or entertainment. line 24.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

Page 182 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Expenses of certain performing artists. If 2106-EZ and deduct your employee business to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’s new line
you are a performing artist, you may qualify to expenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule of clothing.
deduct your employee business expenses as an A (Form 1040), line 20. Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2003.adjustment to gross income rather than as a He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify, Impairment-related work expenses of dis- pense purposes. He records his total mileage,you must meet all of the following requirements. abled employees. If you are an employee business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the
with a physical or mental disability, your impair- year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-1. During the tax year, you perform services ment-related work expenses are not subject to nent information in a travel expense log (notin the performing arts as an employee for the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap- shown). He obtains receipts for his expenses forat least two employers. plies to most other employee business ex- lodging and for any other expenses of $75 or
penses. After you complete Form 2106 or2. You receive at least $200 each from any more.
2106-EZ, enter your impairment-related worktwo of these employers. During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000expenses from Form 2106, line 10, or Form3. Your related performing-arts business ex- miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),penses are more than 10% of your gross He answers all the questions in Part II of Formline 27, and identify the type and amount of thisincome from the performance of those 2106-EZ and figures his car expense to beexpense on the dotted line next to line 27. Enterservices. $8,900 (20,000 × 441/2 cents per mile).your employee business expenses that are un-
His total employee business expenses arerelated to your disability from Form 2106, line4. Your adjusted gross income is not more
shown in the following table.10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A, linethan $16,000 before deducting these busi-
20.ness expenses.
 Type of Expense AmountImpairment-related work expenses are your
Special rules for married persons. If you allowable expenses for attendant care at your Parking fees and tolls .... $ 5 2 0
are married, you must file a joint return unless workplace and other expenses you have in con- Car expenses .......... 8,900
you lived apart from your spouse at all times nection with your workplace that are necessary Meals ............... 3,861
during the tax year. Lodging, laundry, dryfor you to be able to work. For more information,
If you file a joint return, you must figure re- cleaning ............. 17,446see chapter 21.
quirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for both Entertainment ......... 3,250
Gifts, education, etc. ..... 6 5 0you and your spouse. However, requirement (4) Illustrated Example Total ............... $34,627applies to your and your spouse’s combined
adjusted gross income. Bill Wilson is an employee of Fashion Clothing Bill received an allowance of $30,000
Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a typical travel week,Where to report.  If you meet all of the ($2,500 per month) to help offset his expenses.
Bill leaves his home on Long Island on Mondayabove requirements, you should first complete Bill did not have to account to his employer for
morning and drives to Albany to exhibit theForm 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your the reimbursement, and the $30,000 was in-
Fashion line for 3 days to prospective custom-performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 of cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.
ers. Then he drives to Troy to show Fashion’sForm 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106-EZ in the total Because Bill’s reimbursement was includednew line of merchandise to Town Departmenton line 24 of Form 1040. in his income and he is using the standard mile-Store, an old customer. While in Troy, he talksIf you do not meet all of the above require- age rate for his car expenses, he files Formwith Tom Brown, purchasing agent for Townments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex- 2106-EZ with his tax return. His filled-in form isDepartment Store, to discuss the new line. Hepenses as an adjustment to gross income. shown on the next page.later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinnerInstead, you must complete Form 2106 or
Page 180 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 183 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
8,900
520
17,446
31,072
13 2003
20,000 2,600 2,400
3,556
650
7,111
OMB No. 1545-0074
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Trea sury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expen ses
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 44.5¢
(.445)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from wor k
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expen ses not included on line s 1 through 3. Do not include meal s and
entertainment
4
4
5
Meals and entertainment expen ses: $ × 50% (.50) (Employee s subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expen ses incurred
while away from home on business by 75% (.75) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20
(or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR, line 9). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local
government official s, qualified performing arti sts, and individual s with di sabilities: See the
instructions for special rules on where to enter thi s amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2006)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and nece ssary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expen se is one that i s
common and accepted in your field of trade, bu siness, or profe ssion. A nece ssary expense is one that i s helpful and appropriate
for your bu siness. An expen se does not have to be re quired to be con sidered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expen se, you are u sing the standard mileage rate for 2006.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements for this purpose).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expen se on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of mile s you drove your vehicle during 2006, enter the number of mile s you u sed your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for per sonal use?
Was your vehicle available for per sonal use during off-duty hour s?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
Caution: You can u se the standard mileage rate for 2006 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and u sed the standard mileage rate for the fir st year
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and u sed the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lea se period after 1997.
2006
1
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

Page 184 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
even if you do not meet the requirements listed Education Required byearlier.
Employer or by LawAlso, keep in mind that your work-related27. education expenses may qualify you to claim Once you have met the minimum educational
more than one tax benefit. Generally, you may requirements for your job, your employer or the
claim any number of benefits as long as you use law may require you to get more education. This
different expenses to figure each one.Tax Benefits for additional education is qualifying work-related
education if all three of the following require-When you figure your taxes, you may
ments are met.want to compare these tax benefits soWork-Related
you can choose the method(s) that
TIP
• It is required for you to keep your present
give you the lowest tax liability. First, figure your salary, status, or job,Education taxes using the expenses as business deduc-
• The requirement serves a business pur-tions. Then, figure your taxes again using any of
pose of your employer, andthe other deductions and credits for which you
qualify. You may find that a combination of • The education is not part of a program thatWhat’s New
credit(s) and deduction(s) gives you the lowest will qualify you for a new trade or busi-
ness.tax.Standard mileage rate. Generally, if you
claim a business deduction for work-related ed- When you get more education than your em-ucation and you drive your car to and from Useful Items ployer or the law requires, the additional educa-school, the amount you can deduct for miles You may want to see: tion can be qualifying work-related educationdriven during 2006 is 44 1/2 cents a mile. This is
only if it maintains or improves skills required indown from 481/2 cents a mile at the end of 2005. Publication your present work. See Education To MaintainSee Transportation Expenses under What Ex-
or Improve Skills, later.❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carpenses Can Be Deducted, for more information.
Expenses
Example. You are a teacher who has satis-
❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education fied the minimum requirements for teaching.
Your employer requires you to take an additional
Reminder Form (and Instructions) college course each year to keep your teaching
job. If the courses will not qualify you for a new❏ 2106 Employee Business ExpensesLimit on itemized deductions. If your ad- trade or business, they are qualifying❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employeejusted gross income for 2006 is more than work-related education even if you eventuallyBusiness Expenses$150,500 ($75,250 if you are married filing sep- receive a master’s degree and an increase in
arately), your itemized deductions may be lim- salary because of this extra education.❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemizedited. See chapter 29 for more information about Deductionsthis limit.
Education To Maintain
or Improve Skills
If your education is not required by your em-Introduction Qualifying Work- ployer or the law, it can be qualifying work-
This chapter discusses work-related education related education only if it maintains or improvesRelated Educationexpenses that you may be able to deduct as skills needed in your present work. This could
business expenses. include refresher courses, courses on currentYou can deduct the costs of qualifying work-To claim such a deduction, you must: developments, and academic or vocationalrelated education as business expenses. This is courses.• Be working, education that meets at least one of the follow-
ing two tests.• Itemize your deductions on Schedule A Example. You repair televisions, radios,
(Form 1040) if you are an employee, and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep up• The education is required by your em-
with the latest changes, you take specialployer or the law to keep your present• File Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule
courses in radio and stereo service. Thesesalary, status, or job. The required educa-F (Form 1040) if you are self-employed,
courses maintain and improve skills required intion must serve a bona fide business pur-and
your work.pose of your employer.• Have expenses for education that meet
the requirements discussed under Qualify- • The education maintains or improves skills Maintaining skills vs. qualifying for new job.ing Work-Related Education. needed in your present work. Education to maintain or improve skills needed
in your present work is not qualifying education ifIf you are an employee and able to itemize However, even if the education meets one or it will also qualify you for a new trade or busi-your deductions, you may be able to claim a both of the above tests, it is not qualifying ness.deduction for the expenses you pay for your work-related education if it:work-related education. Your deduction will be Temporary absence. If you stop working
the amount by which your qualifying • Is needed to meet the minimum educa- for a year or less in order to get education to
work-related education expenses plus other job maintain or improve skills needed in your pres-tional requirements of your present trade
and certain miscellaneous expenses is greater ent work and then return to the same generalor business, or
than 2% of your adjusted gross income. See type of work, your absence is considered tempo-• Is part of a program of study that will qual-chapter 28. rary. Education that you get during a temporaryify you for a new trade or business.If you are self-employed, you deduct your absence is qualifying work-related education if it
expenses for qualifying work-related education maintains or improves skills needed in yourYou can deduct the costs of qualifyingdirectly from your self-employment income. present work.work-related education as a business expenseYour work-related education expenses may even if the education could lead to a degree. Example. You quit your biology researchalso qualify you for other tax benefits, such as
Use Figure 27-A, later, as a quick check to job to become a full-time biology graduate stu-the Hope and lifetime learning credits (see chap-
see if your education qualifies. dent for one year. If you return to work in biologyter 35). You may qualify for these other benefits
Page 182 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 185 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
research after completing the courses, the edu- when you become a faculty member. You gen- If you have all the required education  except
the fifth year, you have met the minimum educa-cation is related to your present work even if you erally will be considered a faculty member when
tional requirements. The fifth year of training isdo not go back to work with the same employer. one or more of the following occurs.
qualifying work-related education unless it isIndefinite absence. If you stop work for • You have tenure. part of a program of study that will qualify you formore than a year, your absence from your job is a new trade or business.• Your years of service count toward ob-considered indefinite. Education during an in- taining tenure.definite absence, even if it maintains or im- Example 2. Assume the same facts as in
• You have a vote in faculty decisions.proves skills needed in the work from which you Example 1 except that you have a bachelor’s
are absent, is considered to qualify you for a degree and only six professional education• Your school makes contributions for you to
new trade or business. Therefore, it is not quali- courses. The additional four education coursesa retirement plan other than social security
fying work-related education. can be qualifying work-related education. Al-or a similar program.
though you do not have all the required courses,
you have already met the minimum educationalEducation To Meet Example 1. The law in your state requires requirements.
beginning secondary school teachers to have aMinimum Requirements
bachelor’s degree, including 10 professional ed- Example 3. Assume the same facts as in
Education you need to meet the minimum edu- ucation courses. In addition, to keep the job, a Example 1 except that you are hired with only 3
cational requirements for your present trade or years of college. The courses you take that leadteacher must complete a fifth year of training
business is not qualifying work-related educa- to a bachelor’s degree (including those in edu-within 10 years from the date of hire. If the
cation) are not qualifying work-related educa-tion. The minimum educational requirements employing school certifies to the state Depart-
tion. They are needed to meet the minimumare determined by: ment of Education that qualified teachers cannot
educational requirements for employment as abe found, the school can hire persons with only 3• Laws and regulations, teacher.years of college. However, to keep their jobs,
• Standards of your profession, trade, or these teachers must get a bachelor’s degree Example 4. You have a bachelor’s degreebusiness, and and the required professional education courses and you work as a temporary instructor at awithin 3 years.• Your employer. university. At the same time, you take graduate
Under these facts, the bachelor’s degree, courses toward an advanced degree. The rulesOnce you have met the minimum educational whether or not it includes the 10 professional of the university state that you can become arequirements that were in effect when you were education courses, is considered the minimum faculty member only if you get a graduate de-
hired, you do not have to meet any new mini- educational requirement for qualification as a gree. Also, you can keep your job as an instruc-
mum educational requirements. This means teacher in your state. tor only as long as you show satisfactory
that if the minimum requirements change after
you were hired, any education you need to meet
the new requirements can be qualifying educa-
tion.
You have not necessarily met the mini-
mum educational requirements of your
trade or business simply because you
CAUTION
!
are already doing the work.
Example 1. You are a full-time engineering
student. Although you have not received your
degree or certification, you work part time as an
engineer for a firm that will employ you as a
full-time engineer after you finish college. Al-
though your college engineering courses im-
prove your skills in your present job, they are
also needed to meet the minimum job require-
ments for a full-time engineer. The education is
not qualifying work-related education.
Example 2. You are an accountant and you
have met the minimum educational require-
ments of your employer. Your employer later
changes the minimum educational requirements
and requires you to take college courses to keep
your job. These additional courses can be quali-
fying work-related education because you have
already satisfied the minimum requirements that
were in effect when you were hired.
Requirements for Teachers
States or school districts usually set the mini-
mum educational requirements for teachers.
The requirement is the college degree or the
minimum number of college hours usually re-
quired of a person hired for that position.
If there are no requirements, you will have
met the minimum educational requirements
Figure 27-A. Does Your Work-Related Education Qualify?
Start Here
Yes
Is the education required
by your employer or the
law to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the requirement
serve a bona fide
business requirement of
your employer?
Is the education needed to meet
the minimum educational
requirements of your present
trade or business?
Is the education part of a
program of study that will
qualify you for a new
trade or business?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
needed in your present
work?
Your education is not
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Your education is
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 183

Page 186 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
progress toward getting this degree. You have deduct the costs of returning from school toBar or CPA Review Course
home.not met the minimum educational requirements
Review courses to prepare for the bar examina-to qualify you as a faculty member. The gradu- Attendance on a temporary basis. You go totion or the certified public accountant (CPA) ex-ate courses are not qualifying work-related edu- school on a temporary basis if either of theamination are not qualifying work-relatedcation. following situations applies to you.education. They are part of a program of study
that can qualify you for a new profession. 1. Your attendance at school is realisticallyCertification in a new state. Once you have
expected to last 1 year or less and doesmet the minimum educational requirements for indeed last for 1 year or less.Teaching and Related Dutiesteachers for your state, you are considered to
2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-have met the minimum educational require-
All teaching and related duties are considered tically expected to last 1 year or less, butments in all states. This is true even if you must the same general kind of work. A change in at a later date your attendance is reasona-get additional education to be certified in an- duties in any of the following ways is not consid- bly expected to last more than 1 year. Yourother state. Any additional education you need ered a change to a new business. attendance will be considered temporaryis qualifying work-related education. You have
up to the date you determine it will last• Elementary school teacher to secondaryalready met the minimum requirements for more than 1 year.school teacher.teaching. Teaching in another state is not a new
trade or business. • Teacher of one subject, such as biology,
Note. If you are in either situation (1) or (2)to teacher of another subject, such as art.
above, your attendance is not temporary if factsExample. You hold a permanent teaching • Classroom teacher to guidance counselor. and circumstances indicate otherwise.certificate in State A and are employed as a
teacher in that state for several years. You move • Classroom teacher to school administra- Attendance not on a temporary basis. Youtor.to State B and are promptly hired as a teacher. do not go to school on a temporary basis if eitherYou are required, however, to complete certain of the following situations apply to you.prescribed courses to get a permanent teaching
certificate in State B. These additional courses 1. Your attendance at school is realistically
are qualifying work-related education because expected to last more than 1 year. It doesWhat Expenses Can Be not matter how long you actually attend.the teaching position in State B involves the
same general kind of work for which you were 2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-Deducted
qualified in State A. tically expected to last 1 year or less, but
If your education meets the requirements de- at a later date your attendance is reasona-
scribed earlier under Qualifying Work-Related bly expected to last more than 1 year. Your
Education That
Education, you can generally deduct your edu- attendance is not temporary after the date
Qualifies You for a cation expenses as business expenses. If you you determine it will last more than 1 year.
are not self-employed, you can deduct businessNew Trade or Business
expenses only if you itemize your deductions.
You cannot deduct expenses related toEducation that is part of a program of study that Deductible Transportationtax-exempt and excluded income.will qualify you for a new trade or business is not Expensesqualifying work-related education. This is true Deductible expenses. The following educa-
even if you do not plan to enter that trade or If you are regularly employed and go directlytion expenses can be deducted.
business. from home to school on a temporary basis, you• Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and sim- can deduct the round-trip costs of transportationIf you are an employee, a change of duties ilar items. between your home and school. This is truethat involves the same general kind of work is regardless of the location of the school, the• Certain transportation and travel costs.not a new trade or business. distance traveled, or whether you attend school• Other education expenses, such as costs on nonwork days.Example 1. You are an accountant. Your of research and typing when writing a pa- Transportation expenses include the actualemployer requires you to get a law degree at per as part of an educational program. costs of bus, subway, cab, or other fares, as wellyour own expense. You register at a law school as the costs of using your car. Transportationfor the regular curriculum that leads to a law expenses do not include amounts spent forNondeductible expenses. You cannot de-degree. Even if you do not intend to become a travel, meals, or lodging while you are awayduct personal or capital expenses. For example,lawyer, the education is not qualifying because from home overnight.you cannot deduct the dollar value of vacation
the law degree will qualify you for a new trade or time or annual leave you take to attend classes.
business. Example 1. You regularly work in a nearbyThis amount is a personal expense.
town, and go directly from work to home. YouUnclaimed reimbursement. If you do notExample 2. You are a general practitioner also attend school every work night for 3 monthsclaim reimbursement that you are entitled to to take a course that improves your job skills.of medicine. You take a 2-week course to review receive from your employer, you cannot deduct Since you are attending school on a temporarydevelopments in several specialized fields of the expenses that apply to the reimbursement. basis, you can deduct your daily round-tripmedicine. The course does not qualify you for a
transportation expenses in going between homenew profession. It is qualifying work-related edu- Example. Your employer agrees to pay and school. This is true regardless of the dis-cation because it maintains or improves skills your education expenses if you file a voucher tance traveled.required in your present profession. showing your expenses. You do not file a
voucher, and you do not get reimbursed. Be- Example 2. Assume the same facts as inExample 3. While working in the private cause you did not file a voucher, you cannot Example 1 except that on certain nights you gopractice of psychiatry, you enter a program to deduct the expenses on your tax return. directly from work to school and then home. Youstudy and train at an accredited psychoanalytic can deduct your transportation expenses frominstitute. The program will lead to qualifying you your regular work site to school and then home.Transportation Expensesto practice psychoanalysis. The psychoanalytic
training does not qualify you for a new profes- If your education qualifies, you can deduct local Example 3. Assume the same facts as in
sion. It is qualifying work-related education be- transportation costs of going directly from work Example 1 except that you attend the school for
cause it maintains or improves skills required in to school. If you are regularly employed and go 9 months on Saturdays, nonwork days. Since
your present profession. to school on a temporary basis, you can also you are attending school on a temporary basis,
Page 184 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 187 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you can deduct your round-trip transportation Example 2. Sue works in Boston. She went No Double Benefit Allowedexpenses in going between home and school. to a university in Michigan to take a course for
work. The course is qualifying work-related edu- You cannot do either of the following.Example 4. Assume the same facts as in cation.
• Deduct work-related education expensesExample 1 except that you attend classes twice She took one course, which is one-fourth of a as business expenses if you deduct thesea week for 15 months. Since your attendance in full course load of study. She spent the rest of expenses under any other provision of theschool is not considered temporary, you cannot the time on personal activities. Her reasons for law. See chapter 35. deduct your transportation expenses in going taking the course in Michigan were all personal.
between home and school. If you go directly • Deduct work-related education expensesSue’s trip is mainly personal becausefrom work to school, you can deduct the paid with tax-free scholarship, grant, orthree-fourths of her time is considered personalone-way transportation expenses of going from employer-provided educational assis-time. She cannot deduct the cost of herwork to school. If you go from work to home to tance. See Adjustments to Qualifyinground-trip train ticket to Michigan. She can de-school and return home, your transportation ex- Work-Related Education Expenses, later.duct one-fourth of the meals (subject to the 50%penses cannot be more than if you had gone limit) and lodging costs for the time she attendeddirectly from work to school. the university. At the time this publication went to
print, Congress was considering legis-Using your car. If you use your car (whether Example 3. Dave works in Nashville and lation that would reinstate the tuitionyou own or lease it) for transportation to school,
CAUTION
!
recently traveled to California to take a 2-week and fees deduction. If this deduction is rein-you can deduct your actual expenses or use the seminar. The seminar is qualifying work-related stated, you cannot take both a business deduc-standard mileage rate to figure the amount you education. tion and a tuition and fees deduction for thecan deduct. The standard mileage rate for miles
same education expenses for 2006. Choose theWhile there, he spent an extra 8 weeks ondriven during 2006 is 441/2 cents a mile. Which-
one that will give you the lower tax. To find out ifpersonal activities. The facts, including the extraever method you use, you can also deduct park-
this legislation was enacted, and for more de-8-week stay, show that his main purpose was toing fees and tolls. See chapter 26 for information
tails, go to www.irs.gov, click on More Formstake a vacation.on deducting your actual expenses of using a
and Publications , and then on What1s Hot inDave cannot deduct his round-trip airfare orcar.
forms and publications, or see Publication 553,his meals and lodging for the 8 weeks. He can
Highlights of 2006 Tax Changes.deduct only his expenses for meals (subject toTravel Expenses the 50% limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks he
attended the seminar.You can deduct expenses for travel, meals (see Adjustments to Qualifying50% limit on meals , later), and lodging if you
Work-Related Education ExpensesCruises and conventions. Certain cruisestravel overnight mainly to obtain qualifying
and conventions offer seminars or courses aswork-related education. Travel expenses for If you pay qualifying work-related education ex-part of their itinerary. Even if the seminars orqualifying work-related education are treated penses with certain tax-free funds, you cannotcourses are work related, your deduction forthe same as travel expenses for other employee claim a deduction for those amounts. You musttravel may be limited. This applies to:business purposes. For more information, see reduce the qualifying expenses by the amount ofchapter 26. • Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other any tax-free educational assistance you re-
form of luxury water transportation, andYou cannot deduct expenses for per- ceived.
sonal activities, such as sightseeing, Tax-free educational assistance includes:• Conventions outside the North Americanvisiting, or entertaining.CAUTION
!
area. • The tax-free part of scholarships and fel-
lowships (see chapter 1 of Publication
For a discussion of the limits on travel ex-Mainly personal travel. If your travel away 970),
pense deductions that apply to cruises and con-from home is mainly personal, you cannot de- • Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publicationduct all of your expenses for travel, meals, and ventions, see Luxury Water Travel and 970),lodging. You can deduct only your expenses for Conventions in Publication 463.
lodging and 50% of your expenses for meals • Employer-provided educational assistance
during the time you attend the qualified educa- (see chapter 10 of Publication 970),50% limit on meals. You can deduct only
tional activities. 50% of the cost of your meals while traveling • Veterans’ educational assistance (seeWhether a trip’s purpose is mainly personal away from home to obtain qualifying chapter 1 of Publication 970), andor educational depends upon the facts and cir- work-related education. You cannot have been
• Any other nontaxable (tax-free) paymentscumstances. An important factor is the compari- reimbursed for the meals.
(other than gifts or inheritances) receivedson of time spent on personal activities with time Employees must use Form 2106 or Form
for education assistance.spent on educational activities. If you spend 2106-EZ to apply the 50% limit.
more time on personal activities, the trip is con-
Do not reduce the qualifying work-related ed-sidered mainly educational only if you can show
ucation expenses by amounts paid with fundsa substantial nonpersonal reason for traveling to Travel as Education the student receives as:a particular location.
You cannot deduct the cost of travel as a form of • Payment for services, such as wages,Example 1. John works in Newark, New education even if it is directly related to your
• A loan,Jersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a deducti- duties in your work or business.
ble 1-week course at the request of his em- • A gift,
ployer. His main reason for going to Chicago Example. You are a French language
• An inheritance, orwas to take the course. teacher. While on sabbatical leave granted for
travel, you traveled through France to improveWhile there, he took a sightseeing trip, enter- • A withdrawal from the student’s personal
your knowledge of the French language. Youtained some friends, and took a side trip to savings.
chose your itinerary and most of your activitiesPleasantville for a day.
to improve your French language skills. YouSince the trip was mainly for business, John Also, do not reduce the qualifying
cannot deduct your travel expenses as educa-can deduct his round-trip airfare to Chicago. He work-related education expenses by any schol-
tion expenses. This is true even if you spentcannot deduct his transportation expenses of arship or fellowship reported as income on the
most of your time learning French by visitinggoing to Pleasantville. He can deduct only the student’s return or any scholarship which, by its
French schools and families, attending moviesmeals (subject to the 50% limit) and lodging terms, cannot be applied to qualifying
connected with his educational activities. or plays, and engaging in similar activities. work-related education expenses.
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 185

Page 188 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. To figure your deduc-
tion for employee business expenses, including RecordkeepingReimbursements qualifying work-related education, you generally
must complete Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ.How you treat reimbursements depends on the You must keep records as proof of anyForm not required. Do not complete eitherarrangement you have with your employer. deduction claimed on your tax return.Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ if:There are two basic types of reimbursement Generally, you should keep your rec-RECORDS
arrangements—accountable plans and nonac- ords for 3 years from the date of filing the tax• All reimbursements, if any, were included
countable plans. You can tell the type of plan return and claiming the deduction.in box 1 of your Form W-2, and
you are reimbursed under by the way the reim- For specific information about keeping rec-• You are not claiming travel, transportation,bursement is reported on your Form W-2. ords of business expenses, see Recordkeepingmeal, or entertainment expenses.For information about how to treat reim- in chapter 26.
bursements under both accountable and nonac- If you meet both of these requirements, entercountable plans, see Reimbursements  in the expenses directly on Schedule A (Formchapter 26. 1040), line 20. (Special rules for expenses of
certain performing artists and fee-basis officials
and for impairment-related work expenses are
explained later.)
28.Deducting Business Using Form 2106-EZ. This form is shorter
and easier to use than Form 2106. Generally,
Expenses you can use this form if:
Miscellaneous• All reimbursements, if any, were includedSelf-employed persons and employees report
in box 1 of your Form W-2, andbusiness expenses differently.
The following information explains what Deductions• You are using the standard mileage rate if
forms you must use to deduct the cost of your you are claiming vehicle expenses.
qualifying work-related education as a business
If you do not meet both of these requirements,expense.
What’s Newuse Form 2106.
Self-Employed Persons Limit on itemized deductions. The amountPerforming Artists and of adjusted gross income allowed without limit-If you are self-employed, you must report the ing your itemized deductions has increased. ForFee-Basis Officialscost of your qualifying work-related education on 2006, if your adjusted gross income is more thanthe appropriate form used to report your busi- If you are a qualified performing artist, or a state $150,500 ($75,250 if you are married filing sep-ness income and expenses (generally Schedule (or local) government official who is paid in arately), you may have to reduce the amount ofC, C-EZ, or F). If your educational expenses whole or in part on a fee basis, you can deduct certain itemized deductions, including most mis-include expenses for a car or truck, travel, or the cost of your qualifying work-related educa- cellaneous deductions. For more informationmeals, report those expenses the same way you tion as an adjustment to gross income rather and a worksheet, see the instructions for Sched-report other business expenses for those items. than as an itemized deduction. ule A (Form 1040), line 28, or chapter 29.See the instructions for the form you file for Include the cost of your qualifying
information on how to complete it. Limit on certain business-related meals andwork-related education with any other employee
entertainment expenses. The limit on certainbusiness expenses on Form 1040, line 24. You
business-related meals and entertainment ex-do not have to itemize your deductions onEmployees penses has increased from 70% to 75%. SeeSchedule A (Form 1040), and, therefore, the
chapter 26 for details.deduction is not subject to theIf you are an employee, you can deduct the cost
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. You mustof qualifying work-related education only if you: Educator expenses. The deduction for edu-complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ to figure your cator expenses as an adjustment to income ex-1. Did not receive any reimbursement from deduction, even if you meet the requirements pired at the end of 2005. See Educatoryour employer, described earlier under Form not required. Expenses in this chapter.For more information on qualified performing2. Were reimbursed under a nonaccountable artists, see Publication 463. At the time this publication went toplan (amount is included in box 1 of Form print, Congress was considering legis-W-2), or lation that would extend the deductionCAUTION
!
Impairment-Related Work3. Received reimbursement under an ac- for educator expenses as an adjustment to in-
Expensescountable plan, but the amount received come. If this was not extended, you may be able
was less than your expenses. to claim these expenses as a miscellaneous
If you are disabled and have impairment-related deduction. To find out if this legislation was en-If either (1) or (2) applies, you can deduct the work expenses that are necessary for you to be acted, and for more details, go to www.irs.gov,total qualifying cost. If (3) applies, you can de- able to get qualifying work-related education, click on More Forms and Publications, and thenduct only the qualifying costs that were more you can deduct these expenses on Schedule A on What’s Hot in forms and publications, or seethan your reimbursement. (Form 1040), line 27. They are not subject to the Publication 553, Highlights of 2006 Tax
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. To deductIn order to deduct the cost of your qualifying Changes.
these expenses, you must complete Form 2106work-related education as a business expense,
or 2106-EZ, even if you meet the requirements,include the amount with your deduction for any
described earlier, under Form not required.other employee business expenses on Sched-
For more information on impairment-relatedule A (Form 1040), line 20. (Special rules for
Introductionwork expenses, see Publication 463.expenses of certain performing artists and
fee-basis officials and for impairment-related This chapter explains which expenses you can
work expenses are explained later.) claim as miscellaneous itemized deductions on
This deduction is subject to the Schedule A (Form 1040). You must reduce the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies total of most miscellaneous itemized deductions
to most miscellaneous itemized deductions. See by 2% of your adjusted gross income. This chap-
chapter 28. ter covers the following topics.
Page 186 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 189 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Deductions subject to the 2% limit. of your reserve-related travel costs as an adjust- Business Liability Insurance
ment to gross income rather than as an itemized• Deductions not subject to the 2% limit. You can deduct insurance premiums you paiddeduction. For more information, see Armed
for protection against personal liability for• Expenses you cannot deduct. Forces Reservists Traveling More Than 100
wrongful acts on the job.Miles From Home,  under Deductions Not Sub-
ject to the 2% Limit, later.You must keep records to verify your
deductions. You should keep receipts, Impairment-related work expenses. If you Damages for Breach ofcanceled checks, financial accountRECORDS
have a physical or mental disability, certain ex- Employment Contractstatements, and other documentary evidence. penses you incur that allow you to work may not
For more information on recordkeeping, get be subject to the 2% limit. See Impair- If you break an employment contract, you canPublication 552, Recordkeeping for Individuals. ment-Related Work Expenses under Deduc- deduct damages you pay your former employer
tions Not Subject to the 2% Limit, later. that are attributable to the pay you received from
that employer.Useful Items Performing artists. If you are a qualifiedYou may want to see: performing artist, you may be able to deduct
your employee business expenses as an adjust- Depreciation on Computers or CellPublication ment to income rather than as a miscellaneous Phones❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions itemized deduction. See Special Rules in chap-
ter 26 if you need more information about this You can claim a depreciation deduction for a❏ 535 Business Expenses exception. computer or cell phone that you use in your work❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home as an employee if its use is:State and local government officials paid(Including Use by Daycare on a fee basis. If you performed services asProviders) 1. For the convenience of your employer, andan employee of a state or local government and
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property 2. Required as a condition of your employ-you were paid in whole or in part on a fee basis,
ment.you can claim your trade or business expenses
Form (and Instructions) in performing those services as an adjustment to For more information about the rules and
income, rather than as a miscellaneous deduc-❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses exceptions to the rules affecting the allowable
tion. See Officials Paid on a Fee Basis  under deductions for a home computer or cell phone,❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee Deductions Not Subject to the 2% Limit, later. see Publication 529.Business Expenses
Unreimbursed Employee Dues to Chambers of CommerceExpenses (Line 20) and Professional Societies
Deductions Subject You can deduct only unreimbursed employee You may be able to deduct dues paid to profes-
expenses that are: sional organizations (such as bar associationsto the 2% Limit
and medical associations) and to chambers of1. Paid or incurred during your tax year, commerce and similar organizations, if member-You can deduct certain expenses as miscellane-
2. For carrying on your trade or business of ship helps you carry out the duties of your job.ous itemized deductions on Schedule A
Similar organizations include:being an employee, and(Form 1040). You can claim the amount of ex-
penses that is more than 2% of your adjusted • Boards of trade,3. Ordinary and necessary.
gross income. You figure your deduction on
• Business leagues,An expense is ordinary if it is common andSchedule A by subtracting 2% of your adjusted
accepted in your trade, business, or profession.gross income from the total amount of these • Civic or public service organizations,An expense is necessary if it is appropriate andexpenses. Your adjusted gross income is the
• Real estate boards, andhelpful to your business. An expense does notamount on Form 1040, line 38.
have to be required to be considered necessary.Generally, you apply the 2% limit after you • Trade associations.
apply any other deduction limit. For example, Examples of unreimbursed employee ex-
you apply the 50% (or 75%) limit on busi- penses are listed next. The list is followed by You cannot deduct dues paid to an organiza-
ness-related meals and entertainment (dis- discussions of additional unreimbursed em- tion if one of its main purposes is to:
cussed in chapter 26) before you apply the 2% ployee expenses.
1. Conduct entertainment activities for mem-limit. • Business bad debt of an employee. bers or their guests, orDeductions subject to the 2% limit are dis-
cussed in the three categories in which you • Education that is work related. (See chap- 2. Provide members or their guests with ac-report them on Schedule A. ter 27.) cess to entertainment facilities.
• Legal fees related to your job.1. Unreimbursed employee expenses (line Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon clubs
20). are not deductible. See Club Dues under Non-• Licenses and regulatory fees.
deductible Expenses, later.2. Tax preparation fees (line 21). • Malpractice insurance premiums.
Lobbying and political activities. You may3. Other expenses (line 22). • Medical examinations required by an em- not be able to deduct that part of your dues that
ployer. is for certain lobbying and political activities. SeeExceptions to 2% limit. The following Dues used for lobbying under Lobbying Ex-• Occupational taxes.paragraphs describe certain employee business penses, later.expenses that are not subject to the 2% limit. • Passport for a business trip.
Armed Forces reservists. If you are a • Subscriptions to professional journals andmember of a reserve component of the Armed Educator Expensestrade magazines related to your work.Forces of the United States, and you travel more
• Travel, transportation, entertainment, andthan 100 miles away from home in connection For 2005, if you were an eligible educator, you
gifts related to your work. (See chapterwith your performance of services as a member could deduct your qualified educator expenses
of the reserves, you may be able to deduct some 26.) as an adjustment to income up to a certain
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 187

Page 190 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount. If your ordinary and necessary educa- your tax benefit in the earlier year. (See Recov- Tools Used in Your Work
eries in chapter 12.)tor expenses were over that amount, you could
Generally, you can deduct amounts you spenddeduct the excess as a miscellaneous deduction Employer pays the employment agency. for tools used in your work if the tools wear outsubject to the 2% limit. The provision that al- If your employer pays the fees directly to the and are thrown away within 1 year from the datelowed qualified educator expenses to be de- employment agency and you are not responsi- of purchase. You can depreciate the cost ofducted as an adjustment to income expired at ble for them, you do not include them in your tools that have a useful life substantially beyondthe end of 2005. For 2006, you can deduct gross income. the tax year. For more information about depre-ordinary and necessary educator expenses only
ciation, see Publication 946.as a miscellaneous deduction (unreimbursed R´esum´e. You can deduct amounts you spendemployee business expenses). See the instruc- for preparing and mailing copies of a r´esum´e totions for Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ for more prospective employers if you are looking for a Union Dues and Expensesinformation. new job in your present occupation.
At the time this publication went to You can deduct dues and initiation fees you pay
Travel and transportation expenses. If youprint, Congress was considering legis- for union membership.
travel to an area and, while there, you look for alation that would reinstate the deduc-CAUTION
!
You can also deduct assessments for benefitnew job in your present occupation, you may betion for educator expenses as an adjustment to payments to unemployed union members. How-able to deduct travel expenses to and from theincome. To find out if this legislation was en- ever, you cannot deduct the part of the assess-area. You can deduct the travel expenses if theacted, and for more details, go to www.irs.gov, ments or contributions that provides funds fortrip is primarily to look for a new job. The amountclick on More Forms and Publications, and then the payment of sick, accident, or death benefits.of time you spend on personal activity comparedon What’s Hot in forms and publications, or see Also, you cannot deduct contributions to a pen-to the amount of time you spend in looking forPublication 553, Highlights of 2006 Tax sion fund, even if the union requires you to makework is important in determining whether the tripChanges. the contributions.is primarily personal or is primarily to look for a You may not be able to deduct amounts younew job. pay to the union that are related to certain lobby-Even if you cannot deduct the travel ex-Home Office ing and political activities. See Lobbying Ex-penses to and from an area, you can deduct the penses under Nondeductible Expenses, later.expenses of looking for a new job in your pres-If you use a part of your home regularly and
ent occupation while in the area.exclusively for business purposes, you may be
You can choose to use the standard mileageable to deduct a part of the operating expenses Work Clothes and Uniformsrate to figure your car expenses. The rate forand depreciation of your home.
business use of a vehicle is 441/2 cents per mile. You can deduct the cost and upkeep of workYou can claim this deduction for the busi- See chapter 26 for more information. clothes if the following two requirements areness use of a part of your home only if you use
met.that part of your home regularly and exclusively:
Licenses and Regulatory Fees 1. You must wear them as a condition of your1. As your principal place of business for any
employment.trade or business,
You can deduct the amount you pay each year
2. The clothes are not suitable for everyday2. As a place to meet or deal with your pa- to state or local governments for licenses and
wear.tients, clients, or customers in the normal regulatory fees for your trade, business, or pro-
course of your trade or business, or fession.
It is not enough that you wear distinc-3. In the case of a separate structure not at- tive clothing. The clothing must be spe-tached to your home, in connection with cifically required by your employer. NorCAUTION
!
Occupational Taxesyour trade or business. is it enough that you do not, in fact, wear your
work clothes away from work. The clothing mustThe regular and exclusive business use You can deduct an occupational tax charged at
not be suitable for taking the place of your regu-a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of workingmust be for the convenience of your employer
lar clothing.or conducting a business in the locality. If youand not just appropriate and helpful in your job.
are an employee, you can claim occupationalGet Publication 587 for more detailed informa- Examples of workers who may be able to
taxes only as a miscellaneous deduction subjecttion and a worksheet. deduct the cost and upkeep of work clothes are:
to the 2% limit; you cannot claim them as a delivery workers, firefighters, health care work-
deduction for taxes elsewhere on your return. ers, law enforcement officers, letter carriers,
Job Search Expenses professional athletes, and transportation work-
ers (air, rail, bus, etc.).
You can deduct certain expenses you have in Repayment of Income Aid Payment Musicians and entertainers can deduct thelooking for a new job in your present occupation, cost of theatrical clothing and accessories if theyAn “income aid payment” is one that is receivedeven if you do not get a new job. You cannot are not suitable for everyday wear.under an employer’s plan to aid employees whodeduct these expenses if: However, work clothing consisting of whitelose their jobs because of lack of work. If you cap, white shirt or white jacket, white bib over-1. You are looking for a job in a new occupa- repay a lump-sum income aid payment that you alls, and standard work shoes, which a painter istion, received and included in income in an earlier required by his union to wear on the job, is notyear, you can deduct the repayment.2. There was a substantial break between the distinctive in character or in the nature of a
ending of your last job and your looking for uniform. Similarly, the costs of buying and main-
a new one, or taining blue work clothes worn by a welder at theResearch Expenses of a College request of a foreman are not deductible.3. You are looking for a job for the first time. Professor
Protective clothing. You can deduct the costIf you are a college professor, you can deductEmployment and outplacement agency fees. of protective clothing required in your work, suchresearch expenses, including travel expenses,You can deduct employment and outplacement as safety shoes or boots, safety glasses, hardfor teaching, lecturing, or writing and publishingagency fees you pay in looking for a new job in hats, and work gloves.on subjects that relate directly to your teachingyour present occupation. duties. You must have undertaken the research Examples of workers who may be required to
Employer pays you back. If, in a later year, as a means of carrying out the duties expected wear safety items are: carpenters, cement work-
your employer pays you back for employment of a professor and without expectation of profit ers, chemical workers, electricians, fishing boat
agency fees, you must include the amount you apart from salary. However, you cannot deduct crew members, machinists, oil field workers,
receive in your gross income up to the amount of the cost of travel as a form of education. pipe fitters, steamfitters, and truck drivers.
Page 188 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 191 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Military uniforms. You generally cannot de- Certain Casualty and Theft Losses Hobby Expenses
duct the cost of your uniforms if you are on
You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a You can generally deduct hobby expenses, butfull-time active duty in the armed forces. How-
only up to the amount of hobby income. A hobbymiscellaneous itemized deduction subject to theever, if you are an armed forces reservist, you
is not a business because it is not carried on to2% limit if you used the damaged or stolencan deduct the unreimbursed cost of your uni- make a profit. See Activity not for profit in chap-property in performing services as an employee.form if military regulations restrict you from ter 12 under Other Income.First report the loss in Section B of Form 4684,wearing it except while on duty as a reservist. In
Casualties and Thefts. You may also have tofiguring the deduction, you must reduce the cost
include the loss on Form 4797, Sales of Busi-by any nontaxable allowance you receive for Indirect Deductions ofness Property, if you are otherwise required tothese expenses. Pass-Through Entitiesfile that form. To figure your deduction, add allIf local military rules do not allow you to wear
casualty or theft losses from this type of property Pass-through entities include partnerships, Sfatigue uniforms when you are off duty, you can
included on Form 4684, lines 35 and 41b, or corporations, and mutual funds that are not pub-deduct the amount by which the cost of buying
licly offered. Deductions of pass-through entitiesForm 4797, line 18a. For other casualty and theftand keeping up these uniforms is more than the are passed through to the partners or sharehold-losses, see chapter 25.uniform allowance you receive. ers. The partners or shareholders can deduct
You can deduct the cost of your uniforms if their share of passed-through deductions for
you are a civilian faculty or staff member of a investment expenses as miscellaneous item-Clerical Help and Office Rent
military school. ized deductions subject to the 2% limit.
You can deduct office expenses, such as rent
Example. You are a member of an invest-and clerical help, that you have in connectionTax Preparation Fees ment club that is formed solely to invest in secur-with your investments and collecting the taxable
ities. The club is treated as a partnership. The(Line 21) income on them.
partnership’s income is solely from taxable divi-
You can usually deduct tax preparation fees in dends, interest, and gains from sales of securi-
the year you pay them. Thus, on your 2006 ties. In this case, you can deduct your share ofDepreciation on Home Computer the partnership’s operating expenses as miscel-return, you can deduct fees paid in 2006 for
laneous itemized deductions subject to the 2%You can deduct depreciation on your homepreparing your 2005 return. These fees include
limit. However, if the investment club partner-computer if you use it to produce income (forthe cost of tax preparation software programs
ship has investments that also produce nontax-and tax publications. They also include any fee example, to manage your investments that pro-
able income, you cannot deduct your share ofyou paid for electronic filing of your return. How- duce taxable income). You generally must de- the partnership’s expenses that produce theever, if you paid your tax by credit card, you preciate the computer using the straight line nontaxable income.cannot deduct the convenience fee you were method over the Alternative Depreciation Sys-
Publicly offered mutual funds. Publicly of-charged. tem (ADS) recovery period. But if you work as an
fered mutual funds do not pass deductions foremployee and also use the computer in thatDeduct expenses of preparing tax schedules investment expenses through to shareholders.work, see Publication 946.relating to profit or loss from business (Schedule A mutual fund is “publicly offered” if it is:C or C-EZ), rentals or royalties (Schedule E), or
farm income and expenses (Schedule F) on the 1. Continuously offered pursuant to a publicExcess Deductions of an Estateappropriate schedule. Deduct the expenses of offering,
preparing the remainder of the return on Sched- If an estate’s total deductions in its last tax year 2. Regularly traded on an established securi-ule A (Form 1040), line 21. ties market, orare more than its gross income for that year, the
beneficiaries succeeding to the estate’s prop- 3. Held by or for at least 500 persons at allOther Expenses (Line 22) erty can deduct the excess. Do not include de- times during the tax year.
ductions for the estate’s personal exemptionYou can deduct certain other expenses as mis- A publicly offered mutual fund will send you aand charitable contributions when figuring the Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, orcellaneous itemized deductions subject to the estate’s total deductions. The beneficiaries can a substitute form, showing the net amount of2% limit. These are expenses you pay: claim the deduction only for the tax year in dividend income (gross dividends minus invest-
which, or with which, the estate terminates,1. To produce or collect income that must be ment expenses). This net figure is the amount
whether the year of termination is a normal yearincluded in your gross income, you report on your return as income. You cannot
or a short tax year. For more information, see deduct investment expenses.2. To manage, conserve, or maintain prop- Termination of Estate in Publication 559, Survi-erty held for producing such income, or Information returns. You should receive in-vors, Executors, and Administrators. formation returns from pass-through entities.3. To determine, contest, pay, or claim a re-
fund of any tax. Partnerships and S corporations. These
entities issue Schedule K-1, which lists the itemsFees to Collect Interest andYou can deduct expenses you pay for the pur- and amounts you must report and identifies theDividendsposes in (1) and (2) above only if they are rea- tax return schedules and lines to use.sonably and closely related to these purposes. You can deduct fees you pay to a broker, bank, Nonpublicly offered mutual funds. TheseSome of these other expenses are explained in trustee, or similar agent to collect your taxable funds will send you a Form 1099-DIV, or a sub-the following discussions. bond interest or dividends on shares of stock. stitute form, showing your share of gross incomeIf the expenses you pay produce income that But you cannot deduct a fee you pay to a broker and investment expenses. You can claim the
is only partially taxable, see Tax-Exempt Income to buy investment property, such as stocks or expenses only as a miscellaneous itemized de-
Expenses, later, under Nondeductible Ex- bonds. You must add the fee to the cost of the duction subject to the 2% limit.
penses. property.
You cannot deduct the fee you pay to a Investment Fees and Expensesbroker to sell securities. You can use the feeAppraisal Fees
only to figure gain or loss from the sale. See the You can deduct investment fees, custodial fees,
You can deduct appraisal fees if you pay them to instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040), col- trust administration fees, and other expenses
figure a casualty loss or the fair market value of umns (d) and (e), for information on how to you paid for managing your investments that
donated property. report the fee. produce taxable income.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 189

Page 192 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Legal Expenses Safe Deposit Box Rent Amortizable Premium on Taxable
BondsYou can usually deduct legal expenses that you You can deduct safe deposit box rent if you use
the box to store taxable income-producingincur in attempting to produce or collect taxable In general, if the amount you pay for a bond is
stocks, bonds, or investment-related papers andincome or that you pay in connection with the greater than its stated principal amount, the ex-
documents. You cannot deduct the rent if youdetermination, collection, or refund of any tax. cess is bond premium. You can elect to amortize
use the box only for jewelry, other personal the premium on taxable bonds. The amortizationYou can also deduct legal expenses that are:
items, or tax-exempt securities. of the premium is generally an offset to interest
1. Related to either doing or keeping your income on the bond rather than a separate de-
job, such as those you paid to defend duction item.
Service Charges on Dividendyourself against criminal charges arising Part of the premium on some bonds may be
a miscellaneous deduction not subject to the 2%out of your trade or business, Reinvestment Plans
limit. For more information, see Amortizable2. For tax advice related to a divorce, if the You can deduct service charges you pay as a Premium on Taxable Bonds in Publication 529,bill specifies how much is for tax advice subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan. and Bond Premium Amortization in chapter 3 ofand it is determined in a reasonable way, These service charges include payments for: Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex-
or penses.1. Holding shares acquired through a plan,3. To collect taxable alimony.
2. Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends,You can deduct expenses of resolving tax Certain Casualty and Theft Lossesand
issues relating to profit or loss from business
3. Keeping individual records and providing(Schedule C or C-EZ), rentals or royalties You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a
detailed statements of accounts. miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject to(Schedule E), or farm income and expenses
the 2% limit if the damaged or stolen property(Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. You
was income-producing property (property helddeduct expenses of resolving nonbusiness tax
for investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds,issues on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Tax Trustee’s Administrative Fees for
gold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First,Preparation Fees, earlier. IRA report the loss in Form 4684, Section B. You
may also have to include the loss on Form 4797Trustee’s administrative fees that are billed sep-Unlawful discrimination claims. You may be
if you are otherwise required to file that form. Toarately and paid by you in connection with yourable to deduct, as an adjustment to income on figure your deduction, add all casualty or theftindividual retirement arrangement (IRA) are de-Form 1040, line 36, rather than as a miscellane- losses from this type of property included onductible (if they are ordinary and necessary) as aous itemized deduction, attorney fees and court Form 4684, lines 35 and 41b, or Form 4797, linemiscellaneous itemized deduction subject to thecosts for actions settled or decided after October 18a. For more information on casualty and theft2% limit. For more information about IRAs, see22, 2004, involving a claim of unlawful discrimi- losses, see chapter 25.chapter 17.nation, a claim against the U.S. Government, or
a claim made under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the
Social Security Act. However, the amount you Federal Estate Tax on Income incan deduct on Form 1040, line 36, is limited to Respect of a DecedentDeductions Notthe amount you included in gross income in
2006 for that claim. The rest of your attorney You can deduct the federal estate tax attributa-
Subject to the 2% Limitfees and court costs for this type of claim are ble to income in respect of a decedent that you
deductible as a miscellaneous itemized deduc- as a beneficiary include in your gross income.You can deduct the items listed below as miscel-tion subject to the 2% limit. See Publication 525 Income in respect of the decedent is gross in-laneous itemized deductions. They are not sub-for more information. come that the decedent would have receivedject to the 2% limit. Report these items on had death not occurred and that was not prop-Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27. erly includible in the decedent’s final income tax
return. See Publication 559 for more informa-Loss on Deposits
tion.List of Deductions
For information on whether, and if so, how, you
may deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualified Each of the following items is discussed in detail
financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or after the list. Gambling Losses Up to the
Bankrupt Financial Institution in Publication 550. Amount of Gambling Winnings• Amortizable premium on taxable bonds.
• Casualty and theft losses from in- You must report the full amount of your gambling
come-producing property.Repayments of Income winnings for the year on Form 1040, line 21. You
deduct your gambling losses for the year on• Federal estate tax on income in respect ofIf you had to repay an amount that you included Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27. You cannota decedent.in income in an earlier year, you may be able to deduct gambling losses that are more than your
deduct the amount you repaid. If the amount you • Gambling losses up to the amount of gam- winnings.
had to repay was ordinary income of $3,000 or bling winnings. You cannot reduce your gambling win-less, the deduction is subject to the 2% limit. If it • Impairment-related work expenses of per- nings by your gambling losses and re-was more than $3,000, see Repayments Under sons with disabilities. port the difference. You must report theCAUTION
!
Claim of Right under Deductions Not Subject to full amount of your winnings as income and• Loss from other activities from Schedulethe 2% Limit, later. claim your losses (up to the amount of winnings)K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 2. as an itemized deduction. Therefore, your rec-
• Repayments of more than $3,000 under a ords should show your winnings separately fromRepayments of Social Security claim of right. your losses.
Benefits • Unrecovered investment in an annuity. Diary of winnings and losses. You
For information on how to deduct your repay- must keep an accurate diary or similar
ments of certain social security benefits, see record of your losses and winnings.RECORDS
Repayments More Than Gross Benefits in chap- Your diary should contain at least the following
ter 11. information.
Page 190 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 193 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. The date and type of your specific wager Officials Paid on a Fee List of Nondeductibleor wagering activity.
Basis Expenses2. The name and address or location of the
gambling establishment. If you are a fee-basis official, you can claim your • Broker’s commissions that you paid inexpenses in performing services in that job as3. The names of other persons present with connection with your IRA or other invest-an adjustment to income rather than as a miscel-you at the gambling establishment. ment property.laneous itemized deduction. To qualify as a
4. The amount(s) you won or lost. • Burial or funeral expenses, including thefee-basis official, you must be employed by a
cost of a cemetery lot.  state or local government and be paid in wholeSee Publication 529 for more information. or in part on a fee basis. • Capital expenses.
Where to report. If you qualify as a fee-basis • Fees and licenses, such as car licenses,Impairment-Related Work official, you should first complete Form 2106 or marriage licenses, and dog tags.
Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses inExpenses • Hobby losses — But see Hobby Ex-performing services in that job (Form 2106, line
penses, earlier.If you have a physical or mental disability that 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6) on Form 1040,
line 24.limits your being employed, or substantially lim- • Home repairs, insurance, and rent.
its one or more of your major life activities, such
• Illegal bribes and kickbacks—See Bribesas performing manual tasks, walking, speaking, Armed Forces Reservists and kickbacks in chapter 11 of Publicationbreathing, learning, and working, you can de- Traveling More Than 100 535.duct your impairment-related work expenses.
Miles From Home • Losses from the sale of your home, furni-Impairment-related work expenses are ordi-
ture, personal car, etc.nary and necessary business expenses for at- If you are a member of a reserve component of
• Personal disability insurance premiums.tendant care services at your place of work and the Armed Forces of the United States and you
for other expenses in connection with your place travel more than 100 miles away from home in • Personal, living, or family expenses.
of work that are necessary for you to be able to connection with your performance of services as • The value of wages never received or losta member of the reserves, you can deduct yourwork. vacation time.travel expenses as an adjustment to gross in-
come rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedWhere to report. If you are an employee, you deduction. The amount of expenses you can Adoption Expensesenter impairment-related work expenses on deduct as an adjustment to gross income is
Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ. Enter on Schedule limited to the regular federal per diem rate (for You cannot deduct the expenses of adopting a
A (Form 1040), line 27, that part of the amount lodging, meals, and incidental expenses) and child, but you may be able to take a credit for
on Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, the standard mileage rate (for car expenses) those expenses. See chapter 37.
plus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. Forthat is related to your impairment. Enter the
more information, see Publication 463.amount that is unrelated to your impairment on
Campaign ExpensesSchedule A (Form 1040), line 20. Member of a reserve component. You are a
member of a reserve component of the Armed You cannot deduct campaign expenses of a
Forces of the United States if you are in the candidate for any office, even if the candidate isLoss From Other Activities From Army, Naval, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast running for reelection to the office. These in-
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), Box 2 Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the clude qualification and registration fees for pri-
United States, the Air National Guard of the mary elections.If the amount reported in Schedule K-1 (Form United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub- Legal fees. You cannot deduct legal fees1065-B), box 2, is a loss, report it on Schedule A lic Health Service. paid to defend charges that arise from partici-(Form 1040), line 27. It is not subject to the
pation in a political campaign.passive activity limitations. Where to report. If you have reserve-related
travel that takes you more than 100 miles from
home, you should first complete Form 2106 or
Check-Writing Fees on PersonalForm 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses forRepayments Under Claim of Right
Accountreserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to
If you had to repay more than $3,000 that you the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or
If you have a personal checking account, youincluded in your income in an earlier year be- Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040,
cannot deduct fees charged by the bank for theline 24. Subtract this amount from the total oncause at the time you thought you had an un- privilege of writing checks, even if the accountForm 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, andrestricted right to it, you may be able to deduct pays interest.deduct the balance as an itemized deduction onthe amount you repaid or take a credit against
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20.your tax. See Repayments in chapter 12 for You cannot deduct travel expenses that domore information. Club Duesnot take you more than 100 miles from home as
an adjustment to gross income. Instead, you Generally, you cannot deduct the cost of mem-must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and de-Unrecovered Investment in bership in any club organized for business, plea-duct those expenses as an itemized deduction sure, recreation, or other social purpose. ThisAnnuity on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. includes business, social, athletic, luncheon,
sporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country clubs.A retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu-
For exceptions, see Dues to Chambers of Com-ity can exclude from income a part of each
merce and Professional Societies under Un-payment received as a tax-free return of the Nondeductible reimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier.retiree’s investment. If the retiree dies before the
entire investment is recovered tax free, any un- Expenses
recovered investment can be deducted on the Commuting Expensesretiree’s final income tax return. See chapter 10 Examples of nondeductible expenses are listed
for more information about the tax treatment of next. The list is followed by discussions of addi- You cannot deduct commuting expenses (the
pensions and annuities. tional nondeductible expenses. cost of transportation between your home and
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 191

Page 194 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your main or regular place of work). If you haul 3. Attempt to influence the general public, or 7. Property claims or property sett lement in a
divorce.segments of the public, about elections,tools, instruments, or other items, in your car to
legislative matters, or referendums, orand from work, you can deduct only the addi- You cannot deduct these expenses even if a
tional cost of hauling the items such as the rent result of the legal proceeding is the loss of in-4. Communicate directly with covered execu-
on a trailer to carry the items. come-producing property.tive branch officials in any attempt to influ-
ence the official actions or positions of
those officials.
Fines or Penalties Political Contributions
Lobbying expenses also include any amounts
You cannot deduct fines or penalties you pay to You cannot deduct contributions made to a polit-paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan-
a governmental unit for violating a law. This ical candidate, a campaign committee, or aning, or coordination of any of these activities.
newsletter fund. Advertisements in conventionincludes an amount paid in settlement of your Dues used for lobbying. If a tax-exempt bulletins and admissions to dinners or programsactual or potential liability for a fine or penalty organization notifies you that part of the dues or that benefit a political party or political candidate(civil or criminal). Fines or penalties include other amounts you pay to the organization are are not deductible.parking tickets, tax penalties, and penalties de- used to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses,ducted from teachers’ paychecks after an illegal you cannot deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex-
strike. penses in Publication 529 for information on Professional Accreditation Fees
exceptions.
You cannot deduct professional accreditation
Health Spa Expenses fees such as the following.
Lost or Mislaid Cash or PropertyYou cannot deduct health spa expenses, even if 1. Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini-
there is a job requirement to stay in excellent tial right to practice accounting.You cannot deduct a loss based on the mere
physical condition, such as might be required of disappearance of money or property. However, 2. Bar exam fees and incidental expenses ina law enforcement officer. an accidental loss or disappearance of property securing admission to the bar.
can qualify as a casualty if it results from an 3. Medical and dental license fees paid to getidentifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or initial licensing.Home Security System unusual. See chapter 25.
You cannot deduct the cost of a home security Example. A car door is accidentallysystem as a miscellaneous deduction. However, slammed on your hand, breaking the setting of Professional Reputationyou may be able to claim a deduction for a home your diamond ring. The diamond falls from thesecurity system as a business expense if you You cannot deduct expenses of radio and TVring and is never found. The loss of the diamondhave a home office. See Home Office under appearances to increase your personal prestigeis a casualty. or establish your professional reputation.Unreimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier, and
Security System under Deducting Expenses  in
Publication 587. Lunches with Coworkers Relief Fund Contributions
You cannot deduct the expenses of lunches with You cannot deduct contributions paid to a pri-co-workers, except while traveling away fromHomeowners’ Insurance Premiums vate plan that pays benefits to any covered em-home on business. See chapter 26 for informa- ployee who cannot work because of any injury orYou cannot deduct premiums that you pay or tion on deductible expenses while traveling illness not related to the job.that are placed in escrow for insurance on your away from home.
home, such as fire and liability or mortgage
insurance. Residential Telephone ServiceMeals While Working Late
You cannot deduct any charge (including taxes)You cannot deduct the cost of meals while work-Investment-Related Seminars for basic local telephone service for the firsting late. However, you may be able to claim a telephone line to your residence, even if it isYou cannot deduct any expenses for attending a deduction if the cost of meals is a deductible used in a trade or business.convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in- entertainment expense, or if you are traveling
vestment purposes. away from home. See chapter 26 for information
on deductible entertainment expenses and ex- Stockholders’ Meetings
penses while traveling away from home.
Life Insurance Premiums You cannot deduct transportation and other ex-
penses you pay to attend stockholders’ meet-You cannot deduct premiums you pay on your ings of companies in which you own stock butPersonal Legal Expenseslife insurance. You may be able to deduct, as have no other interest. You cannot deduct these
alimony, premiums you pay on life insurance You cannot deduct legal expenses for personal expenses even if you are attending the meeting
policies assigned to your former spouse. See matters that do not produce taxable income to get information that would be useful in making
chapter 18 for information on alimony. such as those for the following. further investments.
1. Custody of children.
Lobbying Expenses Tax-Exempt Income Expenses2. Breach of promise to marry suit.
3. Civil or criminal charges resulting from aYou generally cannot deduct amounts paid or You cannot deduct expenses to produce
personal relationship. tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct interestincurred for lobbying expenses. These include
on a debt incurred or continued to buy or carryexpenses to: 4. Damages for personal injury, but see Un- tax-exempt securities.lawful discrimination claims, earlier.1. Influence legislation, If you have expenses to produce both tax-5. Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-2. Participate or intervene in any political able and tax-exempt income, but you cannottion of a title).campaign for, or against, any candidate for identify the expenses that produce each type of
public office, 6. Preparation of a will. income, you must divide the expenses based on
Page 192 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 195 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the amount of each type of income to determine • Casualty and theft losses from in-
the amount that you can deduct. come-producing property—line 27.Introduction
• Gambling losses—line 27.Example. During the year, you received This chapter discusses the overall limit on item-
taxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt inter- ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
est of $1,200. In earning this income, you had The following topics are included.
total expenses of $500 during the year. You • Who is subject to the limit.cannot identify the amount of each expense item How Do You Figurethat is for each income item. Therefore, 80% • Which itemized deductions are limited.
($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the taxable the Limit?• How to figure the limit.interest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is for the
tax-exempt interest. You can deduct, subject to If your itemized deductions are subject to thethe 2% limit, expenses of $400 (80% of $500). Useful Items limit, the total of all your itemized deductions is
reduced by the smaller of the following reducedYou may want to see:
by one-third:Travel Expenses for Another Form (and Instructions) • 80% of your itemized deductions that areIndividual
affected by the limit. See Which Itemized❏ Schedule A (Form 1040), ItemizedYou generally cannot deduct travel expenses Deductions Are Limited, earlier, orDeductionsyou pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, or • 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-other individual who accompanies you (or your ceeds $150,500 ($75,250 if married filingemployee) on business or personal travel. See
separately).chapter 26 for more information on deductible
travel expenses. Are You Subject Before you figure the overall limit on itemized
deductions, you first must complete Schedule A
to the Limit? (Form 1040), lines 1 through 27, including anyVoluntary Unemployment related forms (such as Form 2106, Form 4684,Benefit Fund Contributions You are subject to the limit on certain itemized etc.).
deductions if your adjusted gross income (AGI) The overall limit on itemized deductions isYou cannot deduct voluntary unemployment is more than $150,500 ($75,250 if you are mar- figured after you have applied any other limit onbenefit fund contributions you make to a union ried filing separately). Your AGI is the amount on the allowance of any itemized deduction. Thesefund or a private fund. However, you can deduct Form 1040, line 38. other limits include charitable contribution limitscontributions as taxes if state law requires you to
(chapter 24), the limit on certain meal and enter-make them to a state unemployment fund that
tainment expenses (chapter 26), and the 2%-of-covers you for the loss of wages from unemploy-
adjusted-gross-income limit on certain miscella-ment caused by business conditions.
neous deductions (chapter 28).Which Itemized
Wristwatches Deductions Itemized Deductions Worksheet. After you
have completed Schedule A (Form 1040)
You cannot deduct the cost of a wristwatch, Are Limited? through line 27, you can use the Itemized De-
even if there is a job requirement that you know ductions Worksheet in the Instructions for
the correct time to properly perform your duties. The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc- Schedule A (Form 1040) to figure your limit.
tions are subject to the overall limit on itemized Enter the result on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
deductions. 28. Keep the worksheet for your records.
• Taxes paid—line 9. You should compare the amount of
your standard deduction to the amount• Interest paid—lines 10, 11, and 12. of your itemized deductions after ap-
TIP
• Gifts to charity—line 18. plying the limit. Use the greater amount when29.
completing Form 1040, line 40. See chapter 20• Job expenses and certain miscellaneous for information on how to figure your standarddeductions—line 26. deduction.
• Other miscellaneous deductions—line 27,Limit on
excluding gambling and casualty or theft
Examplelosses.
Itemized
For tax year 2006, Bill and Terry Willow are filing
a joint return on Form 1040. Their adjustedDeductions gross income on line 38 is $259,600. Their
Schedule A itemized deductions are as follows:
Which Itemized
What’s New Deductions Taxes paid—line 9 .......... $ 17,900
Interest paid—lines 10, 11, and 12 45,000Are Not Limited?Phaseout of limit on itemized deductions.
Beginning in 2006, the overall limit on certain
Investment interest expenseThe following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-itemized deductions will gradually be eliminated.
—line 13 ................. 41,000tions are not subject to the overall limit on item-Under this phaseout rule, the limit on itemized
ized deductions. However, they are still subjectdeductions is reduced by one-third for 2006. Gifts to charity—line 18 ....... 21,000to other applicable limits.
• Medical and dental expenses—line 4. Job expenses—line 26 ........ 17,240
• Investment interest expense—line 13. Total .................. $142,140
• Casualty and theft losses from personal
use property—line 19.
Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 193

Page 196 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 29-1. Itemized Deductions Worksheet—Line 28
1. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 9, 14, 18, 19, 26, and 27. ................. 1. 142,140
2. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 13, and 19, plus any gambling and casualty or
theft losses included on line 27. .................................................... 2. 41,000
Be sure your total gambling and casualty or theft losses are clearly identified on the dotted
lines next to line 27.CAUTION
!
3. Is the amount on line 2 less than the amount on line 1?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on Schedule A, line 28.STOP
/H22076 Yes. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ................................................. 3. 101,140
4. Multiply line 3 by 80% (.80) ......................................... 4. 80,912
5. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38 .............................. 5. 259,600
6. Enter: $150,500 ($75,250 if married filing separately) ...................... 6. 150,500
7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the amount on line 5?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above onSTOP
Schedule A, line 28.
/H22076 Yes. Subtract line 6 from line 5 .................................. 7. 109,100
8. Multiply line 7 by 3% (.03) .......................................... 8. 3,273
9. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 8 .................................................. 9. 3,273
10. Divide line 9 by 3 ............................................................... 10. 1,091
11. Subtract line 10 from line 9 ........................................................ 11. 2,182
12. Total itemized deductions.  Subtract line 11 from line 1. Enter the result here and on Schedule A,
line 28 ....................................................................... 12. 139,958
The Willows’ investment interest expense The Willows use the Itemized Deductions Of their $142,140 total itemized deductions,
deduction ($41,000 from Schedule A (Form Worksheet in the Schedule A (Form 1040) in- the Willows can deduct only $139,958
1040), line 13) is not subject to the overall limit structions to figure their overall limit. Their com- ($142,140 − $2,182). They enter $139,958 on
on itemized deductions. pleted worksheet is shown as Table 29-1. Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.
Page 194 Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions

Page 197 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Six.
The eight chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how to figureFiguring Your the tax of certain children who have more than $1,700 of investment income.
They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions are subtracted directly fromTaxes and your tax and reduce your tax, dollar for dollar. Chapter 36 discusses the earned
income credit and how you may be able to get part of the credit paid to you in
Credits advance throughout the year.
• Foreign earned income exclusion or the and refined coal produced at facilities
housing exclusion. (See Form 2555, For- placed in service after October 22, 2004,
eign Earned Income, or Form 2555-EZ, and Indian coal produced at facilities
30. Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.) placed in service after August 8, 2005.
See Form 8835, Section B.
Credits. After you figure your income tax and
any alternative minimum tax (discussed later), Other taxes. After you subtract your tax cred-
How To Figure determine your tax credits. This chapter does its, determine whether there are any other taxes
not explain whether you are eligible for these you must pay. This chapter does not explain
credits. You can find that information in chapters these other taxes. You can find that information
Your Tax 32 through 37 and your form instructions. See in other chapters of this publication and your
the following table for credits you may be able to form instructions. See the following table for
subtract from your income tax. other taxes you may need to add to your income
tax.Introduction
CREDITSAfter you have figured your income and deduc- See OTHER TAXEStions as explained in Parts One through Five, For information on: chapter: Seeyour next step is to figure your tax. This chap- For information on: chapter:Adoption .................. 3 7ter discusses:
Alternative motor vehicle ....... 3 7 Additional taxes on qualified retirement• The general steps you take to figure your Alternative fuel vehicle refueling plans and IRAs .............. 10, 17tax, property ................. 3 7 Advance earned income credit• An additional tax you may have to pay Child and dependent care ...... 3 2 payments ................. 3 6called the alternative minimum tax, and Child tax credit .............. 3 4 Household employment taxes ..... 3 2
• The conditions you must meet if you want Clean renewable energy bond .... 3 7 Recapture of an education credit . . . 35
the IRS to figure your tax. Education ................. 3 5 Social security and Medicare tax on
Elderly or disabled ........... 3 3 unreported tips .............. 6
Foreign tax ................ 3 7 Uncollected social security and
Gulf tax credit bonds .......... 3 7 Medicare tax on tips .......... 6Figuring Your Tax
Mortgage interest ............ 3 7 Another tax you may have to pay, the alter-Prior year minimum tax ........ 3 7Your income tax is based on your taxable in- native minimum tax, is discussed later in thisQualified electric vehicle ....... 3 7come. After you figure your income tax and any chapter.Qualified retirement savingsalternative minimum tax, subtract your tax cred- There are other taxes that are not dis-contributions .............. 3 7its and add any other taxes you may owe. The cussed in this publication. These include theResidential energy improvements 37result is your total tax. Compare your total tax following items.
with your total payments to determine whether Some credits (such as the earned income 1. Self-employment tax. You must figure thisyou are entitled to a refund or owe additional tax. credit) are not listed above because they are tax if either of the following applies to youtreated as payments. See Payments, later.This section provides a general outline of (or your spouse if you file a joint return).There are other credits that are not dis-how to figure your tax. You can find step-by-step a. Your net earnings fromcussed in this publication. These include thedirections in the instructions for Forms 1040EZ, self-employment from other than churchfollowing items.1040A, and 1040. If you are unsure of which tax employee income were $400 or more.• General business credit, which is made upform you should file, see Which Form Should I The term “net earnings fromof several separate business-related cred-Use? in chapter 1. self-employment” may include certainits. These generally are reported on Form nonemployee compensation and other3800, General Business Credit, and are amounts reported to you on FormTax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax Table discussed in chapter 4 of Publication 334, 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. Ifor the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure Tax Guide for Small Business. you received a Form 1099-MISC, seetheir income tax. However, there are special • Empowerment zone and renewal commu- the Instructions for Recipients on themethods if your income includes any of the nity employment credit, which is for certain back. Also see the instructions forfollowing items. employers who are engaged in a business Schedule SE (Form 1040),• A net capital gain. (See chapter 16.) in an empowerment zone or a renewal Self-Employment Tax; and Publication• Qualified dividends taxed at the same community. See Publication 954, Tax In- 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.rates as a net capital gain. (See chapters centives for Distressed Communities. Also b. You had church employee income of8 and 16.) see the instructions for Form 8844, Em- $108.28 or more.• Lump-sum distributions. (See chapter 10.) powerment Zone and Renewal Commu-
nity Employment Credit.• Farming or fishing income. (See Schedule 2. Recapture taxes. You may have to pay
J (Form 1040), Income Averaging for • Credit for alcohol used as fuel. See Form these taxes if you previously claimed an
Farmers and Fishermen.) 6478. investment credit, a low-income housing
• Investment income over $1,700 for chil- • Renewable electricity, refined coal, and In- credit, a mortgage interest credit, a new
dren under age 18. (See chapter 31.) dian coal production credit for electricity markets credit, a qualified electric vehicle
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 195

Page 198 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
credit, a credit for employer-provided child 1099-MISC, box 15b. For more informa- • $42,500 if your filing status is single or
care facilities, or an Indian employment tion, see the instructions for Form 1040, head of household, or
credit. For more information, see the in- line 63. • $31,275 if your filing status is married filing
structions for Form 1040, line 63. 12. Interest on the tax due on installment in- a separate return.
3. Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. If come from the sale of certain residential
you are (or were) a 5% owner of a busi- lots and timeshares. For more information, Adjustments and tax preference items.ness and you received a distribution that see the instructions for Form 1040, line 63. The more common adjustments and tax prefer-exceeds the benefits provided for you 13. Interest on the deferred tax on gain from ence items include:under the qualified pension or annuity plan certain installment sales with a sales price • Addition of personal exemptions,formula, you may have to pay this addi- over $150,000. For more information, see • Addition of the standard deduction (iftional tax. See Tax on Excess Benefits in the instructions for Form 1040, line 63. claimed),chapter 4 of Publication 560, Retirement
• Addition of itemized deductions claimedPlans for Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE, Payments. After you determine your total tax,
for state and local taxes, certain interest,and Qualified Plans). figure the total payments you have already
most miscellaneous deductions, and part4. Uncollected social security and Medicare made for the year. Include credits that are
of medical expenses,tax on group-term life insurance. If your treated as payments. This chapter does not ex-
• Subtraction of any refund of state and lo-former employer provides you with more plain these payments and credits. You can find
cal taxes included in gross income,than $50,000 of group-term life insurance that information in other chapters of this publica-
coverage, you must pay the employee part tion and your form instructions. See the follow- • Changes to accelerated depreciation of
of social security and Medicare taxes on ing table for amounts you can include in your certain property,
those premiums. The amount should be total payments. • Difference between gain or loss on the
shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with sale of property reported for regular taxPAYMENTScodes M and N. purposes and AMT purposes,See
5. Tax on golden parachute payments. This • Addition of certain income from incentiveFor information on: chapter:
tax applies if you received an “excess par- stock options,Child tax credit (additional) ...... 3 4achute payment” (EPP) due to a change in • Change in certain passive activity loss de-Credit for federal telephone excisea corporation’s ownership or control. See ductions,tax paid ................... 3 7the instructions for Form 1040, line 63. • Addition of certain depletion that is moreEarned income credit ......... 3 66. Tax on accumulation distribution of trusts. than the adjusted basis of the property,Estimated tax paid ........... 4This applies if you are the beneficiary of a Excess social security • Addition of part of the deduction for certaintrust that accumulated its income instead and RRTA tax withheld ....... 3 7 intangible drilling costs, andof distributing it currently. See the instruc- Federal income tax withheld ..... 4 • Addition of tax-exempt interest on certaintions for Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Health coverage tax credit ...... 3 7 private activity bonds.Distribution of Trusts. Regulated investment company
7. Additional tax on HSAs or MSAs. If credit ................... 3 7
Tax paid with extension ........ 1 More information. For more informationamounts contributed to, or distributed from,
about the alternative minimum tax, see the in-your health savings account or medical Another credit that is treated as a payment issavings account do not meet the rules for structions for Form 1040, line 45, and Formthe credit for federal excise tax paid on fuels.these accounts, you may have to pay addi- 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals.This credit is for persons who have a nontaxabletional taxes. See Publication 969, Health use of certain fuels, such as diesel fuel andSavings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored kerosene. It is claimed on Form 1040, line 70.Health Plans; Form 8853, Archer MSAs See Form 4136, Credit for Federal Tax Paid onand Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts; Fuels. Tax Figured by IRSForm 8889, Health Savings Accounts
Refund or balance due. To determine(HSAs); and Form 5329, Additional Taxes If you file by April 16, 2007, (April 17, 2007, if youwhether you are entitled to a refund or oweon Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and live in Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Newadditional tax, compare your total payments withOther Tax-Favored Accounts. Hampshire, New York, Vermont, or the Districtyour total tax. If you are entitled to a refund, see8. Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. This ap- of Columbia), you can have the IRS figure youryour form instructions for information on havingplies if amounts contributed to, or distrib- tax for you on Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, orit directly deposited into one or more of youruted from, your Coverdell ESA do not meet Form 1040.accounts instead of receiving a paper check.the rules for these accounts. See Publica- If the IRS figures your tax and you paid tootion 970, Tax Benefits for Education, and much, you will receive a refund. If you did notForm 5329. pay enough, you will receive a bill for the bal-9. Additional tax on qualified tuition pro- ance. To avoid interest or the penalty for lategrams. This applies to amounts distributed Alternative payment, you must pay the bill within 30 days offrom qualified tuition programs that do not the date of the bill or by the due date for yourmeet the rules for these accounts. See Minimum Tax return, whichever is later.Publication 970 and Form 5329.
10. Tax on insider stock compensation from an This section briefly discusses an additional tax When the IRS cannot figure your tax. The
expatriated corporation. You may owe a you may have to pay. IRS cannot figure your tax for you if any of the
15% excise tax on the value of nonstatu- The tax law gives special treatment to some following apply.
tory stock options and certain other kinds of income and allows special deductions 1. You want your refund directly depositedstock-based compensation held by you or and credits for some kinds of expenses. Taxpay- into your accounts.a member of your family from an expatri- ers who benefit from the law in these ways may 2. You want any part of your refund appliedated corporation or its expanded affiliated have to pay at least a minimum amount of tax to your 2007 estimated tax.group in which you were an officer, direc- through an additional tax. This additional tax is
3. You had income for the year from sourcestor, or more-than-10% owner. For more in- called the alternative minimum tax (AMT).
other than wages, salaries, tips, interest,formation, see the instructions for Form You may have to pay the alternative mini-
dividends, taxable social security benefits,1040, line 63. mum tax if your taxable income for regular tax
unemployment compensation, IRA distri-purposes, combined with certain adjustments11. Additional tax on income you received butions, pensions, and annuities.and tax preference items, is more than:from a nonqualified deferred compensation
4. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more.plan that fails to meet certain require- • $62,550 if your filing status is married filing
5. You itemize deductions.ments. This income should be shown in a joint return (or qualifying widow(er) with
6. You file any of the following forms.Form W-2, box 12, with code Z, or in Form dependent child),
Page 196 Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax

Page 199 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income. your return. For details, see the Form 1040EZ Fill in any forms or schedules asked for on
instructions. the lines you completed, and attach them to yourb. Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income
return.Exclusion. Credit for federal telephone excise tax paid.c. Form 4137, Social Security and Medi- If you can take this credit, as discussed in chap- Credit for child and dependent care ex-care Tax on Unreported Tip Income. ter 37, enter the amount of the credit on line 9. penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-d. Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri- The IRS will not figure this credit. cussed in chapter 32, complete Form 2441,bution of Trusts.
Child and Dependent Care Expenses, and at-e. Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu- tach it to your return. Enter the amount of thetions. Form 1040A Line Entries credit on line 48. The IRS will not figure thisf. Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. credit.Read lines 1 through 27 and fill in the lines thatg. Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—
apply to you. If you are filing a joint return, useIndividuals. Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If youthe space to the left of line 27 to separately showh. Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs. can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,your taxable income and your spouse’s taxablei. Form 8615, Tax for Children Under Age attach Schedule R, Credit for the Elderly or theincome. Do not complete line 28. Complete lines18 With Investment Income of More Disabled. Enter “CFE” on the dotted line next to29 through 33, 36, and 38 through 42 if theyThan $1,700. Form 1040, line 49. The IRS will figure the creditapply to you. Do not fill in lines 30 and 40a if youj. Form 8814, Parents’ Election To Report for you. On Schedule R check the box in Part Iwant the IRS to figure the credits shown on
Child’s Interest and Dividends. for your filing status and age. Complete Part IIthose lines. Also, enter any write-in information
and Part III, lines 11 and 13, if they apply.k. Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex- that applies to you in the space to the left of line
penses. 43. Do not complete lines 34, 35, 37, and 43
Earned income credit. If you can take thisl. Form 8853, Archer MSAs and through 48.
credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS willLong-Term Care Insurance Contracts.
Credit for child and dependent care ex- figure it for you. Enter “EIC” on the dotted linem. Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts penses. If you can take this credit, as dis- next to Form 1040, line 66a. Enter the nontax-(HSAs). cussed in chapter 32, complete Schedule 2 able combat pay you elect to include in earnedn. Form 8915, Qualified Hurricane Retire- (Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex- income on line 66b. If you have a qualifyingment Plan Distributions and Repay- penses for Form 1040A Filers, and attach it to child, you must fill in Schedule EIC and attach itments. your return. Enter the amount of the credit on to your return.
line 29. The IRS will not figure this credit. If your credit for any year after 1996 was
reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsoCredit for the elderly or the disabled. If youFiling the Return have to file Form 8862, Information To Claimcan take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33, Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, withattach Schedule 3 (Form 1040A), Credit for theAfter you complete the line entries for the tax your return. For details, see the Form 1040 in-Elderly or the Disabled for Form 1040A Filers.form you are filing, as discussed next, attach the structions.Enter “CFE” next to line 30. The IRS will figurepeel-off label. If you do not have a peel-off label,
this credit for you. On Schedule 3, check the boxfill in your name and address. Enter your social Credit for federal telephone excise tax paid.in Part I for your filing status and age. Completesecurity number in the space provided. If you are If you can take this credit, as discussed in chap-Part II and Part III, lines 11 and 13, if they apply.married, enter the social security numbers of ter 37, enter the amount of the credit on line 71.you and your spouse even if you file separately. Earned income credit. If you can take this The IRS will not figure this credit.Complete the “Third Party Designee” area of the credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS will
return if you would like another person to dis- figure it for you. Enter “EIC” to the left of the entry
cuss your return with the IRS. Sign and date space for line 40a. Enter the nontaxable combat
your return and enter your occupation(s). If you pay you elect to include in earned income on line
are filing a joint return, both you and your spouse 40b. If you have a qualifying child, you must fill in
must sign it. Enter your daytime phone number Schedule EIC, Earned Income Credit, and at-
in the space provided. tach it to your return. 31.
Attach a copy of each of your Forms W-2 to If your credit for any year after 1996 was
reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsoyour return. Also attach any Form 1099-R you
have to file Form 8862, Information To Claimreceived that has withholding tax in box 4.
Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with Tax onMail your return to the Internal Revenue
your return. For details, see the Form 1040AService Center for the area where you live. A list
instructions.of Service Center addresses is shown near the Investmentend of this publication. Credit for federal telephone excise tax paid.
If you can take this credit, as discussed in chap- Income ofter 37, enter the amount of the credit on line 42.Form 1040EZ Line Entries The IRS will not figure this credit.
Certain MinorRead lines 1 through 9 and fill in the lines that
apply to you. Do not complete lines 10 through Form 1040 Line Entries13. If you are filing a joint return, use the space Childrento the left of line 6 to separately show your Read lines 1 through 43 and fill in the lines thattaxable income and your spouse’s taxable in- apply to you. Do not complete line 44.come. If you are filing a joint return, use the space
What’s Newunder the words “Adjusted Gross Income” on
Earned income credit. If you can take this the front of your return to separately show your
credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS can taxable income and your spouse’s taxable in- Investment income of child under age 18. A
figure it for you. Enter “EIC” in the space to the come. child’s investment income may be subject to tax
left of line 8a. Enter the nontaxable combat pay Read lines 45 through 71. Fill in the lines that at the parent’s tax rate if the child is under age
you elect to include in earned income on line 8b. apply to you, but do not fill in lines 56, 63, and 18 previously under age 14) at the end of the
If your credit for any year after 1996 was 72. Also, do not complete line 57 and lines 73 year. The amount of taxable investment income
reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also through 77. Do not fill in lines 49 and 66a if you the child can have without it being subject to tax
have to file Form 8862, Information To Claim want the IRS to figure the credits shown on at the parent’s rate has increased to $1,700
Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with those lines. (previously $1,600).
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children Page 197

Page 200 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Parents are married. If the child’s parents file • The dividend and interest income was less
separate returns, use the return of the parent than $8,500.Introduction with the greater taxable income. • No estimated tax payment was made for
This chapter discusses the following two rules 2006 and no 2005 overpayment was ap-Parents not living together. If the child’sthat may affect the tax on certain investment plied to 2006 under your child’s name andparents are married to each other but not livingincome of a child under age 18. social security number.together, and the parent with whom the child
• No federal income tax was taken out of1. If the child’s interest and dividend income lives (the custodial parent) is considered unmar-
your child’s income under the backup with-(including capital gain distributions) total ried, use the return of the custodial parent. If the
holding rules.less than $8,500, the child’s parent may be custodial parent is not considered unmarried,
able to choose to include that income on • You are the parent whose return must beuse the return of the parent with the greater
the parent’s return rather than file a return used when applying the special tax rulestaxable income.
for the child. (See Parent’s Election To Re- for children under age 18. (See WhichFor an explanation of when a married person
port Child’s Interest and Dividends, later.) Parent’s Return To Use, earlier.)living apart from his or her spouse is considered
2. If the child’s interest, dividends, and other unmarried, see Head of Household in chapter 2. These conditions are also shown in Figure 31-A.investment income total more than $1,700,
part of that income may be taxed at the Parents are divorced. If the child’s parents How to make the election. Make the electionparent’s tax rate instead of the child’s tax are divorced or legally separated, and the parent by attaching Form 8814 to your Form 1040 orrate. (See Tax for Children Under Age 18 who had custody of the child for the greater part Form 1040NR. (If you make this election, youWho Have Investment Income of More of the year (the custodial parent) has not remar- cannot file Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) At-Than $1,700, later.) ried, use the return of the custodial parent. tach a separate Form 8814 for each child for
whom you make the election. You can make theFor these rules, the term “child” includes a le- Custodial parent remarried. If the custo-
election for one or more children and not forgally adopted child and a stepchild. These rules dial parent has remarried, the stepparent (rather
others.apply whether or not the child is a dependent. than the noncustodial parent) is treated as the
These rules do not apply if: child’s other parent. Therefore, if the custodial
parent and the stepparent file a joint return, use• The child is not required to file a tax re- Effect of Making the
that joint return. Do not use the return of theturn, Electionnoncustodial parent.• Neither of the child’s parents were living at
If the custodial parent and the stepparent arethe end of the tax year, or The federal income tax on your child’s incomemarried, but file separate returns, use the return• The child files a joint return for the year. may be more if you make the Form 8814 elec-of the one with the greater taxable income. If the tion.custodial parent and the stepparent are married
but not living together, the earlier discussionUseful Items Rate may be higher. If your child received
under Parents not living together applies.You may want to see: qualified dividends or capital gain distributions,
you may pay up to $42.50 more tax if you makeParents never married. If a child’s parentsPublication this election instead of filing a separate tax re-did not marry each other, but lived together all turn for the child. This is because the tax rate on❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and year, use the return of the parent with the the child’s income between $850 and $1,700 isDependents greater taxable income. If the parents did not live 10% if you make this election. However, if youtogether all year, the rules explained earlier file a separate return for the child, the tax rateForm (and Instructions) under Parents are divorced apply. may be as low as 5% because of the preferential
tax rates for qualified dividends and capital gain❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 18 With Widowed parent remarried. If a widow or distributions.Investment Income of More Than widower remarries, the new spouse is treated as
$1,700 the child’s other parent. The rules explained Deductions you cannot take. By making the
earlier under Custodial parent remarried apply. Form 8814 election, you cannot take any of the❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s
following deductions that the child would beInterest and Dividends
entitled to on his or her return.
• The higher standard deduction for a blind
child.Parent’s Election
• The deduction for a penalty on an early
Which Parent’s withdrawal of your child’s savings.To Report Child’s
• Itemized deductions (such as your child’sReturn To Use Interest and Dividends investment expenses or charitable contri-
butions).If a child’s parents are married to each other and You may be able to elect to include your child’s
file a joint return, use the joint return to figure the interest and dividend income (including capital Reduced deductions or credits. If you usetax on the investment income of a child under gain distributions) on your tax return. If you do, Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross in-age 18. The tax rate and other return information your child will not have to file a return. come may reduce certain deductions or creditsfrom that return are used to figure the child’s tax You can make this election for 2006 only if on your return including the following.as explained later under Tax for Children Under all the following conditions are met. • Deduction for contributions to a traditionalAge 18 Who Have Investment Income of More • Your child was under age 18 at the end of individual retirement arrangement (IRA).Than $1,700. 2006. (A child born on January 1,1989, is • Deduction for student loan interest.considered to be age 18 at the end of • Itemized deductions for medical expenses,Parents Who Do Not File a 2006. You cannot make the election for casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-this child.)Joint Return cellaneous expenses.• Your child had income only from interest • Total itemized deductions.and dividends (including capital gain distri-For parents who do not file a joint return, the • Personal exemptions.butions and Alaska Permanent Fund divi-following discussions explain which parent’s tax
• Credit for child and dependent care ex-dends).return must be used to figure the tax.
penses.• Your child is required to file a return forOnly the parent whose tax return is used can
• Child tax credit.2006, unless you make this election.make the election described under Parent’s
• Education tax credits.Election To Report Child’s Interest and Divi- • The child does not file a joint return for
dends. 2006. • Earned income credit.
Page 198 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 201 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalty for underpayment of estimated tax.
If you make this election for 2006 and did not
have enough tax withheld or pay enough esti-
mated tax to cover the tax you owe, you may be
subject to a penalty. If you plan to make this
election for 2007, you may need to increase your
federal income tax withholding or your estimated
tax payments to avoid the penalty. See chapter
4 for more information.
Figuring Child’s Income
Use Form 8814, Part I, to figure your child’s
interest and dividend income to report on your
return. Only the amount over $1,700 is added to
your income. The amount over $1,700 is shown
on Form 8814, line 6. Unless the child’s income
includes qualified dividends or capital gain distri-
butions (discussed next), the same amount is
shown on Form 8814, line 12. Include the
amount from Form 8814, line 12, on Form 1040
or Form 1040NR, line 21. Enter “Form 8814” in
the space next to line 21. If you file more than
one Form 8814, include the total amounts from
line 12 of all your Forms 8814 on Form 1040 or
Form 1040NR, line 21.
Capital gain distributions and qualified divi-
dends. If your child’s dividend income in-
cluded any capital gain distributions, see Capital
gain distributions under Figuring Child’s Income
in Part 2 of Publication 929. If your child’s divi-
dend income included any qualified dividends,
see Qualified dividends under Figuring Child’s
Income in Part 2 of Publication 929.
Figuring Additional Tax
Use Form 8814, Part II, to figure the tax on the
$1,700 of your child’s interest and dividends that
you do not include in your income. This tax is
added to the tax figured on your income.
This additional tax is the smaller of:
1. 10% × (your child’s gross income − $850),
or
2. $85.
Include the amount from line 15 of all your
Forms 8814 in the total on Form 1040, line 44, or
Form 1040NR, line 41. Check box a on Form
1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41.
Illustrated Example
David and Linda Parks are married and will file
separate tax returns for 2006. Their only child,
Philip, is 8. Philip received a Form 1099-INT
showing $1,650 taxable interest income and a
Form 1099-DIV showing $1,150 ordinary divi-
dends. All the dividends were qualified divi-
dends. His parents decide to include that
income on one of their returns so they will not
have to file a return for Philip.
First, David and Linda each figure their tax-
able income (Form 1040, line 43) without regard
to Philip’s income. David’s taxable income is
Figure 31-A. Can You Include Your Child’ s Income On Your Ta x
Return?
Start Here
/H17074
Was your child under age 18
at the end of 2006?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is your child re quired to file a tax return
for 2006 if you do not ma ke this
election?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s only income intere st and
dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Ala ska Permanent Fund
dividends)?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s income less than
$8,500?
/H17074
Yes
Did the child ma ke any estimated tax
payments for 2006?
/H17074
No
Did the child have an overpayment of tax
on his or her 2005 return applied to the
2006 estimated tax?
/H17074
No
Was any federal income tax withheld from
the child’s income (backup withholding)?
/H17074
No
Are you the parent who se return must
be used?*
/H17074
Yes
You can include your child ’s income on
your tax return by completing Form 8814
and attaching it to your return. If you do,
your child is not required to file a return.
You cannot include
your child’s income
on your return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
*See Which Parent’s Return To U se
Is your child filing a joint return for 2006?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17075
$56,700 and Linda’s is $74,300. Because her
taxable income is greater, Linda can elect to $1,650, on line 1a. Philip had no tax-exempt Linda adds lines 1a and 2a and enters the
include Philip’s income on her return. See Which interest income, so she leaves line 1b blank. result, $2,800, on line 4. Because Philip had
Parent’s Return To Use, earlier. She enters Philip’s ordinary dividends, $1,150, qualified dividends, Linda must complete lines 7
On Form 8814 (see illustrated form), Linda on line 2a. All of Philip’s ordinary dividends were through 11 of Form 8814. She inclu des the
enters her name and social security number, qualified dividends, so Linda also enters $1,150 amount from line 9 of Form 8814 ($45 2) on lines
then Philip’s name and social security number. on line 2b. Philip did not have any capital gain 9a and 9b of her Form 1040. On th e dotted lines
She enters Philip’s taxable interest income, distributions, so she leaves line 3 blank.
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children Page 199

Page 202 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the completed form to the child’s Form 1040,
Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
The following discussions explain the paren-
tal information needed for Form 8615 and the
steps to follow in figuring the child’s tax. Form
8615 is illustrated later.
Providing Parental
Information
(Form 8615, lines A–C)
On Form 8615, lines A and B, enter the parent’s
name and social security number. (If the parents
filed a joint return, enter the name and social
security number listed first on the joint return.)
On line C, check the box for the parent’s filing
status.
See Which Parent’s Return To Use  at the
beginning of this chapter for information on
which parent’s return information must be used
on Form 8615.
Parent with different tax year. If the parent
and the child do not have the same tax year,
complete Form 8615 using the information on
the parent’s return for the tax year that ends in
the child’s tax year.
Parent’s return information not known
timely. If the information needed from the par-
ent’s return is not known by the time the child’s
return is due (usually April 15), you can file the
return using estimates.
You can use any reasonable estimate. This
includes using information from last year’s re-
turn. If you use an estimated amount on Form
8615, enter “Estimated” on the line next to the
Figure 31-B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your
Child’s Tax?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the child under age 18 at the end of 2006?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is the child required to file a tax return for 2006?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s investment income more than $1,700?
/H17074
Yes
Use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach it to the
child’s return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Note: If the child’s parent* chooses to report the child’s income
by filing Form 8814, the child is not required to file a tax return.
Do not use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child ’s
Interest and Dividends.)
Do not use
Form 8615 to
figure the
child’s tax.
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Is the child filing a joint return for 2006?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17075
amount.
When you get the correct information, file annext to lines 9a and 9b, she enters “Form amended return on Form 1040X, Amended U.S.8814–$452.” Individual Income Tax Return.Tax for Children UnderLinda includes $648 in the total on line 21 of Instead of using estimates, you can get anher Form 1040 (not illustrated) and in the space automatic 6-month extension of time to file if, byAge 18 Who Havenext to that line writes “Form 8814–$648.” Ad- the date your return is due, you file Form 4868,ding that amount, plus the $452 of qualified Application for Automatic Extension of Time toInvestment Income ofdividends, to her income increases each of the File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. Exten-amounts on lines 22, 37, 38, 41, and 43 of her sions are discussed in chapter 1.More Than $1,700Form 1040 by $1,100. Linda is not claiming any
deductions that are affected by the increase to
Part of a child’s 2006 investment income may be Step 1. Figuring theher income. Therefore, her revised taxable in-
subject to tax at the parent’s tax rate if all of thecome on line 43 is $75,400 ($74,300 + $452 + Child’s Net Investment$648). following statements are true.
IncomeOn Form 8814, Linda subtracts the $850 • The child was under age 18 at the end ofshown on line 13 from the $2,800 on line 4 and (Form 8615, Part I)2006. (A child born on January 1, 1989, isenters the result, $1,950, on line 14. Because
considered to be age 18 at the end ofthat amount is not less than $850, she enters The first step in figuring a child’s tax using Form2006. This child’s investment income is$85 on line 15. This is the tax on the first $1,700 8615 is to figure the child’s net investment in-not taxed at the parent’s rate.)of Philip’s income, which Linda did not have to come. To do that, use Form 8615, Part I.
add to her income. She must add this additional • The child’s investment income was more
tax to the tax figured on her revised taxable Line 1 (investment income). If the child hadthan $1,700.income. no earned income, enter on this line the adjusted
• The child does not file a joint return forThe tax on her $75,400 revised taxable in- gross income shown on the child’s return. Ad-
2006.come, figured using the Qualified Dividends and justed gross income is shown on Form 1040,
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 line 38; Form 1040A, line 22; or Form 1040NR,• The child is required to file a return forinstructions, is $15,749. She adds $85, and en- line 36. Form 1040EZ and Form 1040NR-EZ2006.ters the $15,834 total on Form 1040, line 44, and cannot be used if Form 8615 must be filed.
checks box a. These conditions are also shown in Figure If the child had earned income, figure the
Linda attaches Form 8814 to her Form 1040. 31-B . amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1, by using
the worksheet in the instructions for the form.If neither parent was alive on December 31, However, if the child has excluded any for-2006, do not use Form 8615. Instead, figure the eign earned income or deducted either a losschild’s tax in the normal manner. from self-employment or a net operating loss
If the parent does not or cannot choose to from another year, use the Alternate Worksheet
include the child’s income on the parent’s return, for Form 8615, Line 1, in Publication 929 to
use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach figure the amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1.
Page 200 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 203 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Proof as of
December 6, 2006(subject to change)
Linda P arks
Philip P arks
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
000 00 0000
1,650
2,800
452
648
85
1,150
/H12011
OMB No. 1545-0074Parents’ Election To Report
Child’s Interest and Dividends
Form 8814
/H17075See instructions.Department of the Trea sury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 40/H17075Attach to parents’ Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on your return
Child’s social security numberChild’s name (first, initial, and la st)
If more than one Form 8814 i s attached, check here /H17075
Child’s Interest and Dividends To Report on Your Return
Enter your child ’s taxable interest. If thi s amount i s different from the amount s shown on the
child’s Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID, see the in structions
1a
1a
b Enter your child ’s tax-exempt interest. Do not include thi s
amount on line 1a 1b
2a Enter your child’s ordinary dividends, including any Alaska Permanent Fund dividend s. If your
child received any ordinary dividend s as a nominee, see the instructions
Enter your child’s capital gain distributions. If your child received any capital gain di stributions
as a nominee, see the in structions
Add lines 1a, 2a, and 3. If the total i s $1,700 or less, skip lines 5 through 12 and go to line 13.
If the total i s $8,500 or more, do not file this form. Your child must file his or her own return
to report the income
3
1,700 00
4
Base amount
4
5
Subtract line 5 from line 4 6
Tax on the Fir st $1,700 of Child’ s Interest and Dividends
850 00Amount not taxed
15
1313
Subtract line 13 from line 4. If the re sult is zero or le ss, enter -0-
No. Enter $85 here and see the Note below.
Tax. Is the amount on line 14 le ss than $850?
14 14
Yes. Multiply line 14 by 10% (.10). Enter the result here and see the Note below.
Note. If you checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Otherwise, include the amount from line 15 in the tax you enter
on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41. Be sure to check box a on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3. Form 8814 (2006)Cat. No. 10750J
/H20854
A B
C
3
6
2a
5
Part I
Part II
15
Caution. The federal income tax on your child ’s income, including qualified dividends and capital gain di stributions, may be le ss
if you file a separate tax return for the child in stead of ma king this election. Thi s is because you cannot ta ke certain tax benefit s
that your child could ta ke on his or her own return. For detail s, see Tax benefits you cannot ta ke on page 2.
2006
b Enter your child’s qualified dividends included on line 2a. See the
instructions 2b
If both lines 2b and 3 are zero or blan k, skip lines 7 through 10, enter -0- on line 11, and
go to line 12. Otherwi se, go to line 7.
Divide line 2b by line 4. Enter the re sult as a decimal (rounded
to at lea st three place s) 7
7
Divide line 3 by line 4. Enter the re sult as a decimal (rounded to
at least three place s) 8
8
Multiply line 6 by line 7. Enter the result here. See the instructions
for where to report thi s amount on your return 9
9
Multiply line 6 by line 8. Enter the result here. See the instructions
for where to report thi s amount on your return 10
10
Add lines 9 and 10 1111
Subtract line 11 from line 6. Include thi s amount in the total on Form 1040, line 21, or Form
1040NR, line 21. In the space next to line 21, enter “Form 8814” and show the amount. If you
checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Go to line 13 below 12
12
.
.
1,150
1,100
1950
452
411
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children Page 201

Page 204 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Investment income defined. Investment investment income if they are for expenses paid figured with the child’s net investment income
income is generally all income other than sala- to produce or collect taxable income or to man- (plus the net investment income o f any other
ries, wages, and other amounts received as pay age, conserve, or maintain property held for child whose Form 8615 includes the ta x return
for work actually done. It includes taxable inter- producing income. These expenses include information of that parent) and the tax figured
est, dividends, capital gains (including capital custodian fees and service charges, service without it.
gain distributions), the taxable part of social se- fees to collect taxable interest and dividends, When figuring the tentative tax at the par-
curity and pension payments, and certain distri- and certain investment counsel fees. ent’s tax rate, do not refigure any of the exclu-
butions from trusts. Investment income includes These expenses are added to certain other sions, deductions, or credits on the parent’s
amounts produced by assets the child obtained miscellaneous itemized deductions on Schedule return because of the child’s net investment in-
with earned income (such as interest on a sav- A (Form 1040). Only the amount greater than come. For example, do not refigure the medical
ings account into which the child deposited 2% of the child’s adjusted gross income can be expense deduction.
wages). deducted. See chapter 28 for more information.  Figure the tentative tax on Form 8615, lines
6 through 13.Nontaxable income. For this purpose, in- Example 1. Roger, age 12, has investmentvestment income includes only amounts that the income of $8,000, no other income, no adjust- Note. If the child has any capital gains orchild must include in total income. Nontaxable ments to income, and itemized deductions of losses, get Publication 929 for help in complet-investment income, such as tax-exempt interest $300 (net of the 2% limit) that are directly con- ing Form 8615, Part II.and the nontaxable part of social security and nected with his investment income. His adjustedpension payments, is not included. gross income is $8,000, which is entered on Line 7 (net investment income of other chil-
Income from property received as a gift. Form 1040, line 38, and on Form 8615, line 1. dren). If the tax return information of the par-
A child’s investment income includes all income Line 2 is $1,700 because that is more than the ent is also used on any other child’s Form 8615,
produced by property belonging to the child. sum of $850 and his directly-connected itemized enter on line 7 the total of the amounts from line
This is true even if the property was transferred deductions of $300. 5 of all the other children’s Forms 8615. Do not
to the child, regardless of when the property was include the amount from line 5 of the Form 8615
Example 2. Eleanor, age 8, has investmenttransferred or purchased or who transferred it. being completed.
income of $16,000 and an early withdrawal pen-A child’s investment income includes income
alty of $100. She has no other income. She hasproduced by property given as a gift to the child. Example. Paul and Jane Persimmon have
itemized deductions of $1,050 (net of the 2%This includes gifts to the child from grandparents three children, Sharon, Jerry, and Mike, who
limit) that are directly connected with the produc-or any other person and gifts made under the must attach Form 8615 to their tax returns. The
tion of her investment income. Her adjustedUniform Gift to Minors Act. children’s net investment income amounts on
gross income, entered on line 1, is $15,900 line 5 of their Forms 8615 are:
Example. Amanda Black, age 13, received ($16,000 − $100). The amount on line 2 is
• Sharon — $800the following income. $1,900. This is the larger of:
• Jerry — $600• Dividends — $600 1. $850 plus the $1,050 of directly connected
• Mike — $1,000itemized deductions, or• Wages — $2,100
2. $1,700.• Taxable interest — $1,200 Line 7 of Sharon’s Form 8615 will show
$1,600, the total of the amounts on line 5 of• Tax-exempt interest — $100 Line 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 and enter the Jerry’s and Mike’s Forms 8615.
result on this line. If zero or less, do not complete• Net capital gains — $100 Line 7 of Jerry’s Form 8615 will show $1,800the rest of the form. However, you must still ($800 + $1,000).The dividends were qualified dividends on stock attach Form 8615 to the child’s tax return. Figure Line 7 of Mike’s Form 8615 will show $1,400given to her by her grandparents. the tax on the child’s taxable income in the ($800 + $600).normal manner.Amanda’s investment income is $1,900. This
Other children’s information not available.is the total of the dividends ($600), taxable inter- Line 4 (child’s taxable income). Enter on line If the net investment income of the other childrenest ($1,200), and net capital gains ($100). Her 4 the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, is not available when the return is due, either filewages are earned (not investment) income be- line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR, the return using estimates or get an extension ofcause they are received for work actually done. line 40. time to file. See Parent’s return information notHer tax-exempt interest is not included because However, if the child files Form 2555 or known timely, earlier.it is nontaxable. 2555-EZ to claim the foreign earned income
exclusion or housing exclusion, see the FormTrust income. If a child is the beneficiary of Line 11 (tentative tax). Subtract line 10 from
8615 instructions.a trust, distributions of taxable interest, divi- line 9 and enter the result on this line. This is the
dends, capital gains, and other investment in- tentative tax.Line 5 (net investment income). A child’s netcome from the trust are investment income to If line 7 is blank, skip lines 12a and 12b andinvestment income cannot be more than his orthe child. enter the amount from line 11 on line 13. Alsoher taxable income. Enter on Form 8615, line 5,However, for purposes of completing Form skip the discussion for lines 12a and 12b thatthe smaller of line 3 or line 4. This is the child’s8615, a taxable distribution from a qualified disa- follows.net investment income.bility trust is considered earned income, not in- If zero or less, do not complete the rest of thevestment income. Lines 12a and 12b (dividing the tentativeform. However, you must still attach Form 8615
tax). If an amount is entered on line 7, divideto the child’s tax return. Figure the tax on theLine 2 (deductions). If the child does not the tentative tax shown on line 11 among thechild’s taxable income in the normal manner.itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 children according to each child’s share of the
or Form 1040NR), enter $1,700 on line 2. total net investment income. This is done on
Step 2. FiguringIf the child does itemize deductions, enter on lines 12a, 12b, and 13. Add the amount on line 7
line 2 the larger of: to the amount on line 5 and enter the total on lineTentative Tax at
12a. Divide the amount on line 5 by the amount1. $850 plus the child’s itemized deductions the Parent’s Tax Rate on line 12a and enter the result as a decimal onthat are directly connected with the pro- line 12b.(Form 8615, Part II)duction of investment income entered on
line 1, or The next step in completing Form 8615 is to Example. In the earlier example under Line
figure a tentative tax on the child’s net invest- 7 (net investment income of other children),2. $1,700.
ment income at the parent’s tax rate. The tenta- Sharon’s Form 8615 shows $1,600 on line 7.
Directly connected. Itemized deductions tive tax at the parent’s tax rate is the difference The amount entered on line 12a is $2,400, the
are directly connected with the production of between the tax on the parent’s taxable income total of the amounts on lines 5 and 7 ($800 +
Page 202 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 205 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$1,600). The decimal on line 12b is .333, figured He enters Sara’s investment income,Illustrated Exampleas follows and rounded to three places. $2,800, on line 1. Sara does not itemize deduc-
tions, so John enters $1,700 on line 2. He entersThe following example includes a completed$800 $1,100 ($2,800 − $1,700) on line 3.= .333 Form 8615. Form 1040A is not shown. Sara’s taxable income, as shown on her$2,400 John and Laura Brown have one child, Sara. Form 1040A, line 27, is $2,500. This is her totalShe is 13 and has $2,800 taxable interest in- income ($4,300) minus her standard deductioncome and $1,500 earned income. She does notStep 3. Figuring ($1,800). Her standard deduction is limited toitemize deductions. John and Laura file a joint the amount of her earned income plus $300.return with John’s name and social securitythe Child’s Tax John enters $2,500 on line 4.number listed first. They claim three exemp-(Form 8615, Part III) John compares lines 3 and 4 and enters thetions, including an exemption for Sara, on their smaller amount, $1,100, on line 5.return.The final step in figuring a child’s tax using Form John enters $48,000 on line 6. This is theBecause Sara is under age 18 and has more8615 is to determine the larger of: taxable income from line 43 of John and Laura’sthan $1,700 investment income, part of her in- joint Form 1040 return. Sara is an only child, socome may be subject to tax at her parents’ rate.1. The total of: line 7 is blank. He adds line 5 ($1,100), line 6A completed Form 8615 must be attached to her ($48,000), and line 7 (blank), and entersa. The child’s share of the tentative tax return. $49,100 on line 8.based on the parent’s tax rate, plus Sara’s father, John, fills out Sara’s return for Using the column for married filing jointly inher. He completes her Form 1040A through lineb. The tax on the child’s taxable income in the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $49,100. He27, then begins completing her Form 8615.excess of net investment income, fig- enters the tax, $6,614, on line 9. He entersJohn enters his name and social securityured at the child’s tax rate, or $6,449 on line 10. This is the tax from line 44 ofnumber on Sara’s Form 8615 because his name John and Laura’s Form 1040. He enters $165 onand number are listed first on the joint return he2. The tax on the child’s taxable income, fig- line 11 ($6,614 − $6,449).and Laura are filing. He checks the box forured at the child’s tax rate. Because line 7 is blank, John skips lines 12amarried filing jointly. and 12b and enters $165 on line 13.This is the child’s tax. It is figured on Form
John subtracts line 5 ($1,100) from line 48615, lines 14 through 18.
($2,500) and enters the result, $1,400, on line
Alternative minimum tax. A child may be 14. Using the column for single filing status in
subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if he or the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $1,400 and
she has certain items given preferential treat- enters this tax, $141, on line 15. He adds lines
ment under the tax law. See Alternative Mini- 13 ($165) and 15 ($141) and enters $306 on line
mum Tax in chapter 30. 16.
For more information on who is liable for Using the column for single filing status in the
AMT and how to figure it, get Form 6251, Alter- Tax Table, John finds the tax on $2,500 (line 4)
native Minimum Tax—Individuals. For informa- and enters this tax, $251, on line 17.
tion on special limits that apply to a child who John compares lines 16 and 17 and enters
files Form 6251, see Alternative Minimum Tax in the larger amount, $306, on line 18 of Sara’s
Publication 929. Form 8615. He also enters that amount on line
28 of Sara’s Form 1040A.
John also completes Schedule 1 (Form
1040A) for Sara.
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children Page 203

Page 206 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Proof as of
December 6, 2006(subject to change)
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero or le ss, stop; do not complete the re st of thi s form but do
attach it to the child ’s return
Sara L. Brown
John J. Brown
1 1 7 00 1 1 1 1
007 00 0001
2,800
1,700
1,100
2,500
1,100
48,000
49,100
6,614
6,449
165
1,400
141
306
251
306
165
OMB No. 1545-0074Tax for Children Under Age 18
With Investment Income of More Than $1,700
Form 8615
Department of the Trea sury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 33
/H17075Attach only to the child’ s Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Child’s social security numberChild’s name shown on return
Parent’s social security numberParent’s name (fir st, initial, and la st). Caution: See instructions before completing.
Parent’s filing status (check one):
Child’s Net Investment Income
Enter the child’s investment income (see instructions)1 1
If the child did not itemize deduction s on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR), enter
$1,700. Otherwise, see instructions
2
2
3
3
4
Enter the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR,
line 40
4
Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4. If zero, stop; do not complete the re st of this form but do
attach it to the child ’s return
5
5
Tentative Tax Based on the Tax Rate of the Parent
Enter the parent’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; Form 1040EZ,
line 6; Form 1040NR, line 40; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14. If zero or le ss, enter -0-
6
6
Enter the total, if any, from Form s 8615, line 5, of all other children of the parent named
above. Do not include the amount from line 5 above
7
7
8Add lines 5, 6, and 7 ( see instructions)8
9
Enter the tax on the amount on line 8 based on the parent’s filing status above (see instructions).
If the Qualified Dividend s and Capital Gain Tax Wor ksheet, Schedule D Tax Wor ksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here /H17075
9
10 Enter the parent ’s tax from Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A, line 28, minu s any alternative
minimum tax; Form 1040EZ, line 11; Form 1040NR, line 41; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 15. Do not
include any tax from Form 4972 or 8814. If the Qualified Dividend s and Capital Gain Tax
Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Wor ksheet, or Schedule J (Form 1040) wa s used to figure the tax,
check here /H17075 10
Subtract line 10 from line 9 and enter the re sult. If line 7 is blank, also enter this amount on line
13 and go to Part III
11
11
12aAdd lines 5 and 712a
12b .Divide line 5 by line 12a. Enter the re sult as a decimal (rounded to at lea st three places)b
Multiply line 11 by line 12b13 13
Child’s Tax—If lines 4 and 5 above are the same, enter -0- on line 15 and go to line 16.
1414 Subtract line 5 from line 4
15
15 Enter the tax on the amount on line 14 ba sed on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If
the Qualified Dividend s and Capital Gain Tax Wor ksheet, Schedule D Tax Wor ksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) i s used to figure the tax, chec k here /H17075
1616 Add lines 13 and 15
17
17 Enter the tax on the amount on line 4 ba sed on the child’s filing status ( see in structions). If
the Qualified Dividend s and Capital Gain Tax Wor ksheet, Schedule D Tax Wor ksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) i s used to figure the tax, chec k here /H17075
18 Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 here and on the child’s Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A,
line 28; or Form 1040NR, line 41 18
Form 8615 (2006)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see the instructions.
A B
C
Single
Cat. No. 64113U
/H11003
Part III
Part I
Part II
(99) /H17075See separate instructions.
Before you begin: If the child, the parent, or any of the parent ’s other children under age 18 mu st u se the Schedule D Tax
Worksheet or ha s income from farming or fi shing, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children and Dependent s. It
explains how to figure the child’s tax using the Schedule D Tax Worksheet or Schedule J (Form 1040).
Married filing jointly Married filing separately Head of hou sehold Qualifying widow(er)
2006
Page 204 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 207 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. You must identify the care provider on yourUseful Items
tax return. (See Provider IdentificationYou may want to see: Test, later.)
32. Publication 7. If you exclude or deduct dependent care
benefits provided by a dependent care❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, benefits plan, the total amount you excludeand Filing Information or deduct must be less than the dollar limit
Child and for qualifying expenses (generally, $3,000❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care
if one qualifying person was cared for orExpenses
$6,000 if two or more qualifying personsDependent Care ❏ 926 Household Employer’s Tax Guide were cared for). (If two or more qualifying
persons were cared for, the amount youForm (and Instructions) exclude or deduct will always be less thanCredit
the dollar limit, since the amount you can❏ 2441 Child and Dependent Care
exclude or deduct is limited to $5,000. SeeExpenses
Reduced Dollar Limit under How To Figure❏ Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) Child and the Credit, later.)Reminders Dependent Care Expenses for
These tests are presented in Figure 32-A andForm 1040A FilersTaxpayer identification number needed for are also explained in detail in this chapter.
❏ Schedule H (Form 1040) Householdeach qualifying person. You must include on
Employment Taxesline 2 of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) Qualifying Person Test
the name and taxpayer identification number ❏ W-7 Application for IRS Individual
(generally the social security number) of each Your child and dependent care expenses mustTaxpayer Identification Number
be for the care of one or more qualifying per-qualifying person. See Taxpayer identification ❏ W-10 Dependent Care Provider’s sons.number under Qualifying Person Test, later. Identification and Certification A qualifying person is:
You may have to pay employment taxes. If
1. Your qualifying child who is your depen-you pay someone to come to your home and
dent and who was under age 13 when thecare for your dependent or spouse, you may be care was provided (but see Note below),a household employer who has to pay employ- Tests To Claim 2. Your spouse who was physically or men-ment taxes. Usually, you are not a household
tally not able to care for himself or herselfemployer if the person who cares for your de- the Credit and lived with you for more than half thependent or spouse does so at his or her home or
year, orplace of business. See Employment Taxes for To be able to claim the credit for child and
Household Employers, later. 3. A person who was physically or mentallydependent care expenses, you must file Form
not able to care for himself or herself, lived1040 or Form 1040A, not Form 1040EZ, and with you for more than half the year, andmeet all the following tests. either:
1. The care must be for one or more qualify-Introduction a. Was your dependent, oring persons who are identified on the form
This chapter discusses the credit for child and b. Would have been your dependent ex-you use to claim the credit. (See Qualifying
dependent care expenses and covers the fol- cept that (i) he or she received grossPerson Test.)
income of $3,300 or more, (ii) he or shelowing topics. 2. You (and your spouse if you are married) filed a joint return, or (iii) you, or your• Tests you must meet to claim the credit. must have earned income during the year. spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed
(However, see Rule for student-spouse or as a dependent on someone else’s• How to figure the credit.
spouse not able to care for self under 2006 return.• How to claim the credit. Earned Income Test, later.)
• Employment taxes you may have to pay 3. You must pay child and dependent care Note. If you are divorced or separated, seeas a household employer. expenses so you (and your spouse if you Child of divorced or separated parents, later, toare married) can work or look for work. determine which parent may treat the child as aYou may be able to claim the credit if you pay (See Work-Related Expense Test, later.) qualifying person.someone to care for your dependent who is
4. You must make payments for child andunder age 13 or for your spouse or dependent Dependent defined. A dependent is a per-dependent care to someone neither youwho is not able to care for himself or herself. The son, other than you or your spouse, for whomnor your spouse can claim as a depen-credit can be up to 35% of your expenses. To you can claim an exemption. To be your depen-dent. If you make payments to your child,qualify, you must pay these expenses so you dent, a person must be your qualifying child (orhe or she cannot be your dependent andcan work or look for work. your qualifying relative).must be age 19 or older by the end of theThis credit should not be confused with Qualifying child. To be your qualifyingyear. You cannot make payments to yourthe child tax credit discussed in chapter child, a child must live with you for more thanspouse or to the parent of your qualifying34.CAUTION
!
half the year and meet other requirements.child who is your qualifying person and is
under age 13. (See Payments to Relatives More information. For more information
or Dependents under Work-Related Ex- about who is a dependent or a qualifying child,Dependent care benefits. If you received any
see chapter 3.pense Test, later.)dependent care benefits from your employer
during the year, you may be able to exclude from 5. Your filing status must be single, head of Physically or mentally not able to care foryour income all or part of them. You must com- household, qualifying widow(er) with de- oneself. Persons who cannot dress, clean, or
plete Part III of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form pendent child, or married filing jointly. You feed themselves because of physical or mental
1040A) before you can figure the amount of your must file a joint return if you are married, problems are considered not able to care for
credit. See Dependent Care Benefits under How unless an exception applies to you. (See themselves. Also, persons who must have con-
To Figure the Credit, later. Joint Return Test, later.) stant attention to prevent them from injuring
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 205

Page 208 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 32-A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
No
No
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your spouse or to the parent of your
qualifying child who is your qualifying person and is under age 13?
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Did you1 have earned income during the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you pay the expenses to allow you 1 to work or look for work?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could
claim as a dependent?
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of
19 at the end of the year?
No
Yes
/H17075
Are you single? Are you filing a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider’s name, address,
and identifying number?
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this
information? (See Due diligence.)
Did you have only one qualifying child and
exclude or deduct at least $3,000 of dependent
care benefits?
You CAN claim the child and dependent
care credit. Fill out Form 2441 or
Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).
You CANNOT claim the child
and dependent care credit. 2
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
If you had expenses that met the requirements for 2005, except that you did not pay them until 2006, you may be able to claim t hose expenses in 2006.
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.
/H17075
Yes
1
2
Page 206 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 209 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
themselves or others are considered not able to Members of certain religious faiths op- are considered work-related only if both of the
care for themselves. posed to social security. Certain income following are true.
earned by persons who are members of certain • They allow you (and your spouse if youPerson qualifying for part of year. You de- religious faiths that are opposed to participation are married) to work or look for work.termine a person’s qualifying status each day. in Social Security Act programs and have an
For example, if the person for whom you pay • They are for a qualifying person’s care.IRS-approved form that exempts certain income
child and dependent care expenses no longer from social security and Medicare taxes may not
qualifies on September 16, count only those be considered earned income for this purpose. Working or Looking for Workexpenses through September 15. Also see Dol- See Earned Income Test in Publication 503.
lar Limit under How To Figure the Credit, later.
To be work-related, your expenses must allowNot earned income. Earned income does notTaxpayer identification number. You must you to work or look for work. If you are married,include pensions or annuities, social securityinclude on your return the name and taxpayer generally both you and your spouse must workpayments, workers’ compensation, interest, div-identification number (generally the social se- or look for work. Your spouse is treated as work-idends, or unemployment compensation. It alsocurity number) of the qualifying person(s). If the ing during any month he or she is a full-timedoes not include scholarship or fellowshipcorrect information is not shown, the credit may student or is physically or mentally not able togrants, except amounts paid to you (and re-be reduced or disallowed. care for himself or herself.ported on Form W-2) for teaching, research, or Your work can be for others or in your ownIndividual taxpayer identification number other services. business or partnership. It can be either full time(ITIN) for aliens. If your qualifying person is a or part time.Rule for student-spouse or spouse not ablenonresident or resident alien who does not have Work also includes actively looking for work.to care for self. Your spouse is treated asand cannot get a social security number (SSN), However, if you do not find a job and have nohaving earned income for any month that he oruse that person’s ITIN. To apply for an ITIN, see earned income for the year, you cannot take thisshe is:Form W-7. The ITIN is entered wherever an credit. See Earned Income Test, earlier.SSN is requested on a tax return. Whether your expenses allow you to work or1. A full-time student, orAn ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle look for work depends on the facts. For example,the holder to social security benefits or change 2. Physically or mentally not able to care for the cost of a babysitter while you and yourthe holder’s employment or immigration status himself or herself. (Your spouse also must spouse go out to eat is not normally aunder U.S. law. live with you for more than half the year.) work-related expense.
Adoption taxpayer identification number An expense is not considered work-relatedFigure the earned income of the nonworking
(ATIN). If your qualifying person is a child who merely because you had it while you were work-spouse described under (1) or (2) above as
was placed in your home for adoption and for ing. The purpose of the expense must be toexplained under Earned Income Limit, later.
whom you do not have an SSN, you must get an enable you to work.This rule applies to only one spouse for anyATIN for the child. File Form W-7A, Application one month. If, in the same month, both you and Volunteer work.  For this purpose, you arefor Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending your spouse do not work and are either full-time not considered to be working if you do unpaidU.S. Adoptions. students or physically or mentally not able to volunteer work or volunteer work for a nominalcare for yourselves, only one of you can beChild of divorced or separated parents. salary.treated as having earned income in that month.Even if you cannot claim your child as a depen-
Work for part of year. If you work or activelydent, he or she is treated as your qualifying Full-time student. You are a full-time stu- look for work during only part of the period cov-person if: dent if you are enrolled at and attend a school for ered by the expenses, then you must figure yourthe number of hours or classes that the school• The child was under age 13 or was physi- expenses for each day. For example, if you workconsiders full time. You must have been a stu-cally or mentally not able to care for him- all year and pay care expenses of $250 a monthdent for some part of each of 5 calendar monthsself or herself, and ($3,000 for the year), all the expenses areduring the year. (The months need not be con- work-related. However, if you work or look for• You were the child’s custodial parent (the secutive.) work for only 2 months and 15 days during theparent with whom the child lived for the If you enrolled in school before August 25, year and pay expenses of $250 a month, yourgreater part of 2005). 2005, you are treated as a full-time student for work-related expenses are limited to $625 (2 1/2
any month of the enrollment period you were months × $250).The noncustodial parent cannot treat the child unable to attend classes because of Hurricaneas a qualifying person even if that parent is Katrina. Payments while you are out sick. Do notentitled to claim the child as a dependent under count as work-related expenses amounts youIf you enrolled in school before Septemberthe special rule for a child of divorced or sepa- pay for child and dependent care while you are23, 2005, you are treated as a full-time studentrated parents. off work because of illness. These amounts arefor any month of the enrollment period you were
not paid to allow you to work. This applies even ifunable to attend classes because of Hurricane
Earned Income Test you get sick pay and are still considered anRita.
employee.If you enrolled in school before October 23,To claim the credit, you (and your spouse if you 2005, you are treated as a full-time student forare married) must have earned income during any month of the enrollment period you werethe year. Care of a Qualifying Personunable to attend classes because of Hurricane
Wilma.Earned income. Earned income includes To be work-related, your expenses must be to
wages, salaries, tips, other taxable employee School. The term “school” includes elemen- provide care for a qualifying person. You do not
compensation, and net earnings from tary schools, junior and senior high schools, have to choose the least expensive way of pro-
self-employment. A net loss from colleges, universities, and technical, trade, and viding the care.
self-employment reduces earned income. mechanical schools. A school does not include Expenses are for the care of a qualifying
Earned income also includes strike benefits and an on-the-job training course, correspondence person only if their main purpose is the person’s
any disability pay you report as wages. school, or school offering courses only through well-being and protection.
Earned income also includes nontaxable the Internet. Expenses for household services qualify if
employee compensation such as parsonage al- part of the services is for the care of qualifying
lowances, meals and lodging furnished for the persons. See Household services, later.Work-Relatedconvenience of the employer, voluntary salary
deferrals, military basic quarters and subsis- Expenses not for care. Expenses for care doExpense Test
tence allowances and in-kind quarters and sub- not include amounts you pay for food, clothing,
sistence, and military pay earned in a combat Child and dependent care expenses must be education, and entertainment. However, yo u
zone. work-related to qualify for the credit. Expenses can include small amounts paid for these items if
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 207

Page 210 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
they are incident to and cannot be separated Taxes paid on wages. The taxes you pay Providerfrom the cost of caring for the qualifying person. on wages for qualifying child and dependent
Identification Testcare services are work-related expenses. See
Education. Expenses for a child in nursery Employment Taxes for Household Employers,
school, pre-school, or similar programs for chil- You must identify all persons or organizationslater.
dren below the level of kindergarten are ex- that provide care for your child or dependent.
penses for care. Expenses to attend Use Part I of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form
kindergarten or a higher grade are not expenses 1040A) to show the information.Payments to Relatives or
for care. Do not use these expenses to figure Dependents Information needed. To identify the care pro-your credit. vider, you must give the provider’s:You can count work-related payments you make
Example 1. You take your 3-year-old child to relatives who are not your dependents, even if 1. Name,
to a nursery school that provides lunch and they live in your home. However, do not count 2. Address, andeducational activities as a part of its preschool any amounts you pay to:
childcare service. You can count the total cost 3. Taxpayer identification number.1. A dependent for whom you (or yourwhen you figure the credit.
If the care provider is an individual, the tax-spouse if you are married) can claim an
payer identification number is his or her socialexemption,Example 2. You place your 10-year-old
security number or individual taxpayer identifi-child in a boarding school so you can work full 2. Your child who was under age 19 at the cation number. If the care provider is an organi-time. Only the part of the boarding school ex- end of the year, even if he or she is not zation, then it is the employer identificationpense that is for the care of your child is a your dependent, number (EIN).work-related expense. You can count that part
You do not have to show the taxpayer identi-3. Your spouse, orof the expense in figuring your credit if it can be
fication number if the care provider is one ofseparated from the cost of education. You can- 4. The parent of your qualifying child who is certain tax-exempt organizations (such as anot count any part of the amount you pay the your qualifying person and is under church or school). In this case, enterschool for your child’s education. age 13. “Tax-Exempt” in the space where the tax form
Care outside your home. You can count the calls for the number.
cost of care provided outside your home if the If you cannot provide all of the information orJoint Return Testcare is for your dependent under age 13 or any if the information you provide is incorrect you
other qualifying person who regularly spends at must be able to show that you used due dili-Generally, married couples must file a joint re-least 8 hours each day in your home. gence (discussed later) in trying to furnish theturn to take the credit. However, if you are legally necessary information.Dependent care center. You can count separated or living apart from your spouse, you
care provided outside your home by a depen- may be able to file a separate return and still Getting the information. You can use Form
dent care center only if the center complies with take the credit. W-10 to request the required information from
all state and local regulations that apply to these the care provider. If you do not use Form W-10,Legally separated. You are not consideredcenters. you can get the information from:married if you are legally separated from yourA dependent care center is a place that pro- spouse under a decree of divorce or separate 1. A copy of the provider’s social securityvides care for more than six persons (other than maintenance. You are eligible to take the credit card,persons who live there) and receives a fee, on a separate return.payment, or grant for providing services for any 2. A copy of the provider’s driver’s license (in
of those persons, even if the center is not run for Married and living apart. You are not consid- a state where the license includes the so-
profit. ered married and are eligible to take the credit if cial security number),
all the following apply.Camp. The cost of sending your child to an 3. A copy of the provider’s completed Form
overnight camp is not considered a work-related W-4 if he or she is your household em-1. You file a separate return.expense. The cost of sending your child to a day ployee,2. Your home is the home of a qualifying per-camp may be a work-related expense, even if
4. A copy of the statement furnished by yourson for more than half the year.the camp specializes in a particular activity,
employer if the provider is your employer’ssuch as computers or soccer. 3. You pay more than half the cost of keeping dependent care plan, orup your home for the year.Transportation. The cost of getting a qualify- 5. A letter or invoice from the provider if iting person from your home to the care location 4. Your spouse does not live in your home for shows the information.and back, or from the care location to school and the last 6 months of the year.
back, is not considered a work-related expense. You should keep this information withThis includes the costs of bus, subway, taxi, or Costs of keeping up a home. The costs of your tax records. Do not send Formprivate car. Also, if you pay the transportation keeping up a home normally include property W-10 (or other document containingRECORDS
cost for the care provider to come to your home, taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges, this information) to the Internal Revenue Serv-you cannot count this cost as a work-related home repairs, insurance on the home, and food ice.expense. eaten at home.
The costs of keeping up a home do not Due diligence. If the care provider informationHousehold services. Expenses you pay for include payments for clothing, education, medi- you give is incorrect or incomplete, your credithousehold services meet the work-related ex- cal treatment, vacations, life insurance, trans- may not be allowed. However, if you can showpense test if they are at least partly for the portation, or mortgage principal. that you used due diligence in trying to supplywell-being and protection of a qualifying person. They also do not include the purchase, per- the information, you can still claim the credit.Household services are ordinary and usual manent improvement, or replacement of prop- You can show due diligence by getting andservices done in and around your home that are erty. For example, you cannot include the cost of keeping the provider’s completed Form W-10 ornecessary to run your home. They include the replacing a water heater. However, you can in- one of the other sources of information listedservices of a housekeeper, maid, or cook. How- clude the cost of repairing a water heater. earlier. Care providers can be penalized if theyever, they do not include the services of a chauf- do not provide this information to you or if theyfeur, bartender, or gardener. See Household Death of spouse. If your spouse died during provide incorrect information.Services in Publication 503 for more informa- the year and you do not remarry before the end
tion. of the year, you generally must file a joint return Provider refusal. If the provider refuses to
In this chapter, the term housekeeper refers to take the credit. If you do remarry before the give you their identifying informat ion, you should
to any household employee whose services in- end of the year, the credit can be claimed on report whatever information you have ( such as
clude the care of a qualifying person. your deceased spouse’s separate return. the name and address) on the form you use to
Page 208 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 211 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
claim the credit. Enter “See page 2” in the col- Amounts excluded from your income Effect of exclusion. If you exclude dependent
umns calling for the information you do not have. under your employer’s dependent care care benefits from your income, the amount of
On the bottom of page 2, explain that you re- benefits plan cannot be used to claim a the excluded benefits:CAUTION
!
quested the information from the care provider, medical expense deduction.
1. Is not included in your work-related ex-but the provider did not give you the information.
penses, andThis statement will show that you used due
diligence in trying to furnish the necessary infor- 2. Reduces the dollar limit, discussed later.Dependent Care Benefits
mation.
If you receive dependent care benefits, your
dollar limit for purposes of the credit may be Earned Income Limit
reduced. See Reduced Dollar Limit , later. But,
The amount of work-related expenses you useeven if you cannot take the credit, you may beHow To Figure
to figure your credit cannot be more than:able to take an exclusion or deduction for the
dependent care benefits.the Credit 1. Your earned income for the year if you are
Dependent care benefits. Dependent care single at the end of the year, orYour credit is a percentage of your work-related benefits include: 2. The smaller of your or your spouse’sexpenses. Your expenses are subject to the
earned income for the year if you are mar-earned income limit and the dollar limit. The 1. Amounts your employer paid directly to ei-
ried at the end of the year.percentage is based on your adjusted gross ther you or your care provider for the care
income. of your qualifying person while you work, Earned income is defined under Earned Income
and Test, earlier.
Figuring Total 2. The fair market value of care in a daycare For purposes of item (2), use your
facility provided or sponsored by your em- spouse’s earned income for the entireWork-Related Expenses
ployer. year, even if you were married for only
TIP
To figure the credit for 2006 work-related ex- part of the year.Your salary may have been reduced to pay for
penses, count only those you paid by December these benefits. If you received benefits as an
31, 2006. Separated spouse. If you are legally sepa-employee, they should be shown on your W-2
rated or married and living apart from yourform. See Statement for employee, later. Bene-Expenses prepaid in an earlier year. If you spouse (as described under Joint Return Test,fits you received as a partner should be shown inpay for services before they are provided, you earlier), you are not considered married for pur-box 13 of your Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) withcan count the prepaid expenses only in the year poses of the earned income limit. Use only yourcode N. Enter the amount of these benefits onthe care is received. Claim the expenses for the income in figuring the earned income limit.Form 2441, line 12.later year as if they were actually paid in that
later year. Surviving spouse. If your spouse died duringExclusion or deduction. If your employer
the year and you file a joint return as a survivingprovides dependent care benefits under a quali-Expenses not paid until the following year. spouse, you are not considered married for pur-fied plan, you may be able to exclude theseDo not count 2005 expenses that you paid in poses of the earned income limit. Use only yourbenefits from your income. Your employer can2006 as work-related expenses for 2006. You income in figuring the earned income limit.tell you whether your benefit plan qualifies. Tomay be able to claim an additional credit for
claim the exclusion, you must complete Part IIIthem on your 2006 return, but you must figure it Community property laws. You should dis-of either Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Formseparately. See Payments for previous year’s regard community property laws when you fig-1040A). You cannot use Form 1040EZ.expenses under Amount of Credit in Publication ure earned income for this credit.If you are self-employed and receive benefits503.
from a qualified dependent care benefit plan, Student-spouse or spouse not able to careIf you had expenses in 2006 that you you are treated as both employer and employee. for self. Your spouse who is either a full-timedid not pay until 2007, you cannot Therefore, you would not get an exclusion from student or not able to care for himself or herselfcount them when figuring your 2006
TIP
wages. Instead, you would get a deduction on is treated as having earned income. His or hercredit. You may be able to claim a credit for them Form 1040, Schedule C, line 14; Schedule E, earned income for each month is considered toon your 2007 return. line 18 or 28; or Schedule F, line 17. To claim the be at least $250 if there is one qualifying person
deduction, you must use Form 2441. in your home, or at least $500 if there are two orExpenses reimbursed. If a state social serv- The amount you can exclude or deduct is more.ices agency pays you a nontaxable amount to limited to the smallest of:reimburse you for some of your child and depen- Spouse works. If your spouse works during
dent care expenses, you cannot count the ex- that month, use the higher of $250 (or $500) or1. The total amount of dependent care bene-penses that are reimbursed as work-related his or her actual earned income for that month.fits you received during the year,expenses.
Spouse qualifies for part of month.  If2. The total amount of qualified expenses you
your spouse is a full-time student or not able toincurred during the year,Example. You paid work-related expenses
care for himself or herself for only part of aof $3,000. You are reimbursed $2,000 by a state 3. Your earned income, month, the full $250 (or $500) still applies for thatsocial services agency. You can use only
month.4. Your spouse’s earned income, or$1,000 to figure your credit.
Both spouses qualify. If, in the same5. $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately).Medical expenses. Some expenses for the month, both you and your spouse are eithercare of qualifying persons who are not able to The definition of earned income for this purpose full-time students or not able to care for your-care for themselves may qualify as work-related is not exactly the same as the definition for the selves, only one spouse can be considered toexpenses and also as medical expenses. You credit. See the instructions for Form 2441 or have this earned income of $250 (or $500) forcan use them either way, but you cannot use the Schedule 2 (Form 1040A). that month.same expenses to claim both a credit and a
medical expense deduction. Statement for employee. Your employer
If you use these expenses to figure the credit must give you a Form W-2 (or similar statement) Dollar Limit
and they are more than the earned income limit showing in box 10 the total amount of dependent
or the dollar limit, discussed later, you can add care benefits provided to you during the year There is a dollar limit on the am ount of your
the excess to your medical expenses. However, under a qualified plan. Your employer will also work-related expenses you can use t o figure the
if you use your total expenses to figure your include any dependent care benefits over credit. This limit is $3,000 for one qualifying
medical expense deduction, you cannot use any $5,000 in your wages shown on your Form W-2 person, or $6,000 for two or more quali fying
part of them to figure your credit. in box 10. persons.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 209

Page 212 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you paid work-related expenses for IF your adjusted gross THENthe care of two or more qualifying per- income is: the Employment Taxessons, the $6,000 limit does not need to
TIP
But not percentagebe divided equally among them. For example, if Over over is: for Householdyour work-related expenses for the care of one
$ 0 $15,000 35%qualifying person are $3,200 and your 15,000 17,000 34%work-related expenses for another qualifying Employers17,000 19,000 33%person are $2,800, you can use the total, 19,000 21,000 32%$6,000, when figuring the credit. If you pay someone to come to your home and21,000 23,000 31% care for your dependent or spouse, you may be23,000 25,000 30%Yearly limit. The dollar limit is a yearly limit. a household employer. If you are a household25,000 27,000 29%The amount of the dollar limit remains the same employer, you will need an employer identifica-27,000 29,000 28%no matter how long, during the year, you have a 29,000 31,000 27% tion number (EIN) and you may have to payqualifying person in your household. Use the 31,000 33,000 26% employment taxes. If the individuals who work in$3,000 limit if you paid work-related expenses 33,000 35,000 25% your home are self-employed, you are not liablefor the care of one qualifying person at any time 35,000 37,000 24% for any of the taxes discussed in this section.during the year. Use $6,000 if you paid 37,000 39,000 23%work-related expenses for the care of more than Self-employed persons who are in business for39,000 41,000 22%one qualifying person at any time during the themselves are not household employees. Usu-41,000 43,000 21%year. ally, you are not a household employer if the43,000 No limit 20%
person who cares for your dependent or spouse
does so at his or her home or place of business.Reduced Dollar Limit
If you use a placement agency that exercises
If you received dependent care benefits that you control over what work is done and how it will beHow To Claimexclude or deduct from your income, you must done by a babysitter or companion who works in
subtract that amount from the dollar limit that your home, that person is not your employee.the Creditapplies to you. Your reduced dollar limit is fig- This control could include providing rules of con-ured on lines 29 through 33 of Form 2441 or To claim the credit, you can file Form 1040 or duct and appearance and requiring regular re-lines 23 through 27 of Schedule 2 (Form 1040A). Form 1040A. You cannot claim the credit on ports. In this case, you do not have to paySee Dependent Care Benefits, earlier, for infor- Form 1040EZ. employment taxes. But, if an agency merelymation on excluding or deducting these benefits.
gives you a list of sitters and you hire one fromForm 1040. You must complete Form 2441
that list, the sitter may be your employee.and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the creditExample. George is a widower with one
on Form 1040, line 48. An example of a filled-inchild and earns $24,000 a year. He pays If you have a household employee you mayForm 2441 is at the end of this chapter.work-related expenses of $2,900 for the care of be subject to:his 4-year-old child and qualifies to claim the Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 2credit for child and dependent care expenses. 1. Social security and Medicare taxes,(Form 1040A) and attach it to your Form 1040A.His employer pays an additional $1,000 under a Enter the credit on your Form 1040A, line 29. 2. Federal unemployment tax, anddependent care benefit plan. This $1,000 is ex-
Limit on credit. The amount of credit you cancluded from George’s income. 3. Federal income tax withholding.
claim is limited to the amount of your regular taxAlthough the dollar limit for his work-related Social security and Medicare taxes are gener-(after reduction by any allowable foreign taxexpenses is $3,000 (one qualifying person),
ally withheld from the employee’s pay andcredit) plus your alternative minimum tax, if any.George figures his credit on only $2,000 of the
matched by the employer. Federal unemploy-$2,900 work-related expenses he paid. This is Tax credit not refundable. You cannot get ment (FUTA) tax is paid by the employer onlybecause his dollar limit is reduced as shown a refund for any part of the credit that is more and provides for payments of unemploymentnext. than this limit. compensation to workers who have lost their
Recordkeeping. You should keep rec-George’s Reduced Dollar Limit jobs. Federal income tax is withheld from the
ords of your work-related expenses. employee’s total pay if the employee asks you to1) Maximum allowable expenses Also, if your dependent or spouse isRECORDS
do so and you agree.for one qualifying person ..... $3,000 not able to care for himself or herself, your rec-2) Minus: Dependent care benefits For more information on a household em-ords should show both the nature and the lengthGeorge excludes from income −1,000 of the disability. Other records you should keep ployer’s tax responsibilities, see Publication 9263) Reduced dollar limit on
to support your claim for the credit are described and Schedule H (Form 1040) and its instruc-expenses George can use for
earlier under Provider Identification Test. tions.the credit ............... $2,000
State employment tax. You may also have toAmount of Credit
pay state unemployment tax. Contact your state
To determine the amount of your credit, multiply unemployment tax office for information. You
your work-related expenses (after applying the should also find out whether you need to pay or
earned income and dollar limits) by a percent- collect other state employment taxes or carry
age. This percentage depends on your adjusted workers’ compensation insurance. A list of state
gross income shown on Form 1040, line 38, or employment tax agencies, including addressesForm 1040A, line 22. The following table shows and phone numbers, is in Publication 926.the percentage to use based on adjusted gross
income.
Page 210 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 213 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5) Lesser of expenses paidemployer reports the value of this service as
($2,400) or dollar limit ($3,000) $2,400$3,000 for the year. This $3,000 is shown on herExample Form W-2 in box 10, but is not included in tax- 6) Percentage for AGI of $29,000able wages in box 1. (28%) .................  . 2 8The following example shows how to figure the
A neighbor cares for Joan’s older child (Seth) 7) Multiply the amount on line 5 bycredit for child and dependent care expenses for
after school, on holidays, and during the sum- the percentage on line 6 ($2,400two children when employer-provided depen-
mer. Joan pays her neighbor $2,400 for this x .28) ................. $  6 7 2dent care benefits are involved. The filled-in
8) Enter the amount from Formcare.Form 2441 is shown at the end of this chapter.
1040, line 46 ............ $1,199Joan figures her credit on Form 2441 asIllustrated example. Joan Thomas is di- 9) Enter the amount from Formfollows.vorced and has two children, ages 3 and 9. She 1040, line 47 ............ - 0 -
works at ACME Computers. Her adjusted gross 10) Subtract line 9 from line 8 .... 1,1991) Work-related expenses Joan
income (AGI) is $29,000, and the entire amount 11) Creditpaid .................. $2,400
(Enter the smaller of line 7 oris earned income. 2) Dollar limit (2 or more qualified
line 10) ................ $672Joan’s younger child (Susan) stays at her individuals) .............. $6,000
employer’s on-site childcare center while she 3) Minus: Dependent care benefits
works. The benefits from this childcare center excluded from Joan’s income −3,000
4) Reduced dollar limit ........ $3,000qualify to be excluded from her income. Her
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 211

Page 214 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Joan Thomas 559 00 3436
P at Green
ACME Computers
12 Ash Avenue
Hometown, TX 75240
(See W-2)
240-00-3811 2,400
2,400
29,000
29,000
2,400
672
Seth
Susan
2,400559 00 1234
559 00 5678
1,199
29,000
672
28
Thomas
Thomas
OMB No. 1545-0074Child and Dependent Care Expenses2441Form
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 21/H17075See separate instructions.
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Persons or Organizations Who Provided the Care— You must complete this part. 
(If you need more space, use the bottom of page 2.)
(b) Address
(number, street, apt. no., city, state, and ZIP code)
(d) Amount paid
(see instructions)
(c) Identifying number
(SSN or EIN)1 (a) Care provider’s
name
Credit for Child and Dependent Care Expenses
2
Add the amounts in column (c) of line 2. Do not enter more than $3,000 for one qualifying
person or $6,000 for two or more persons. If you completed Part III, enter the amount from
line 33
Enter your earned income. See instructions
3
3
If married filing jointly, enter your spouse’s earned income (if your spouse was a student
or was disabled, see the instructions); all others, enter the amount from line 4
4 4
Enter the smallest of line 3, 4, or 5
5
5
6
7
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38, or Form
1040NR, line 36
7
/H11003
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
But not
overOver
But not
overOver
.27$29,000—31,000.35$0—15,000
.2631,000—33,000.3415,000—17,000
.2533,000—35,000.3317,000—19,000
.2435,000—37,000.3219,000—21,000
.2337,000—39,000.3121,000—23,000
.3023,000—25,000
Multiply line 6 by the decimal amount on line 8. If you paid 2005 expenses in 2006, see
the instructions
9
Form 2441 (2006)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4 of the instructions.
Before you begin: You need to understand the following terms. See Definitions on page 1 of the instructions.
Cat. No. 11862M
Part I
Part II
Enter on line 8 the decimal amount shown below that applies to the amount on line 7
Did you receive
dependent care benefits? Yes
No
8
Complete only Part II below.
Complete Part III on the back next.
/H17075
/H17075
Caution. If the care was provided in your home, you may owe employment taxes. See the instructions for Form 1040, line 62, or Form
1040NR, line 57.
.
(99)
Information about your qualifying person(s). If you have more than two qualifying persons, see the instructions.
(a) Qualifying person’s name
First Last
(b) Qualifying person’s social
security number
(c) Qualified expenses you
incurred and paid in 2006 for the
person listed in column (a)
8
6
● Dependent Care Benefits ● Qualifying Person(s) ● Qualified Expenses
9
25,000—27,000
27,000—29,000
.29
.28
39,000—41,000
41,000—43,000
43,000—No limit
.22
.21
.20
10
11
10
11
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46, minus any amount on Form 1040, line 47, or
Form 1040NR, line 43, minus any amount on Form 1040NR, line 44
2006
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10
here and on Form 1040, line 48, or Form 1040NR, line 45
Page 212 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 215 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3,000
3,000
-0-
5,400
3,000
29,000
29,000
3,000
5,000
-0-
3,000
-0-
3,000
2,400
2,400
3,000
3,000
-0-
3,000
6,000
Page 2Form 2441 (2006)
Dependent Care Benefits
Enter the total amount of dependent care benefit s you received in 2006. Amount s you
received as an employee should be shown in box 10 of your Form( s) W-2. Do not include
amounts reported as wages in box 1 of Form(s) W-2. If you were self-employed or a partner,
include amounts you received under a dependent care assistance program from your sole
proprietorship or partner ship
Enter the amount, if any, you carried over from 2005 and u sed in 2006 during the grace
period. See instructions
Enter the amount, if any, you forfeited or carried forward to 2007. See instructions
Enter the total amount of qualified expenses incurred
in 2006 for the care of the qualifying person(s)
13
16
17Enter the smaller of line 15 or 16
14
Enter your earned income. See instructions
16
18
Enter the amount shown below that applie s
to you.
19
Enter the smallest of line 17, 18, or 19
17
20
Enter the amount from line 12 that you received from your sole proprietorship or partnership.
If you did not receive any such amounts, enter -0-
18
21
Taxable benefits. Subtract line 27 from line 22. If zero or less, enter -0-. Also, include this
amount on Form 1040, line 7, or Form 1040NR, line 8. On the dotted line next to Form
1040, line 7, or Form 1040NR, line 8, enter “DCB”
19
28
Part III
To claim the child and dependent care
credit, complete lines 29–33 below.
29
30
31
20
21
28
29 Enter $3,000 ($6,000 if two or more qualifying persons)
Subtract line 30 from line 29. If zero or le ss, stop. You cannot ta ke the credit. 
Exception. If you paid 2005 expen ses in 2006, see the instructions for line 9
Enter the smaller of line 31 or 32. Al so, enter thi s amount on line 3 on the front of thi s
form and complete line s 4–11
Add lines 24 and 27
33
30
31
33
13
14
12
12
Complete line 2 on the front of thi s form. Do not include in column (c) any benefits shown
on line 30 above. Then, add the amount s in column (c) and enter the total here
32
32
Form 2441 (2006)
● If married filing jointly, enter your
spouse’s earned income (if your spouse
was a student or was disabled, see the
instructions for line 5).
● If married filing separately, see the
instructions for the amount to enter.
● All others, enter the amount from line 18.
/H20854
Subtract line 21 from line 1522
Enter $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately and you were re quired to enter your
spouse’s earned income on line 19)
23
Deductible benefit s. Enter the smallest of line 20, 21, or 23. Al so, include thi s amount
on the appropriate line( s) of your return. See instructions
24
Enter the smaller of line 20 or 2325
Enter the amount from line 2426
Excluded benefits. Subtract line 26 from line 25. If zero or le ss, enter -0-27
25
26
22
23
24
27
1515 Combine lines 12 through 14. See instructions
()
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 213

Page 216 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can take the credit only if you file Under Age 65
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot
If you are under age 65 at the end of 2006, youtake the credit if you file Form 1040EZ.
TIP
33. can qualify for the credit only if you are retired on
permanent and total disability (discussed next)
and have taxable disability income (discussedQualified Individual
later) under Disability income. You are retired on
You are a qualified individual for this credit if youCredit for the permanent and total disability if:
are a U.S. citizen or resident alien and either of • You were permanently and totally disabledthe following applies. when you retired, andElderly or the
1. You were age 65 or older at the end of • You retired on disability before the close of2006. the tax year.Disabled
2. You were under age 65 at the end of 2006
Even if you do not retire formally, you may beand all three of the following statements
considered retired on disability when you haveare true.
stopped working because of your disability.Introduction
a. You retired on permanent and total dis- If you retired on disability before 1977, andIf you qualify, the law provides a number of ability (explained later). were not permanently and totally disabled at thecredits that can reduce the tax you owe for a time, you can qualify for the credit if you wereb. You received taxable disability incomeyear. One of these credits is the credit for the permanently and totally disabled on January 1,for 2006.elderly or the disabled. 1976, or January 1, 1977.
This chapter explains the following. c. On January 1, 2006, you had not You are considered to be under age 65reached mandatory retirement age (de-• Who qualifies for the credit for the elderly at the end of 2006 if you were bornfined later under Disability income).or the disabled. after January 1, 1942.
TIP
• How to figure this credit.
Permanent and total disability. You are per-Age 65. You are considered to be age 65 on manently and totally disabled if you cannot en- You may be able to take this credit if: the day before your 65th birthday. Therefore, if gage in any substantial gainful activity becauseyou were born on January 1, 1942, you are• You are age 65 or older, or of your physical or mental condition. A physicianconsidered to be age 65 at the end of 2006. must certify that the condition has lasted or can• You retired on permanent and total disabil-
be expected to last continuously for 12 monthsity and have taxable disability income.
or more, or that the condition can be expected toU.S. Citizen or Resident Alien result in death. See Physician’s statement, later.
Useful Items You must be a U.S. citizen or resident alien (or Substantial gainful activity. Substantial
You may want to see: be treated as a resident alien) to take the credit. gainful activity is the performance of significant
Generally, you cannot take the credit if you were duties over a reasonable period of time while
Publication a nonresident alien at any time during the tax working for pay or profit, or in work generally
year. done for pay or profit. Full-time work (or❏ 524 Credit for the Elderly or the part-time work done at your employer’s conve-Disabled Exceptions. You may be able to take the nience) in a competitive work situation for at
credit if you are a nonresident alien who is mar- least the minimum wage conclusively shows❏ 554 Older Americans’ Tax Guide
ried to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end that you are able to engage in substantial gainful❏ 967 The IRS Will Figure Your Tax of the tax year and you and your spouse choose activity.
to treat you as a U.S. resident alien. If you make Substantial gainful activity is not work you doForms (and Instructions) that choice, both you and your spouse are taxed to take care of yourself or your home. It is not
on your worldwide income. unpaid work on hobbies, institutional therapy or❏ Schedule 3 (Form 1040A) Credit for the
If you were a nonresident alien at the begin- training, school attendance, clubs, social pro-Elderly or the Disabled for Form
ning of the year and a resident alien at the end of grams, and similar activities. However, doing1040A Filers
the year, and you were married to a U.S. citizen this kind of work may show that you are able to
❏ Schedule R (Form 1040) Credit for the or resident alien at the end of the year, you may engage in substantial gainful activity.
Elderly or the Disabled be able to choose to be treated as a U.S. resi- The fact that you have not worked for some
dent alien for the entire year. In that case, you time is not, of itself, conclusive evidence that you
may be allowed to take the credit. cannot engage in substantial gainful activity.
 For information on these choices, see chap- Sheltered employment. Certain work of-ter 1 of Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for fered at qualified locations to physically or men-Can You Take Aliens. tally impaired persons is considered sheltered
employment. These qualified locations are inthe Credit? sheltered workshops, hospitals and similar insti-Married Persons tutions, homebound programs, and DepartmentYou can take the credit for the elderly or the of Veterans Affairs (VA) sponsored homes.disabled if you meet both of the following re- Generally, if you are married at the end of the tax Compared to commercial employment, payquirements. year, you and your spouse must file a joint return is lower for sheltered employment. Therefore,to take the credit. However, if you and your• You are a qualified individual. one usually does not look for sheltered employ-spouse did not live in the same household at any ment if he or she can get other employment. The• Your income is not more than certain lim- time during the tax year, you can file either joint fact that one has accepted sheltered employ-or separate returns and still take the credit.its. ment is not proof of that person’s ability to en-
You can use Figure 33-A and Figure 33-B as gage in substantial gainful activity.Head of household. You can file as head ofguides to see if you qualify. household and qualify to take the credit, even if Physician’s statement. If you are under age
Use Figure 33-A first to see if you are a quali- your spouse lived with you during the first 6 65, you must have your physician complete a
fied individual. If you are, go to Figure 33-B to months of the year, if you meet all the tests. See statement certifying that you were permanently
make sure your income is not too high to take Head of Household in chapter 2 for the tests you and totally disabled on the date you retired. You
the credit. must meet. can use the statement in the instructions for
Page 214 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 217 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If either your AGI or your nontaxableTable 33-1. Initial Amounts pensions are equal to or more than the
income limits, you cannot take theCAUTION
!
THEN enter on line 10 credit.of Schedule R (Form
1040) or Schedule 3
IF your filing status is ... (Form 1040A)...
Single, head of household, or qualifying Figuring the Credit
widow(er) with dependent child and, by the end
of 2006, you were You can figure the credit yourself (see the expla-
nation that follows) or the IRS will figure it for• 65 or older ............................... $5,000
you. See Credit Figured for You, later.• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $5,000
Married filing a joint return and by the end of Figuring the credit yourself. If you figure the
2006 credit yourself, fill out the front of either Sched-
ule R (if you are filing Form 1040) or Schedule 3• both of you were 65 or older .................. $7,500
(if you are filing Form 1040A). Next, fill out Part• both of you were under 65 and one of you retired on $5,000 III of either Schedule R or Schedule 3.permanent and total disability1 ..................
• both of you were under 65 and both of you retired on There are four steps in Part III to deter-$7,500permanent and total disability2 .................. mine the amount of your credit:
• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under $7,50065 and retired on permanent and total disability3 ..... 1. Determine your initial amount (lines• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under 10–12).$5,00065 and not retired on permanent and total disability . . .
2. Determine the total of any nontaxable so-
Married filing a separate return and you did not cial security and certain other nontaxable
live with your spouse at any time during the year pensions and disability benefits you re-
and, by the end of 2006, you were ceived (lines 13a, 13b, and 13c).
• 65 or older ............................... $3,750 3. Determine your excess adjusted gross in-
• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $3,750 come (lines 14–17).
1Amount cannot be more than the taxable disability income. 4. Determine your credit (lines 18–24 of2Amount cannot be more than your combined taxable disability income. Schedule R or lines 18–22 of Schedule 3).3Amount is $5,000 plus the taxable disability income of the spouse under age 65, but not more than $7,500.
These steps are discussed in more detail next.
Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Form • It must be paid under your employer’s ac-
1040A). cident or health plan or pension plan.
• It must be included in your income asYou do not have to file this statement with
Step 1. Determine Initialwages (or payments instead of wages) foryour Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but you must
the time you are absent from work be-keep it for your records. Amountcause of permanent and total disability.Veterans. If the Department of Veterans Af- To figure the credit, you must first determinefairs (VA) certifies that you are permanently and Payments that are not disability income. your initial amount. See Table 33-1.totally disabled, you can substitute VA Form Any payment you receive from a plan that does21-0172, Certification of Permanent and Total not provide for disability retirement is not disabil- Initial amounts for persons under age 65. IfDisability, for the physician’s statement you are ity income. Any lump-sum payment for accrued you are a qualified individual under age 65, yourrequired to keep. VA Form 21-0172 must be annual leave that you receive when you retire on initial amount cannot be more than your taxablesigned by a person authorized by the VA to do disability is a salary payment and is not disability disability income.so. You can get this form from your local VA income.regional office. For purposes of the credit for the elderly or
Step 2. Total Certainthe disabled, disability income does not includePhysician’s statement obtained in earlier
amounts you receive after you reach mandatoryyear. If you got a physician’s statement in an Nontaxable Pensions and
retirement age. Mandatory retirement age is theearlier year and, due to your continued disabled Benefitsage set by your employer at which you wouldcondition, you were unable to engage in any
have had to retire, had you not become dis-substantial gainful activity during 2006, you may Step 2 is to figure the total amount of nontaxableabled.not need to get another physician’s statement social security and certain other nontaxable pay-for 2006. For a detailed explanation of the condi- ments you received during the year. (See Non-tions you must meet, see the instructions for Income Limits taxable payments, later.)Part II of Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 Enter these nontaxable payments on lines(Form 1040A). If you meet the required condi- To determine if you can claim the credit, you 13a or 13b, and total them on line 13c. If you aretions, check the box on line 2 of Part II of Sched- must consider two income limits. The first limit is married filing a joint return, you must enter theule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Form 1040A). the amount of your adjusted gross income combined amount of nontaxable payments both
(AGI). The second limit is the amount of nontax- you and your spouse receive.If you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I of either able social security and other nontaxable pen-Schedule R or Schedule 3, enter, in the space Worksheets are provided in the Formsions you received. The limits are shown inabove the box on line 2 in Part II, the first 1040 and Form 1040A instructions toFigure 33-B, later.name(s) of the spouse(s) for whom the box is help you determine if any of your social
TIP
If both your AGI and nontaxable pensionschecked. security benefits (or equivalent railroad retire-are less than the income limits, you may be able
ment benefits) are taxable.to claim the credit. See Figuring the Credit, next.
Disability income. If you are under age 65,
you must also have taxable disability income to Nontaxable payments. Include the following
qualify for the credit. Disability income must nontaxable payments in the amounts you enter
meet both of the following requirements. on lines 13a and 13b.
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 215

Page 218 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 33-A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
/H17074
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident alien? 1
Yes
Yes
No
/H17076
/H17074
Were you 65 or older at the end of the
year?
No
/H17074
Are you retired on permanent and total
disability?
Yes
/H17074
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before this year? 2
No
Did you receive taxable disability
benefits this year?
You are a qualified
individual and may be
able to take the credit
for the elderly or the
disabled unless your
income exceeds the
limits in Figure 33-B.
/H17076
/H17074
Yes
/H17076
You are not a qualified
individual and cannot
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
/H17074
Yes
/H17073
No
/H17076
No
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end  of the tax year, see U.S. Citizen or
Resident Alien under Qualified Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident alien, answer “yes” to this question.
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become di sabled.
Figure 33-B. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)*
is equal to or more than ...
single, head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
$17,500
married filing a joint return
and both spouses qualify in
Figure 33-A
$25,000
married filing a joint return
and only one spouse qualifies
in Figure 33-A
$20,000
married filing a separate return and
you lived apart from your spouse
the entire year
$12,500
THEN even if you qualify (see Figure 33-A), you CANNOT take the
credit if ...
OR the total of your nontaxable
social security and other nontaxable
pension(s) is equal to or more than ...
$5,000
$7,500
$5,000
$3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 22, or Form 1040, line 38.
START HERE
/H17073
1
2
/H17075
Page 216 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 219 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Nontaxable social security payments. This c. $5,000 if you are married filing a sepa- following discussion for the form you will f ile
is the nontaxable part of the amount of (Form 1040 or 1040A). If you want the IRS torate return and you and your spouse did
benefits shown in box 5 of Form figure your tax, see chapter 30.not live in the same household at any
SSA-1099, which includes disability bene- time during the tax year. Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure yourfits, before deducting any amounts with- credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries under Taxheld to pay premiums on supplementary 2. Divide the result of (1) by 2. Figured by IRS in chapter 30.Medicare insurance, and before any re-
Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure yourduction because of benefits received
Step 4. Determine Your credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries under Taxunder workers’ compensation. (Do not in-
Figured by IRS in chapter 30.clude a lump-sum death benefit payment Credityou may receive as a surviving spouse, or
a surviving child’s insurance benefit pay- To determine if you can take the credit, you mustments you may receive as a guardian.) Exampleadd the amounts you figured in Step 2 and Step
3.• Nontaxable railroad retirement pension The following example illustrates the credit forpayments treated as social security. This the elderly or the disabled. The initial amount isIF the total of Stepsis the nontaxable part of the amount of taken from Table 33-1, shown earlier.2 and 3 is ... THEN ...benefits shown in box 5 of Form
RRB-1099. equal to or more you cannot take the James Davis is 58 years old, single, and
than the amount in credit. files Form 1040A. In 1998 he retired on perma-• Nontaxable pension or annuity payments
Step 1 nent and total disability, and he is still perma-or disability benefits that are paid under a
nently and totally disabled. He got the requiredlaw administered by the Department of less than the you can take the physician’s statement in 1998, and kept it withVeterans Affairs (VA). (Do not include amount in Step 1 credit. his records. His physician signed on line B of theamounts received as a pension, annuity,
statement. This year James checks the box inor similar allowance for personal injuries
Part II of Schedule 3. He does not need to getor sickness resulting from active service in Figuring the credit. If you can take the credit, another statement for 2006.the armed forces of any country or in the subtract the total of Step 2 and Step 3 from the He received the following income for theNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin- amount in Step 1 and multiply the result by 15%. year:istration, or the Public Health Service, or In certain cases, the amount of your creditas a disability annuity under section 808 of Nontaxable social security ........ $1,500may be limited. See Limit on credit, later.the Foreign Service Act of 1980.) Interest (taxable) .............. 1 0 0
Taxable disability pension ........ 11,400Example. You are 66 years old and your• Pension or annuity payments or disability
James’ adjusted gross income is $11,500spouse is 64. Your spouse is not disabled. Youbenefits that are excluded from income
($11,400 + $100). He figures the credit onfile a joint return on Form 1040. Your adjustedunder any provision of federal law other
Schedule 3 as follows:gross income is $14,630. Together you receivedthan the Internal Revenue Code. (Do not 1) Initial amount ............. $5,000$3,200 from social security, which was nontax-include amounts that are a return of your 2) Taxable disability pension .... 11,400able. You figure the credit as follows:cost of a pension or annuity. These 3) Smaller of (1) or (2) ......... 5,000amounts do not reduce your initial 4) Subtract from line 3 the1) Initial amount ................ $5,000amount.) total of:2) Subtract from line 1 the total a) Nontaxable socialof: security benefits ....... $1,500You should be sure to take into ac- a) Nontaxable social security b) Excess adjusted grosscount all of the nontaxable amounts and other nontaxable incomeyou receive. These amounts are veri- pensions .............. $3,200CAUTION
!
[($11,500 − $7,500) ÷ 2] . . 2,000 3,500fied by the IRS through information supplied by b) Excess adjusted gross 5) Balance (not less than -0-) .... 1,500incomeother government agencies. 6) Multiply line 5 by 15% (.15) . . . 225[($14,630 − $10,000) ÷ 2] . . . 2,315 5,515 7) Enter the amount from3) Balance (Not less than -0-) ....... - 0 - Form 1040A, line 28. .... 3 0 8Step 3. Determine Excess 4) Credit ..................... - 0 - 8) Enter any amounts from
Adjusted Gross Income You cannot take the credit because your Form 1040A, line 29. .... - 0 -
9) Subtract line 8 from line 7 308nontaxable social security (line 2a) plus yourYou also must reduce your initial amount by your 10) Creditexcess adjusted gross income (line 2b) is moreexcess adjusted gross income. Figure your ex- (Enter the smaller of line 6than your initial amount (line 1).cess adjusted gross income on lines 14–17. or line 9) ............ $225
You figure your excess adjusted gross in- Limit on credit. The amount of credit you can His credit is $225. He enters $225 on line 30come as follows: claim may be limited. of Form 1040A. The Schedule 3 for James Davis
Figure any limit on your credit on lines is not shown.1. Subtract from your adjusted gross income
21–24 of Schedule R or lines 21–22 of Sched-(Form 1040, line 38 or Form 1040A, line
ule 3.22) the amount shown for your filing status
in the following list:
a. $7,500 if you are single, a head of
household, or a qualifying widow(er) Credit Figured for Youwith a dependent child,
If you choose to have the Internal Revenueb. $10,000 if you are married filing a joint
Service (IRS) figure the credit for you, read thereturn, or
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 217

Page 220 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Lived with you for more than half of 2006 b. Single, head of household, or qualifying
(see Exception to time lived with you be- widow(er) - $75,000.
low), and c. Married filing separately - $55,000.34.
5. Was a U.S. citizen, a U.S. national, or a
resident of the United States. If the child
Modified AGI. For purposes of the child taxwas adopted, see Adopted child below.
credit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus theChild Tax Credit For each qualifying child you must either following amounts that may apply to you.check the box on Form 1040 or Form 1040A,
• Any amount excluded from income be-line 6c, column (4), or complete Form 8901 (if
cause of the exclusion of income fromthe child is not your dependent).Introduction
Puerto Rico.
The child tax credit is a credit that may reduce Example. Your son turned 17 on December • Any amount on line 45 or line 50 of Formyour tax by as much as $1,000 for each of your 30, 2006. He is a citizen of the United States and 2555, Foreign Earned Income.qualifying children. you claimed him as a dependent on your return.The additional child tax credit is a credit you • Any amount on line 18 of Form 2555-EZ,He is not a qualifying child for the child tax creditmay be able to take if you are not able to claim Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.because he was not under age 17 at the end ofthe full amount of the child tax credit. 2006. • Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563, Ex-This chapter explains the following.
clusion of Income for Bona Fide ResidentsExceptions to time lived with you. A child is• Who is a qualifying child. of American Samoa.considered to have lived with you for all of 2006• How much is the credit. if the child was born or died in 2006 and your If you do not have any of the above, yourhome was this child’s home for the entire time he• How to claim the credit. modified AGI is the same as your AGI.or she was alive. Temporary absences for spe-• Why you should check your tax withhold- AGI. Your AGI is the amount on Form 1040,cial circumstances, such as for school, vacation,ing. line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22.medical care, military service, or detention in a
juvenile facility, count as time lived at home.
The child tax credit and the additional There are also exceptions for kidnapped chil-
child tax credit should not be confused dren and children of divorced or separated par-
with the child and dependent care ents. For details, see Residency Test, in chapter Claiming the Credit
CAUTION
!
credit discussed in chapter 32. 3.
To claim the child tax credit, you must file Form
If you have no tax. Credits, such as the child Qualifying child of more than one person. A 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot claim the child
tax credit, the adoption credit, or the credit for special rule applies if your qualifying child is the tax credit on Form 1040EZ. You must provide
child and dependent care expenses, are used to qualifying child of more than one person. For the name and identification number (usually a
reduce tax. If your tax on Form 1040, line 46, or details, see Special Test for Qualifying Child of social security number) on your tax return (or
Form 1040A, line 28, is zero, do not figure the More Than One Person, in chapter 3. Form 8901) for each qualifying child.
child tax credit because there is no tax to re- Answer the Questions in your form instruc-Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysduce. However, you may qualify for the addi- tions for Form 1040, line 53, or Form 1040A, linetreated as your own child. An adopted childtional child tax credit on line 68 (Form 1040) or 33, to find out which child tax credit worksheetincludes a child lawfully placed with you for legalline 41 (Form 1040A). you can use to figure the credit.adoption. If you answer “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 in
If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national andUseful Items your Form 1040 instructions or question 1 in
your adopted child lived with you as a member ofYou may want to see: your Form 1040A instructions, you must com-
your household all year, that child meets condi- plete the child tax credit worksheet in Publica-
tion (5) above to be a qualifying child for the childPublication tion 972. Otherwise, you can use the Child Tax
tax credit. Credit Worksheet in your Form 1040 or Form❏ 972 Child Tax Credit 1040A instructions. (See the filled-in example,
later.)Form (and Instructions)
❏ 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit Amount of Credit
❏ 8901 Information on Qualifying Children
The maximum amount you can claim for the Additional Child TaxWho Are Not Dependents
credit is $1,000 for each qualifying child.
❏ W-4 Employee’s Withholding Allowance CreditCertificate
Limits on the Credit
This credit is for certain individuals who get less
than the full amount of the child tax credit. TheYou must reduce your child tax credit if either (1)
additional child tax credit may give you a refundor (2) applies.
even if you do not owe any tax.Qualifying Child 1. The amount on Form 1040, line 46, or
Form 1040A, line 28, is less than the How to claim the additional child tax credit.A qualifying child for purposes of the child tax credit. If this amount is zero, you cannot To claim the additional child tax credit, follow thecredit is a child who: take this credit because there is no tax to steps below.
reduce. But you may be able to take the1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 1. Make sure you figured the amount, if any,additional child tax credit. See Additionalchild, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- of your child tax credit. See Claiming theChild Tax Credit, later.ter, or a descendant of any of them (for Credit, earlier.example, your grandchild), 2. Your modified adjusted gross income
2. If you answered “Yes” on line 4 or line 5 of(AGI) is above the amount shown below2. Was under age 17 at the end of 2006, the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in thefor your filing status.
3. Did not provide over half of his or her own Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions, or
support for 2006, a. Married filing jointly - $110,000. line 13 of the Child Tax Credit Worksheet
Page 218 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 221 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in Publication 972, use Form 8812 to see if
you can take the additional child tax credit.
3. If you have an additional child tax credit on
line 13 of Form 8812, carry it to Form
1040, line 68 or Form 1040A, line 41.
Checking Your
Withholding
The child tax credit decreases your tax. You can
check your tax withholding by using Publication
919, How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding.
If you are having too much tax withheld, and
you prefer to have the money during the year,
you may be able to decrease your withholding.
You do this by completing a new Form W-4 and
giving it to your employer.
Example
Amy Brown files as head of household and has
two dependent children under age 17. The chil-
dren are qualifying children for purposes of the
child tax credit. Amy’s only income is her salary
of $30,350. Amy chooses to itemize her deduc-
tions and files Form 1040. Her AGI, shown on
line 38 of her Form 1040, is $30,350. This is her
taxable earned income.
Amy does not file Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or
4563. She does not exclude income from Puerto
Rico. Her modified AGI is $30,350.
Amy’s tax, shown on line 46 of her Form
1040, is $1,334. She claims a $225 credit for
child and dependent care expenses on line 48.
She claims a $1,029 earned income credit on
line 66a. She has no other credits.
After answering the Questions in the Form
1040 instructions for line 53, she completes the
child tax credit worksheet to figure her child tax
credit of $1,109. Amy’s completed questions
and child tax credit worksheet are shown later.
Amy reads the TIP in the worksheet and
finds that she may be able to take the additional
child tax credit. See Additional Child Tax Credit
and Amy’s completed Form 8812, later.
Filled-in Questions for Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
Who Must Use
Pub. 972
Questions Pub.
972
Keep this graphic. Ask for text changes. From SGML conversion.
/H12011
3. Are you excluding income from Puerto Rico or are you
filing any of the following forms?
● Form 2555 or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income).
● Form 4563 (exclusion of income for residents of
American Samoa).
No. Continue
Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP
2. Are you claiming any of the following credits?
● Residential energy efficient property credit,
Form 5695, Part II.
● Mortgage interest credit, Form 8396 (see the instructions
for Form 1040, line 54, on page 43).
● District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit,
Form 8859.
No. Use the
worksheet on
page 43 to figure
your credit.
Yes. Y ou must use
Pub. 972 to figure your
child tax credit. Y ou will
also need the form(s)
listed above for any
credit(s) you are claiming.
/H12011
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 38, more than the amount
shown below for your filing status?
● Married filing jointly – $110,000
● Single, head of household, or qualifying widow(er) –
$75,000
● Married filing separately – $55,000
No. Continue Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP/H12011
● Adoption credit, Form 8839 (see the instructions for
Form 1040, line 53, on page 43).
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 219

Page 222 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2
2,000
1,334
1,109
225
1,109
225
24811v37 -- 1040 Instructions
/H12011
/H12011
Child Tax Credit Worksheet—Line 53
1040
Yes. STOP
● To be a qualifying child for the child tax credit, the child must be under age 17 at the end
of 2006 and meet the other requirements listed on page 19.
● Do not use this worksheet if you answered “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 on page 42. Instead, use Pub. 972.
1.
4.
5.
1/H11003Number of qualifying children: $1,000.
Enter the result.
Are the amounts on lines 2 and 3 the same?
TIP
Y ou cannot take this credit because there is no tax
to reduce. However, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the below .
No. Subtract line 3 from line 2.
Is the amount on line 1 more than the amount on line 4?
TIP
Yes. Enter the amount from line 4.
Also, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the
below.
No. Enter the amount from line 1.
This is your child tax
credit.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 53.
You may be able to take the additional child tax credit
on Form 1040, line 68, if you answered “Yes” on line 4 or
line 5 above.
● First, complete your Form 1040 through line 67.
● Then, use Form 8812 to figure any additional child tax
credit.
4
/H20854
5
/H17076
2. 2Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46.
3. Add the amounts from Form 1040:
3
Keep for Y our Records
TIP
CAUTION
Line 47
Line 48 +
Line 49 +
Line 50 +
Line 51 +
Enter the total.Line 52* +
*Include only the amount, if any, from Form 5695, line 12.
Page 220 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 223 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2,000
1,109
891
30,350
891
Amy Brown 012 00 5678
19,050
2,903
Yes. Subtract $11,300 from the amount on line 4a. Enter the result
OMB No. 1545-0074
Additional Child Tax Credit8812Form
Complete and attach to Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 47
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Form 8812 (2006)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Cat. No. 10644E
3
2
4a
6
Withheld social security and Medicare taxes from Form(s) W-2, boxes 4 and
6. If married filing jointly, include your spouse’s amounts with yours. If you
worked for a railroad, see instructions on back
Add lines 7 and 8
1
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
27 and 59, plus any uncollected social security and
Medicare or tier 1 RRTA taxes included on line 63.
Enter -0-.
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
66a and 67.
Enter the total of the amount from Form 1040A, line
40a, plus any excess social security and tier 1 RRTA
taxes withheld that you entered to the left of line 43
(see instructions on back).
Enter the amount from line 1 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet on page 43 of the Form 1040 instructions,
page 38 of the Form 1040A instructions, or page 20 of the Form 1040NR instructions. If you used Pub.
972, enter the amount from line 8 of the worksheet on page 4 of the publication
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 53, Form 1040A, line 33, or Form 1040NR, line 48
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero, stop; you cannot take this credit
8
9
/H20854
6
/H20854
1040A filers:
1040 filers:
1040 filers:
1040A filers:
1
2
13
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 68,
Form 1040A, line 41, or
Form 1040NR, line 62.
/H17076
/H17076
8812
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
3
Enter your total earned income (see instructions on back)
5 Is the amount on line 4a more than $11,300?
No. Leave line 5 blank and enter -0- on line 6.
4a
5
Multiply the amount on line 5 by 15% (.15) and enter the result
7
Next. Do you have three or more qualifying children?
No. If line 6 is zero, stop; you cannot take this credit. Otherwise, skip Part II and enter the
smaller of line 3 or line 6 on line 13.
Ye s .
7
8
9
10
10
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- 11
12 12Enter the larger of line 6 or line 11
Next, enter the smaller of line 3 or line 12 on line 13.
13 This is your additional child tax credit
Part III
Part I
Part II
All Filers
Certain Filers Who Have Three or More Qualifying Children
Additional Child Tax Credit
If line 6 is equal to or more than line 3, skip Part II and enter the amount from line 3 on
line 13. Otherwise, go to line 7.
(99)
4b
Nontaxable combat pay (see instructions on
back)
b
20061040NR
. . . . . . . . . .
1040
1040A
. .. . .. .. ..
1040NR
. .. . .. ... .
Enter the total amounts from Form 1040NR, line 54,
plus any uncollected social security and Medicare or
tier 1 RRTA taxes included on line 58.
1040NR filers:
Enter the amount from Form 1040NR, line 61.1040NR filers:
2,858
891
/H12011
/H12011
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 221

Page 224 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 35-1. Comparison of Education Credits
Hope Credit Lifetime Learning Credit
35. Up to $1,650 credit per eligible student Up to $2,000 credit per return
Available only until the first 2 years of Available for all years of postsecondary
postsecondary education are completed education and for courses to acquire or
improve job skillsEducation
Available only for 2 years per eligible student Available for an unlimited number of years
Credits Student must be pursuing an undergraduate Student does not need to be pursuing a degree
degree or other recognized educational or other recognized education credential
credential
Student must be enrolled at least half time for Available for one or more coursesWhat’s New
at least one academic period beginning
during the yearIncome limits increased. Beginning in 2006,
the amount of your Hope or lifetime learning No felony drug conviction on student’s record Felony drug conviction rule does not a pply
credit is gradually reduced (phased out) if your
modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) is be-
tween $45,000 and $55,000 ($90,000 and year, you can choose to claim either credit, but
$110,000 if you file a joint return). You cannot not both. For 2006, if the total qualified educa- Information for Bothclaim a credit if your MAGI is $55,000 or more tion expenses for a student are less than $7,500,
($110,000 or more if you file a joint return). This it will generally be to your benefit to claim the the Hope and Lifetimeis an increase from the 2005 limits of $43,000 Hope credit.
and $53,000 ($87,000 and $107,000 if filing a If you pay qualified education expenses for Learning Creditsjoint return). For more information, see Effect of more than one student in the same year, you
the Amount of Your Income on the Amount of can choose to take credits on a per-student, Several rules are common to both educationYour Credit, later. per-year basis. This means that, for example, credits. These are discussed below.you can claim the Hope credit for one student
and the lifetime learning credit for another stu-
Can You Claim a Creditdent in the same year.
Reminders Differences between the Hope and life- The following rules will help you determine if you
time learning credits. There are several dif- are eligible to claim an education credit on your
ferences between these two credits. ForKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. tax return.
example, you can claim the Hope credit basedThis Act provides tax relief for persons affected
on the same student’s expenses for no moreby Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may be
than 2 years. However, there is no limit on theable to claim an education credit. See Publica- Who Can Claim a Creditnumber of years for which you can claim a life-tion 4492.
time learning credit based on the same student’s Generally, you can claim an education credit if
expenses. The differences between the two all three of the following requirements are met.
credits are summarized in Table 35-1, above. • You pay qualified education expenses of
At the time this publication went toIntroduction higher education.
print, Congress was considering legis-This chapter discusses two tax credits (referred • You pay the education expenses for anlation that would reinstate the tuitionCAUTION
!
to here as education credits) available to per- eligible student.and fees deduction. If this deduction is rein-sons who pay expenses for higher education. stated, you may be able to take a deduction for • The eligible student is either yourself, yourThey are: your education expenses instead of a credit. spouse, or a dependent for whom you
Choose the one that will give you the lower tax.• The Hope credit, and claim an exemption on your tax return.
To find out if this legislation was enacted, and for• The lifetime learning credit. more details, go to www.irs.gov, click on More
Forms and Publications , and then on What1sThe chapter will do the following. Note. Qualified education expenses paid by
Hot in forms and publications, or see Publication a dependent for whom you claim an exemption,• Give you general information that applies 553, Highlights of 2006 Tax Changes. or by a third party for that dependent, are consid-to both of the credits. ered paid by you.
• Give you specific information about each “Qualified education expenses” are definedUseful Itemsof the credits. later under What Expenses Qualify . “EligibleYou may want to see: students” are defined later under Who Is an• Help you choose which of the credits to Eligible Student . A “dependent for whom youclaim. Publication claim an exemption” is defined later under Who
• Show you how to figure the credit you ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education Can Claim a Dependent’s Expenses.
choose. You may find Figure 35-A, on the next page,
Form (and Instructions) helpful in determining if you can claim an educa-
tion credit on your tax return.Can you claim both education credits this ❏ 8863 Education Credits (Hope and
year. For each student, you can elect for any Lifetime Learning Credits)
year only one of the credits. For example, if you
Who Cannot Claim a Creditelect to take the Hope credit for a child on your
2006 tax return, you cannot, for that same child, You cannot claim an education credit for 2006 ifalso claim the lifetime learning credit for 2006. any of the following apply.If you are eligible to claim the Hope credit
• Your filing status is married filing sepa-and you are also eligible to claim the lifetime
rately.learning credit for the same student in the same
Page 222 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 225 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You are listed as a dependent in the Ex- Qualified Education Expenses No Double Benefit Allowed
emptions section on another person’s tax
For purposes of an education credit, qualified  You cannot do any of the following.return (such as your parents’). See Who
education expenses are tuition and certain re-Can Claim a Dependent’s Expenses, later. • Deduct higher education expenses onlated expenses required for enrollment or at- your income tax return (as, for example, a• Your MAGI is $55,000 or more ($110,000 tendance at an eligible educational institution. business expense) and also claim an edu-or more in the case of a joint return).
cation credit based on those same ex-MAGI is explained later under Effect of the
Eligible educational institution. An eligible penses.Amount of Your Income on the Amount of
educational institution is any college, university,Your Credit.
vocational school, or other postsecondary edu- • Claim a Hope credit and a lifetime learning• You (or your spouse) were a nonresident cational institution eligible to participate in a stu- credit based on the same qualified educa-alien for any part of 2006 and the nonresi- dent aid program administered by the tion expenses.dent alien did not elect to be treated as a Department of Education. It includes virtually allresident alien for tax purposes. More infor- • Claim an education credit based on theaccredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-mation on nonresident aliens can be found same expenses used to figure the tax-freevately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for portion of a distribution from a Coverdellstitutions. The educational institution should beAliens. education savings account (ESA) or quali-able to tell you if it is an eligible educational
fied tuition program (QTP).institution.
Certain educational institutions locatedAt the time this publication went to • Claim a credit based on qualified educa-
outside the United States also participate in theprint, Congress was considering legis- tion expenses paid with tax-free scholar-
U.S. Department of Education’s Federal Stu-lation that would reinstate the tuition ship, grant, or employer-providedCAUTION
!
dent Aid (FSA) programs.and fees deduction. If this deduction is rein- educational assistance. See Adjustments
stated, you cannot take both an education credit to Qualified Education Expenses, later.
and a deduction for your education expenses for Related expenses. Student-activity fees and
2006. Choose the one that will give you the expenses for course-related books, supplies, At the time this publication went tolower tax. To find out if this legislation was en- and equipment are included in qualified educa- print, Congress was considering legis-acted, and for more details, go to www.irs.gov, tion expenses only if the fees and expenses lation that would reinstate the tuitionCAUTION
!
click on More Forms and Publications, and then must be paid to the institution as a condition of and fees deduction. If this deduction is rein-on What1s Hot in forms and publications, or see enrollment or attendance. stated, you cannot take both an education creditPublication 553, Highlights of 2006 Tax In the following examples, assume that each and a deduction for your education expenses forChanges. student is an eligible student at an eligible edu- 2006. Choose the one that will give you the
cational institution. lower tax. To find out if this legislation was en-
acted, and for more details, go to www.irs.gov,What Expenses Qualify Example 1. Jackson is a sophomore in Uni- click on More Forms and Publications, and then
versity V’s degree program in dentistry. This on What1s Hot in forms and publications, or seeThe education credits are based on qualified
year, in addition to tuition, he is required to pay a Publication 553, Highlights of 2006 Taxeducation expenses you pay for yourself, your
fee to the university for the rental of the dental Changes.spouse, or a dependent for whom you claim an
equipment he will use in this program. Becauseexemption on your tax return. Generally, a credit
the equipment rental fee must be paid to Univer-is allowed for qualified education expenses paid
sity V for enrollment and attendance, Jackson’sin 2006 for an academic period beginning in Adjustments to Qualifiedequipment rental fee is a qualified expense.2006 or in the first 3 months of 2007. Education ExpensesFor example, if you paid $1,500 in December
Example 2. Donna and Charles, both2006 for qualified tuition for the Spring 2007 If you pay qualified education expenses withfirst-year students at College W, are required tosemester beginning in January 2007, you may certain tax-free funds, you cannot claim a credithave certain books and other reading materialsbe able to use that $1,500 in figuring your 2006 for those amounts. You must reduce the quali-to use in their mandatory first-year classes. Thecredit. fied education expenses by the amount of anycollege has no policy about how students should tax-free educational assistance and refund(s)obtain these materials, but any student who you received.Academic period. An academic period in- purchases them from College W’s bookstore willcludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other receive a bill directly from the college. Charlesperiod of study (such as a summer school ses- bought his books from a friend, so what he paid Tax-free educational assistance. This in-sion) as reasonably determined by an educa- for them is not a qualified education expense. cludes:tional institution. In the case of an educational Donna bought hers at College W’s bookstore. • Tax-free parts of scholarships and fellow-institution that uses credit hours or clock hours Although Donna paid College W directly for her ships (see chapter 12 of this publicationand does not have academic terms, each pay- first-year books and materials, her payment is and chapter 1 of Publication 970),ment period can be treated as an academic not a qualified expense because the books andperiod. materials are not required to be purchased from • Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publication
College W for enrollment or attendance at the 970),
Paid with borrowed funds. You can claim an institution. • Employer-provided educational assistanceeducation credit for qualified education ex-
(see chapter 10 of Publication 970),penses paid with the proceeds of a loan. You Example 3. When Marci enrolled at College
use the expenses to figure the education credit X for her freshman year, she had to pay a sepa- • Veterans’ educational assistance (see
for the year in which the expenses are paid, not rate student activity fee in addition to her tuition. chapter 1 of Publication 970), and
the year in which the loan is repaid. Treat loan This activity fee is required of all students, and is • Any other nontaxable (tax-free) paymentspayments sent directly to the educational institu- used solely to fund on-campus organizations (other than gifts or inheritances) receivedtion as paid on the date the institution credits the and activities run by students, such as the stu- as educational assistance.student’s account. dent newspaper and the student government.
No portion of the fee covers personal expenses.
Student withdraws from class(es). You can Although labeled as a student activity fee, the Refunds. Qualified education expenses do
claim an education credit for qualified education fee is required for Marci’s enrollment and attend- not include expenses for whi ch you, or someone
expenses not refunded when a student with- ance at College X. Therefore, it is a qualified else who paid qualified education expe nses on
draws. expense. behalf of a student, receive a refund. For more
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 223

Page 226 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 35-A. Can You Claim an Education Credit for 2006?
Yes/H17074
Did you* pay qualified education expenses in 2006 for an eligible student?
/H17074
No
Did the academic period for which you paid qualified education
expenses begin in 2006 or the first 3 months of 2007?
Is the eligible student you, your spouse (if married filing jointly), or your
dependent for whom you claim an exemption on your tax return?
Are you listed as a dependent on another person’s tax return?
Is your filing status married filing separately?
Were you (or your spouse) a nonresident alien for any part of 2006 who
did not elect to be treated as a resident alien for tax purposes?
Is your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) less than $55,000
($110,000 if married filing jointly)?
Did you use the same expenses to claim a deduction, or to figure
the tax-free portion of a Coverdell ESA or QTP distribution?**
Were the same expenses paid with tax-free scholarship, fellowship,
grant, or employer-provided educational assistance?
Did you, or someone else who paid these expenses on behalf of a
student, receive a refund of all the expenses?
Do you have a tax liability (Form 1040, line 46 minus lines 47, 48, and 49)
(Form 1040A, line 28 minus lines 29 and 30)?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
You cannot
claim an education
credit for 2006
You can claim
an education credit
for 2006
You cannot use the same expenses to claim both a lifetime learning credit and a Hope credit.**
Qualified education expenses paid by a dependent for whom you claim an exemption, or by a third party for that dependent, are co nsidered paid by you.*
Caution. At the time this publication went to print, Congress was considering legislation that would reinstate the tuition and fees dedu ction. If this
deduction is reinstated, you cannot take both an education credit and a deduction for your education expenses for the same stud ent for 2006. To find
out if this legislation was enacted, and for more details, go to www.irs.gov, click on More Forms and Publications, and then on What’s Hot in forms and
publications, or see Publication 553, Highlights of 2006 Tax Changes.
Page 224 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 227 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
information, see Refunds in chapters 2 and 3 of • Similar personal, living, or family ex- Qualified education expenses paid di-
Publication 970. rectly to an eligible educational institu-penses.
tion for your dependent under a
TIP
This is true even if the amount must be paid toAmounts that do not reduce qualified educa- court-approved divorce decree are treated asthe institution as a condition of enrollment ortion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu- paid by your dependent.attendance.cation expenses by amounts paid with funds the
student receives as: Expenses paid by you. If you claim an ex-Sports, games, hobbies, and noncredit emption for a dependent who is an eligible stu-• Payment for services, such as wages, courses. Qualified education expenses gen- dent, only you can include any expenses youerally do not include expenses that relate to any• A loan, paid when figuring the amount of an educationcourse of instruction or other education that in- credit. If neither you nor anyone else claims an• A gift, volves sports, games or hobbies, or any non- exemption for the dependent, only the depen-credit course. However, if the course of• An inheritance, or dent can include any expenses you paid wheninstruction or other education is part of the stu- figuring an education credit.• A withdrawal from the student’s personal dent’s degree program, these expenses cansavings. qualify. Expenses paid by others. Someone other
than you, your spouse, or your dependent (suchDo not reduce the qualified education ex- Comprehensive or bundled fees. Some eli- as a relative or former spouse) may make apenses by any scholarship or fellowship re- gible educational institutions combine all of their payment directly to an eligible educational insti-ported as income on the student’s tax return in fees for an academic period into one amount. If tution to pay for an eligible student’s qualifiedthe following situations. you do not receive or do not have access to an education expenses. In this case, the student is• The use of the money is restricted to costs allocation showing how much you paid for quali- treated as receiving the payment from the otherof attendance (such as room and board) fied education expenses and how much you person and, in turn, paying the institution. If youother than qualified education expenses. paid for personal expenses, such as those listed claim an exemption on your tax return for the
above, contact the institution. The institution is student, you are considered to have paid the• The use of the money is not restricted and required to make this allocation and provide you expenses.is used to pay education expenses that with the amount you paid (or were billed) forare not qualified (such as room and qualified education expenses on Form 1098-T, Example. In 2006, Ms. Allen makes a pay-board). Tuition Statement. See Figuring the Credit, later, ment directly to an eligible educational institution
for more information about Form 1098-T. for her grandson Todd’s qualified education ex-Example 1. Jackie paid $3,000 for tuition penses. For purposes of claiming an educationand $5,000 for room and board at University X. credit, Todd is treated as receiving the money asWho Can Claim aThe university did not require her to pay any fees a gift from his grandmother and, in turn, payingin addition to her tuition in order to enroll in or Dependent’s Expenses his qualified education expenses himself.attend classes. To help pay these costs, she Unless an exemption for Todd is claimed onIf there are qualified education expenses forwas awarded a $2,000 scholarship and a $4,000 someone else’s 2006 tax return, only Todd canstudent loan. your dependent for a year, either you or your use the payment to claim an education credit.dependent, but not both of you, can claim anThe terms of the scholarship state that it may If anyone, such as Todd’s parents, claims aneducation credit for your dependent’s expensesbe used to pay any of Jackie’s college ex- exemption for Todd on his or her 2006 tax re-for that year.penses. Because she applied it toward her tui- turn, whoever claims the exemption may be abletion, the scholarship is tax free. Therefore, for For you to claim an education credit for your to use the expenses to claim an educationpurposes of figuring an education credit (either dependent’s expenses, you must also claim an credit. If anyone else claims an exemption forHope or lifetime learning), she must first use the exemption for your dependent. You do this by Todd, Todd cannot claim an education credit.$2,000 scholarship to reduce her tuition (her listing your dependent’s name and other re-
only qualified education expense). The student quired information on Form 1040 (or Form Tuition reduction. When an eligible educa-loan is not tax-free educational assistance, so 1040A), line 6c. tional institution provides a reduction in tuition toshe does not use it to reduce her qualified ex- an employee of the institution (or spouse orpenses. Jackie is treated as having paid $1,000 dependent child of an employee), the amount ofIF you... THEN only...in qualified education expenses ($3,000 tuition the reduction may or may not be taxable. If it is– $2,000 scholarship). claim an exemption you can claim an taxable, the employee is treated as receiving a
on your tax return for education credit payment of that amount and, in turn, paying it toExample 2. The facts are the same as in a dependent who is based on that the educational institution on behalf of the stu-Example 1, except that Jackie uses the $2,000 an eligible student dependent’s dent. For more information on tuition reductions,scholarship to pay room and board, and, there- expenses. The see Qualified Tuition Reduction  in chapter 1 offore, reports her entire scholarship as income on dependent cannot Publication 970.her tax return. In this case, the scholarship is claim a credit.
allocated to expenses other than qualified edu-
do not claim an the dependent cancation expenses. Jackie is treated as paying the Effect of the Amount of
exemption on your claim an educationentire $3,000 tuition with other funds and can Your Income on thetax return for a credit. You cannotfigure her education credit on the entire $3,000.
dependent who is an claim a credit based Amount of Your Crediteligible student on this dependent’s
(even if entitled to expenses. The amount of your education credit is phasedExpenses That Do Not Qualify the exemption) out (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is between
Qualified education expenses do not include $45,000 and $55,000 ($90,000 and $110,000 if
amounts paid for: you file a joint return). You cannot claim an
Expenses paid by dependent. If you claim education credit if your MAGI is $55,000 or more
• Insurance, an exemption on your tax return for an eligible ($110,000 or more if you file a joint return).
student who is your dependent, treat any ex-• Medical expenses (including student
Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).penses paid (or deemed paid) by your depen-health fees),
For most taxpayers, MAGI is adjusted grossdent as if you had paid them. Include these• Room and board, income (AGI) as figured on their federal incomeexpenses when figuring the amount of your edu-
tax return.cation credit.• Transportation, or
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 225

Page 228 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
MAGI when using Form 1040A. If you file distributing a controlled substance as of Luis again attended College X but not as part of
Form 1040A, your MAGI is the AGI on line 22 of the end of 2006. a degree program. Luis graduated from high
that form. school in June 2006. For the 2006 Fall semes-
ter, Luis enrolled as a full-time student in CollegeMAGI when using Form 1040. If you file Completion of first 2 years. A student who X as part of a degree program, and College XForm 1040, your MAGI is the AGI on line 38 of was awarded 2 years of academic credit for awarded Luis credit for his prior coursework atthat form, modified by adding back any: postsecondary work completed before 2006 has College X. Because Luis was enrolled in a de-completed the first 2 years of postsecondary gree program at College X for the 2006 Fall term1. Foreign earned income exclusion, education. This student generally would not be on at least a half-time basis, Luis is an eligiblean eligible student for purposes of the Hope2. Foreign housing exclusion, student for all of tax year 2006. Therefore, thecredit. qualified education expenses paid for classes3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents
Exception. Any academic credit awarded taken at College X during both the 2006 Springof American Samoa, and
solely on the basis of the student’s performance semester (during which Luis was not enrolled in4. Exclusion of income from Puerto Rico. on proficiency examinations is disregarded in a degree program) and the 2006 Fall semester
determining whether the student has completed are taken into account in computing any Hope
2 years of postsecondary education.Phaseout. If your MAGI is within the range of credit.
incomes where the credit must be reduced, you
Enrolled at least half-time. A student waswill figure your reduced credit using lines 7–13 Example 5. Diana graduated from highenrolled at least half-time if the student wasof Form 8863. school in June 2004. In January 2005, Dianataking at least half the normal full-time work load enrolled in a one-year postsecondary certificatefor his or her course of study. program on a full-time basis to obtain a certifi-When Must the Credit Be The standard for what is half of the normal cate as a travel agent. Diana completed thefull-time work load is determined by each eligibleRepaid (Recaptured) program in December 2005, and was awarded aeducational institution. However, the standard certificate. In January 2006, she enrolled in amay not be lower than any of those establishedIf, after you file your 2006 tax return, you or one-year postsecondary certificate program onby the Department of Education under thesomeone else receives tax-free educational as- a full-time basis to obtain a certificate as a com-Higher Education Act of 1965.sistance for, or a refund of, an expense you used puter programmer. Diana is an eligible student
to figure an education credit on that return, you for both tax years 2005 and 2006 because sheExample 1. Marty graduated from highmay have to repay all or part of the credit. You meets the degree requirement, the work loadschool in June 2005. In September, he enrolledmust refigure your education credit(s) for 2006 requirement, and the year of study requirementin an undergraduate degree program at Collegeas if the assistance or refund was received in for those years.U, and attended full time for both the 2005 Fall2006. Subtract the amount of the refigured credit
and 2006 Spring semesters. For the 2006 Fallfrom the amount of the credit you claimed. The
Figuring the Creditsemester, Marty was enrolled less thanresult is the amount you must repay. You add
half-time. Because Marty was enrolled in anthe repayment (recapture) to your tax liability for
The amount of the Hope credit (per eligible stu-undergraduate degree program on at least athe year in which you receive the assistance or
dent) is the sum of:half-time basis for at least one academic periodrefund (see the instructions for your tax return
that began during 2005 and at least one aca-for that year). Your original 2006 tax return does 1. 100% of the first $1,100 of qualified educa-demic period that began during 2006, he is annot change. tion expenses you paid for the eligible stu-eligible student for tax years 2005 and 2006 dent, and(including the 2006 Fall semester when he en-
rolled at College U on less than a half-time 2. 50% of the next $1,100 of qualified educa-
basis). tion expenses you paid for that student.Information for Only
The maximum amount of Hope credit youExample 2. After taking classes at College can claim in 2006 is $1,650 times the number ofthe Hope Credit V on a half-time basis for the 2005 Spring and eligible students. You can claim the full $1,650Fall semesters, Sharon became a full-time stu- for each eligible student for whom you paid atYou may be able to claim a Hope credit of up to dent for the 2006 Spring semester. College V least $2,200 of qualified education expenses.$1,650 for qualified education expenses paid for classified Sharon as a second-semester sopho- However, the credit may be reduced based oneach eligible student. more for the 2006 Spring semester and as a
your MAGI. See Effect of the Amount of Yourfirst-semester junior for the 2006 Fall semester.
Income on the Amount of Your Credit, earlier.Because College V did not classify Sharon asWho Is an Eligible Student
having completed the first two years of postsec-
Example. Jon and Karen Frost are marriedondary education as of the beginning of 2006,To claim the Hope credit, the student for whom
and file a joint tax return. For 2006, they claim anSharon is an eligible student for tax year 2006.you pay qualified education expenses must be
exemption for their dependent daughter on theirTherefore, the qualified education expensesan eligible student. This is a student who meets
tax return. Their MAGI is $70,000. Their daugh-paid for the 2006 Spring semester and the 2006all of the following requirements.
ter is in her sophomore (second) year of studiesFall semester are taken into account in calculat-• The student did not have expenses that at the local university. Jon and Karen paid quali-ing any Hope credit for 2006.were used to figure a Hope credit in any 2 fied education expenses of $4,300 in 2006.
earlier tax years. Jon and Karen, their daughter, and the localExample 3. During the 2005 Fall semester,
university meet all of the requirements for theLuis was a high school student who took classes• The student had not completed the first 2
Hope credit. Jon and Karen can claim a $1,650on a half-time basis at College X. Luis was notyears of postsecondary education (gener-
Hope credit in 2006. This is 100% of the firstenrolled as part of a degree program at Collegeally, the freshman and sophomore years
$1,100 of qualified education expenses, plusX because College X only admits students to aof college) before 2006.
50% of the next $1,100.degree program if they have a high school di-• For at least one academic period begin- ploma or equivalent. Because Luis was not en-ning in 2006, the student was enrolled at Form 1098-T. To help you figure your Hoperolled in a degree program at College X duringleast half-time in a program leading to a credit, you should receive Form 1098-T. Gener-2005, Luis was not an eligible student for taxdegree, certificate, or other recognized ed- ally, an eligible educational institution (such as ayear 2005.ucational credential. college or university) must send Form 1098-T
(or acceptable substitute) to each enrolled stu-• The student was free of any federal or Example 4. The facts are the same as in
dent by January 31, 2007.state felony conviction for possessing or Example 3. During the 2006 Spring semester,
Page 226 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 229 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on your MAGI. See Effect of the Amount of Your for their two dependent children on their taxClaiming the Credit Income on the Amount of Your Credit, earlier. return. Their modified adjusted gross income is
$93,000. Their tax, before credits, is $9,956.You claim the Hope credit by completing Parts I
Example. Bruce and Toni are married and Their son, Sean, will receive his bachelor’s de-and III of Form 8863 and submitting it with your
file a joint tax return. For 2006, their MAGI is gree in psychology from the state college in MayForm 1040 or 1040A. Enter the credit on Form
$75,000. Toni is attending a local college (an 2007. Their daughter, Corey, enrolled full-time1040, line 50, or on Form 1040A, line 31. An
eligible educational institution) to earn credits at that same college in August 2005, to beginillustrated example using Form 8863 appears at
toward a degree in nursing. She already has athe end of this chapter. working on her bachelor’s degree in physical
bachelor’s degree in history and wants to be- education. In July 2006, Dave and Valerie paid
come a nurse. In August 2006, Toni paid $6,000 $2,200 in tuition costs for each child for the Fall
of qualified education expenses for her Fall 2006 semester. In December 2006, they also
2006 semester. Bruce and Toni can claim a paid $2,600 of tuition for each child for theInformation for Only $1,200 (20% × $6,000) lifetime learning credit Spring 2007 semester that begins in January.on their 2006 joint tax return.the Lifetime Learning Dave and Valerie, their children, and the
college meet all of the requirements for theForm 1098-T. To help you figure your lifetimeCredit higher education credits. Because Sean is be-learning credit, you should receive Form
yond the second (sophomore) year of his post-1098-T. Generally, an eligible educational insti-You may be able to claim a lifetime learning secondary education, his expenses do nottution (such as a college or university) mustcredit of up to $2,000 for qualified education qualify for the Hope credit. But, amounts paid forsend Form 1098-T (or acceptable substitute) toexpenses paid for all students enrolled in eligible Sean’s expenses in 2006 for academic periodseach enrolled student by January 31, 2007.educational institutions. beginning in 2006 and the first 3 months of 2007
qualify for the lifetime learning credit. Corey is inClaiming the CreditWho Is an Eligible Student her first 2 (freshman and sophomore) years of
postsecondary education, and expenses paidYou claim the lifetime learning credit by complet-For purposes of the lifetime learning credit, an for her in 2006, for academic periods beginninging Parts II and III of Form 8863 and submitting iteligible student is a student who is enrolled in in 2006 and January 2007, qualify for the Hopewith your Form 1040 or 1040A. Enter the creditone or more courses at an eligible educational credit.on Form 1040, line 50, or Form 1040A, line 31.institution.
Dave and Valerie figure their tentative edu-An illustrated example using Form 8863 is
shown at the end of this chapter. cation credits for 2006, $2,610, as shown in the
Figuring the Credit completed Form 8863. They cannot claim the
full amount because their modified adjustedThe amount of the lifetime learning credit is 20% gross income is more than $90,000. They carryof the first $10,000 of qualified education ex- the amount from line 17 of Form 8863, $2,219,Illustrated Examplepenses you paid for all eligible students. The to line 50 of Form 1040, and they attach themaximum amount of lifetime learning credit you
Form 8863 to their return.Dave and Valerie Jones are married and file acan claim for 2006 is $2,000 (20% × $10,000).
joint tax return. For 2006, they claim exemptionsHowever, that amount may be reduced based
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 227

Page 230 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dave and Valerie Jones 987 00 6543
137 00 9642
Corey
Jones 2,200 1,100 3,300 1,650
1,650
Sean 246 00 9731Jones 4,800
4,800
4,800
960
2,610
850
2,219
9,956
-0-
9,956
2,219
110,000
93,000
17,000
20,000
OMB No. 1545-0074Education Credits
Form 8863
/H17075See instructions.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 50
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Hope Credit. Caution: You cannot take the Hope credit for more than 2 tax years for the same student.
1
2
Lifetime Learning Credit
Form 8863 (2006)
Part I
Part II
2
(a) Student’s name
(as shown on page 1
of your tax return)
Cat. No. 25379M
Tentative Hope credit. Add the amounts on line 1, column (f). If you are taking the lifetime learning
credit for another student, go to Part II; otherwise, go to Part III /H17075
7
Add the amounts on line 3, column (c), and enter the total
8
8
Enter the smaller of line 4 or $10,000
9
Subtract line 9 from line 8. If zero or less, stop; you cannot take any
education credits
9
11
3
10
10
14
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
(f) Enter one-half
of the amount in
column (e)
(e) Add
column (c) and
column (d)
(d) Enter the
smaller of the
amount in
column (c) or
$1,100**
(c) Qualified
expenses (see
instructions). Do
not enter more
than $2,200* for
each student.
Caution: You cannot take the Hope credit and the lifetime learning credit for the same student in the same year.
(a) Student’s name (as shown on page 1 of your tax return)
First name Last name
(c) Qualified
expenses (see
instructions)
Tentative lifetime learning credit. Add lines 6a and 6b and go to Part III
4
5a
4
5a
6c
Part III Allowable Education Credits
Tentative education credits. Add lines 2 and 6c7
Enter: $110,000 if married filing jointly; $55,000 if single, head of household,
or qualifying widow(er)
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38*, or Form 1040A, line 22
If line 10 is equal to or more than line 11, enter the amount from line 7 on line 13 and go to 
line 14. If line 10 is less than line 11, divide line 10 by line 11. Enter the result as a decimal
(rounded to at least three places)
12
Multiply line 7 by line 12 /H1707513
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46, or Form 1040A, line 2814
Subtract line 15 from line 14. If zero or less, stop; you cannot take any
education credits
13
12 /H11003.
(Hope and Lifetime Learning Credits)
(b) Student’s
social security
number (as
shown on page 1
of your tax return)
(b) Student’s social security
number (as shown on page
1 of your tax return)
Enter: $20,000 if married filing jointly; $10,000 if single, head of household,
or qualifying widow(er) 11
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Last name
First name
16
17
15 Enter the total, if any, of your credits from Form 1040, lines 47 through 49,
or Form 1040A, lines 29 and 30
(99)
* For each student who attended an eligible educational institution in the Gulf Opportunity Zone, do not enter more than $4,400.
** For each student who attended an eligible educational institution in the Gulf Opportunity Zone, enter the smaller of the amount in
column (c) or $2,200.
b
c
For students who attended an eligible educational institution in the Gulf Opportunity Zone, enter
the smaller of $10,000 or their qualified expenses included on line 4 (see special rules on page 3)
Subtract line 5b from line 5a
Multiply line 5b by 40% (.40)6a
Multiply line 5c by 20% (.20)b
c
5b
5c
6a
6b
2006
15
16
Education credits. Enter the smaller of line 13 or line 16 here and on Form 1040, line 50, or Form
1040A, line 31
17
* If you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or 4563, or you are excluding income from Puerto Rico, see Pub. 970 for the amount to en ter.
4,800
960
Page 228 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 231 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 36-1, Earned Income Credit in a Nut-
shell. Use Table 36-1 as a guide to Parts A, B,Introduction C, and D. The table is a summary of all the rules
in each part.36. The earned income credit (EIC) is a tax credit for
certain people who work and have less than
Do you have a qualifying child? You have a$38,348 of earned income. A tax credit usually
qualifying child only if you have a child whomeans more money in your pocket. It reduces
meets the three tests described in Rule 8 andthe amount of tax you owe. The EIC may alsoEarned Income illustrated in Figure 36-1.give you a refund.
Credit How do you get the earned income credit? If Improper Claim
To claim the EIC, you must: Made in Prior Year
1. Qualify by meeting certain rules, and If your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied orWhat’s New 2. File a tax return, even if you: reduced for any reason other than a math or
clerical error, you must attach a completed Forma. Do not owe any tax,Earned income amount is more. The maxi- 8862 to your next tax return to claim the EIC.mum amount of income you can earn and still You must also qualify to claim the EIC by meet-b. Did not earn enough money to file aget the credit has increased. You may be able to ing all the rules described in this chapter.return, ortake the credit if: However, if your EIC was denied or reducedc. Did not have income taxes withheld as a result of a math or clerical error, do not• You have more than one qualifying child from your pay. attach Form 8862 to your next tax return. Forand you earned less than $36,348
example, if your arithmetic is incorrect, the IRS($38,348 if married filing jointly), When you complete your return, you can can correct it. If you do not provide a correctfigure your EIC by using a worksheet in the• You have one qualifying child and you social security number, the IRS can deny theinstructions for Form 1040, Form 1040A, orearned less than $32,001 ($34,001 if mar- EIC. These kinds of errors are called math orForm 1040EZ. Or, if you prefer, you can let theried filing jointly), or clerical errors.IRS figure the credit for you. If your EIC for any year after 1996 was de-• You do not have a qualifying child and you nied and it was determined that your error wasearned less than $12,120 ($14,120 if mar- How will this chapter help you? due to reckless or intentional disregard of theried filing jointly). This chapter will explain the following. EIC rules, then you cannot claim the EIC for the
Your adjusted gross income also must be less next 2 years. If your error was due to fraud, then• The rules you must meet to qualify for thethan the amount in the above list that applies to you cannot claim the EIC for the next 10 years.EIC.you. For details, see Rules 1 and 15.
More information. See chapter 5 in Publica-• How to figure the EIC.
Investment income amount is more. The tion 596 for more detailed information about the• How to get advance payment of the EIC inmaximum amount of investment income you can disallowance period and Form 8862.your paycheck.have and still get the credit has increased to
$2,800. See Rule 6.
Useful Items
Part A. Rules forYou may want to see:
EveryonePublicationReminders
❏ 596 Earned Income Credit (EIC) This part of the chapter discusses Rules 1Increased EIC on certain joint returns. A through 7 . You must meet all seven rules tomarried person filing a joint return may get more Form (and Instructions) qualify for the earned income credit. If you do not
EIC than someone with the same income but a meet all seven rules, you cannot get the credit❏ Schedule EIC Earned Income Creditdifferent filing status. As a result, the EIC table and you do not need to read the rest of the(Qualifying Child Information)has different columns for married persons filing chapter.
jointly than for everyone else. When you look up If you meet all seven rules in this part, then❏ W-5 Earned Income Credit Advance
your EIC in the EIC Table, be sure to use the read either Part B or Part C (whichever applies)Payment Certificate
correct column for your filing status and the for more rules you must meet.❏ 8862 Information To Claim Earnednumber of children you have.
Income Credit After Disallowance
Rule 1. Your AGI Must BeAdvance payment of the earned income
credit in your paycheck. If you expect to Less Than:
qualify for the earned income credit in 2007, you
can receive part of it in each paycheck through- • $36,348 ($38,348 for married filing jointly)Do You Qualify for theout the year. See Advance Earned Income if you have more than one qualifying child,Credit, later, for more information.
Credit? • $32,001 ($34,001 for married filing jointly)
Online help. You can use the EITC Assistant if you have one qualifying child, or
at www.irs.gov/eitc to find out if you are eligible To qualify to claim the EIC, you must first meet • $12,120 ($14,120 for married filing jointly)for the credit. The EITC Assistant is available in all of the rules explained in Part A, Rules for if you do not have a qualifying child.English and Spanish. Everyone. Then you must meet the rules in Part
B, Rules If You Have a Qualifying Child, or Part
EIC questioned by IRS. The IRS may ask you C, Rules If You Do Not Have a Qualifying Child. Adjusted gross income (AGI).  AGI is theto provide documents to prove you are entitled There is one final rule you must meet in Part D, amount on line 38 (Form 1040), line 22 (Form
to claim the EIC. We will tell you what docu- Figuring and Claiming the EIC. You qualify for 1040A), or line 4 (Form 1040EZ). If your AGI is
ments to send us. These may include: birth the credit if you meet all the rules in each part equal to or more than the applicable limit listed
certificates, school records, medical records, that applies to you. above, you cannot claim the EIC.
etc. We will also send you a letter with the name, • If you have a qualifying child, the rules inaddress, and telephone number of the IRS em- Example. Your AGI is $32,500, you are sin-Parts A, B, and D apply to you.ployee assigned to your case. The process of gle, and you have one qualifying child. You can-
establishing your eligibility will delay your re- • If you do not have a qualifying child, the not claim the EIC because your AGI is not less
rules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you.fund. than $32,001. However, if your filing status was
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 229

Page 232 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 36-1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
First, you must meet all the rules in this column. Second, you must meet all the rules in one of Third, you must meet the
these columns, whichever applies. rule in this column.
Part A. Part B. Part C. Part D.
Rules for Everyone Rules If You Have a Rules If You Do Not Figuring and Claiming the
Qualifying Child Have a Qualifying EIC
Child
1. Your adjusted gross 2. You must have a valid 8. Your child must meet 11. You must be at 15. Your earned income must
income (AGI) must be social security number. the relationship, age, and least age 25 but under be less than:
less than: 3. Your filing status residency tests. age 65.
•$36,348 ($38,348 for married
•$36,348 ($38,348 for cannot be “Married filing 9. Your qualifying child 12. You cannot be the filing jointly) if you have more
married filing jointly) if separately.” cannot be used by more dependent of another than one qualifying child,
you have more than one 4. You must be a U.S. than one person to claim person.
qualifying child, citizen or resident alien the EIC. 13. You cannot be a
•$32,001 ($34,001 for married
all year. 10. You cannot be a qualifying child of filing jointly) if you have one
•$32,001 ($34,001 for 5. You cannot file Form qualifying child of another another person. qualifying child, or
married filing jointly) if 2555 or Form 2555-EZ person. 14. You must have
you have one qualifying (relating to foreign lived in the United •$12,120 ($14,120 for married
child, or earned income). States more than half filing jointly) if you do not have
6. Your investment of the year. a qualifying child.
•$12,120 ($14,120 for income must be $2,800
married filing jointly) if or less. 
you do not have a 7. You must have earned
qualifying child. income.
married filing jointly, you might be able to claim Other taxpayer identification number. You instead of married filing separately. In that case,
cannot get the EIC if, instead of an SSN, you (orthe EIC because your AGI is less than $34,001. you may be able to claim the EIC. For detailed
your spouse if filing a joint return) have an indi- information about filing as head of household,Community property. If you are married, vidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). see chapter 2.but qualify to file as head of household under ITINs are issued by the Internal Revenue Serv-special rules for married taxpayers living apart ice to noncitizens who cannot get an SSN. Rule 4. You Must Be a(see Rule 3), and live in a state that has commu-
No SSN. If you do not have a valid SSN, putnity property laws, your AGI includes that portion U.S. Citizen or Resident“No” next to line 66a (Form 1040), line 40aof both your and your spouse’s wages that you
Alien All Year(Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form 1040EZ). Youare required to include in gross income. This is
cannot claim the EIC.different from the community property rules that
If you (or your spouse, if married) were a nonres-apply under Rule 7. Getting an SSN. If you (or your spouse if ident alien for any part of the year, you cannotfiling a joint return) do not have an SSN, you can claim the earned income credit unless your filingapply for one by filing Form SS-5, Application forRule 2. You Must Have a status is married filing jointly. You can use thata Social Security Card, with the Social Security filing status only if one spouse is a U.S. citizen orValid Social Security Administration. resident alien and you choose to treat the non-Number (SSN) resident spouse as a U.S. resident. If you makeFiling deadline approaching and still no
this choice, you and your spouse are taxed onSSN. If the filing deadline is approaching andTo claim the EIC, you (and your spouse if filing a your worldwide income. If you need more infor-you still do not have an SSN, you have twojoint return) must have a valid SSN issued by the mation on making this choice, get Publicationchoices.Social Security Administration (SSA). Any quali- 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.fying child listed on Schedule EIC also must 1. Request an automatic 6-month extensionhave a valid SSN. (See Rule 8  if you have a of time to file your return. You can get this Rule 5. You Cannot Filequalifying child.) extension by filing Form 4868, Application
If your social security card (or your spouse’s for Automatic Extension of Time to File Form 2555 or Formif filing a joint return) says “Not valid for employ- U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. For 2555-EZment” and your SSN was issued so that you (or more information, see chapter 1.
your spouse) could get a federally funded bene- You cannot claim the earned income credit if you2. File the return on time without claiming thefit, you cannot get the EIC. An example of a file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or FormEIC. After receiving the SSN, file anfederally funded benefit is Medicaid. amended return (Form 1040X, Amended 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.If you have a card with the legend “Not valid U.S. Individual Income Tax Return) claim- You file these forms to exclude income earned infor employment” and your immigration status ing the EIC. Attach a filled-in Schedule EIC foreign countries from your gross income, or tohas changed so that you are now a U.S. citizen if you have a qualifying child. deduct or exclude a foreign housing amount.or permanent resident, ask the SSA for a new U.S. possessions are not foreign countries. Seesocial security card without the legend. Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Rule 3. Your Filing Status Resident Aliens Abroad, for more detailed infor-U. S. citizen. If you were a U. S. citizen when mation.you received your SSN, you have a valid SSN. Cannot Be Married Filing
SeparatelyValid for work only with INS or DHS authori- Rule 6. Your Investment
zation. If your social security card reads “Valid If you are married, you usually must file a joint Income Must Be $2,800 orfor work only with INS authorization,” or “Valid return to claim the EIC. Your filing status cannotfor work only with DHS authorization,” you have Lessbe “Married filing separately.”a valid SSN.
Spouse did not live with you. If you are mar- You cannot claim the earned income credit un-
SSN missing or incorrect. If an SSN for you ried and your spouse did not live in your home at less your investment income is $2,800 or less. If
or your spouse is missing from your tax return or any time during the last 6 months of the year, your investment income is more than $2,800,
is incorrect, you may not get the EIC. you may be able to file as head of household, you cannot claim the credit. For most people,
Page 230 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 233 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
investment income is the total of the following The amount of your nontaxable combat pay Income That Is Not Earned Income
amounts. should be shown on your Form W-2, in box 12,
Examples of items that are not earned incomewith code Q.• Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040 or include interest and dividends, pensions and1040A). annuities, social security and railroad retirementSelf-employed persons and statutory em-
benefits (including disability benefits), alimony• Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form 1040 ployees. If you are self-employed or received
and child support, welfare benefits, workers’or 1040A). income as a statutory employee, you must use compensation benefits, unemployment com-the Form 1040 instructions to see if you qualify• Dividend income (line 9a of Form 1040 or pensation (insurance), nontaxable foster careto get the EIC.1040A). payments, and veterans’ benefits, including VA
rehabilitation payments. Do not include any of• Capital gain net income (line 13 of Form
these items in your earned income.1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of Form Approved Form 4361 or Form 40291040A). Earnings while an inmate. Amounts receivedThis section is for persons who have an ap-If you file Form 1040EZ, your investment income for work performed while an inmate in a penalproved:is the total of the amount of line 2 and the institution are not earned income when figuring
amount of any tax-exempt interest you wrote to the earned income credit. This includes• Form 4361, Application for Exemption
the right of the words “Form 1040EZ” on line 2. amounts for work performed while in a workFrom Self-Employment Tax for Use by
release program or while in a halfway house.Ministers, Members of Religious OrdersHowever, if you are reporting income or loss
and Christian Science Practitioners, orfrom the rental of personal property on Form Workfare payments. Nontaxable workfare
1040, line 21, or are filing Schedule E (Form • Form 4029, Application for Exemption payments are not earned income for the EIC.
1040), Form 8814, or Form 4797, see Rule 6 in From Social Security and Medicare Taxes These are cash payments certain people re-
chapter 1 of Publication 596 for more informa- ceive from a state or local agency that adminis-and Waiver of Benefits.
tion. ters public assistance programs funded under
the federal Temporary Assistance for NeedyEach approved form exempts certain income
Families (TANF) program in return for certainfrom social security taxes. Each form is dis-Rule 7. You Must Have
work activities such as (1) work experience ac-cussed in this section in terms of what is or is notEarned Income tivities (including remodeling or repairing publicearned income for purposes of the EIC.
housing) if sufficient private sector employmentThis credit is called the “earned income” credit is not available, or (2) community service pro-Form 4361. Even if you have an approvedbecause, to qualify, you must work and have gram activities.Form 4361, amounts you received for perform-earned income. If you are married and file a joint
ing ministerial duties as an employee count asreturn, you meet this rule if at least one spouse Community property. If you are married, butearned income. This includes wages, salaries,works and has earned income. If you are an qualify to file as head of household under specialtips, and other taxable employee compensation.employee, earned income includes all the tax- rules for married taxpayers living apart (see
Amounts you received for performing ministerialable income you get from your employer. If you Rule 3), and live in a state that has community
duties, but not as an employee, do not count asare self-employed or a statutory employee, you property laws, your earned income for the EIC
earned income. Examples include fees for per-will figure your earned income on EIC Work- does not include any amount earned by your
forming marriages and honoraria for deliveringsheet B in the instructions for Form 1040. spouse that is treated as belonging to you under
speeches. those laws. That amount is not earned income
for the EIC, even though you must include it in
Form 4029. Even if you have an approvedEarned Income your gross income on your income tax return.
Form 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and other Your earned income includes the entire amount
Earned income includes all of the following taxable employee compensation count as you earned, even if part of it is treated as belong-
types of income. earned income. However, amounts you re- ing to your spouse under your state’s community
property laws.ceived as a self-employed individual do not1. Wages, salaries, tips, and other taxable count as earned income. Also, in figuring earnedemployee pay. Employee pay is earned Nontaxable military pay. Nontaxable pay forincome, do not subtract losses on Schedule C,income only if it is taxable. Nontaxable em- members of the Armed Forces is not consideredC-EZ, or F from wages on line 7 of Form 1040.ployee pay, such as certain dependent earned income for the EIC. Examples of nontax-
care benefits and adoption benefits, is not able military pay are combat pay, the Basic
earned income. But there is an exception Allowance for Housing (BAH), and the BasicDisability Benefitsfor nontaxable combat pay, which you can Allowance for Subsistence (BAS). See Publica-
choose to include in earned income, as tion 3, Armed Forces’ Tax Guide, for more infor-If you retired on disability, benefits you receiveexplained below. mation.under your employer’s disability retirement plan
are considered earned income until you reach2. Net earnings from self-employment. Combat pay. You can elect to have
minimum retirement age. Minimum retirement your nontaxable combat pay consid-3. Gross income received as a statutory em- age generally is the earliest age at which you ered earned income for the EIC. See
TIP
ployee. could have received a pension or annuity if you Nontaxable combat pay election, earlier.
were not disabled. You must report your taxable
Wages, salaries, and tips. Wages, salaries, disability payments on line 7 of either Form 1040
and tips you receive for working are reported to or Form 1040A until you reach minimum retire-
you on Form W-2, box 1. You should report ment age. Part B. Rulesthese on line 1 (Form 1040EZ) or line 7 (Forms Beginning on the day after you reach mini-1040A and 1040). mum retirement age, payments you receive are If You Have ataxable as a pension and are not consideredNontaxable combat pay election. You can earned income. Report taxable pension pay-elect to include your nontaxable combat pay in Qualifying Childments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b (orearned income for the earned income credit. Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b).Electing to include nontaxable combat pay in If you have met all of the rules in Part A, read
earned income may increase or decrease your Part B to see if you have a qualifying child.
Disability insurance payments. PaymentsEIC. Figure the credit with and without your Part B  discusses Rules 8  through  10 . You
you received from a disability insurance policynontaxable combat pay before making the elec- must meet all three of these rules, in addition to
that you paid the premiums for are not earnedtion. If you make the election, you must include the rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for the
income. It does not matter whether you havein earned income all nontaxable combat pay you earned income credit with a qualifying child.
reached minimum retirement age. If this policy isreceived. If you are filing a joint return and both
through your employer, the amount may beyou and your spouse received nontaxable com- You must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A to
shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with code “J.”bat pay, you can each make your own election. claim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You cannot
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 231

Page 234 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your ...
Son, daughter, stepchild, eligible foster child, or a descendant of
any of them (for example, your grandchild)
OR
was...
Under age 19 at the end of 2006
OR
Under age 24 at the end of 2006 and a student
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year, regardless of age.
who...
Lived with you in the United States
for more than half of 2006.
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
Figure 36-1. Tests for Qualifying Child
Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a
descendant of any of them (for example, your niece or nephew)
Graphic in Pub.596 (text may not match). Text from F.1040 inst.
file Form 1040EZ.) You also must complete • Son, daughter, stepchild, eligible foster Married child. If your child was married at the
Schedule EIC and attach it to your return. If you child, or a descendant of any of them (for end of the year, he or she does not meet the
meet all the rules in Part A and this part, read example, your grandchild), or relationship test unless either of these two situa-
Part D to find out what to do next. tions applies to you: • Brother, sister, half brother, half sister,
If you do not meet Rule 8, you do not stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of 1. You can claim the child’s exemption, orhave a qualifying child. Read Part C to any of them (for example, your niece or
2. The reason you cannot claim the child’sfind out if you can get the earned in- nephew).CAUTION
!
come credit without a qualifying child. exemption is that you gave that right toThe following definitions clarify the relationship your child’s other parent under the Specialtest.
rule for divorced or separated parents, de-Rule 8. Your Child Must scribed later.Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysMeet the Relationship, treated as your own child. The term “adopted
child” includes a child who was lawfully placedAge, and Residency Tests
with you for legal adoption. Age TestYour child is a qualifying child if your child meets
Eligible foster child. For the EIC, a person isthree tests. The three tests are: Your child must be:
your eligible foster child if the child is placed with
1. Relationship, you by an authorized placement agency or by 1. Under age 19 at the end of 2006,
judgement, decree, or other order of any court of2. Age, and 2. Under age 24 at the end of 2006 and acompetent jurisdiction. An authorized placement full-time student, or3. Residency. agency includes a state or local government
agency. It also includes a tax-exempt organiza- 3. Permanently and totally disabled at anyThe three tests are illustrated in Figure 36-1. tion licensed by a state. In addition, it includes time during 2006, regardless of age.The paragraphs that follow contain more infor- an Indian tribal government or an organizationmation about each test. The following example and definitions clarify theauthorized by an Indian tribal government to
age test.place Indian children.
Relationship Test Example. Your son turned 19 on DecemberExample. Debbie, who is 12 years old, was
10. Unless he was disabled or a full-time stu-placed in your care 2 years ago by an authorizedTo be your qualifying child, a child must be your:
dent, he is not a qualifying child because, at theagency responsible for placing children in foster
homes. Debbie is your eligible foster child. end of the year, he was not under age 19.
Page 232 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 235 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Full-time student. A full-time student is a stu- active duty, you are still considered to have been Rule 9. Your Qualifyingdent who is enrolled for the number of hours or on extended active duty even if you do not serve
Child Cannot Be Used Bycourses the school considers to be full-time at- more than 90 days.
tendance. More Than One Person To
Birth or death of a child. A child who wasStudent defined. To qualify as a student, Claim the EICborn or died in 2006 is treated as having livedyour child must be, during some part of each of
with you for all of 2006 if your home was theany 5 calendar months during the calendar year: Sometimes a child meets the rules to be a quali-child’s home the entire time he or she was alive fying child of more than one person. However,1. A full-time student at a school that has a in 2006. only one person can treat that child as a qualify-regular teaching staff, course of study, and ing child and claim the EIC using that child. Theregular student body at the school, or Temporary absences. Count time that you or paragraphs that follow will help you decide who,
your child is away from home on a temporary2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- if anyone, can claim the EIC when more than
ing course given by a school described in absence due to a special circumstance as time one person has the same qualifying child.
(1), or a state, county, or local government. lived with you. Examples of a special circum- You can choose which person will claim thestance include:The 5 calendar months need not be consecu- EIC. If you and someone else have the same
tive. • Illness, qualifying child, you and the other person(s) can
decide which of you, if otherwise eligible, willHurricane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma. You • School attendance, take all of the following tax benefits based on themay be able to treat your child as a student for • Detention in a juvenile facility, qualifying child.each month of the enrollment period, in 2005 or
2006, he or she was unable to attend class • Business, • The child’s exemption.
because of Hurricane Katrina, Rita or Wilma. • Vacation, and • The child tax credit.For details, see Publication 596.
• Military service. • Head of household filing status.School defined. A school can be an ele-
mentary school, junior or senior high school, • The credit for child and dependent care
college, university, or technical, trade, or Kidnapped child. A kidnapped child is treated expenses.
mechanical school. However, on-the-job train- as living with you for more than half of the year if • The exclusion for dependent care benefits.ing courses, correspondence schools, and the child lived with you for more than half the
schools offering courses only through the In- • The EIC.part of the year before the date of the kidnap-
ternet do not count as schools for the EIC. ping. The child must be presumed by law en- The other person cannot take any of these six
forcement authorities to have been kidnappedVocational high school students. Stu- tax benefits unless he or she has a different
by someone who is not a member of your familydents who work in co-op jobs in private industry qualifying child.
or your child’s family. This treatment applies foras a part of a school’s regular course of class- If you and the other person(s) cannot agreeroom and practical training are considered all years until the child is returned. However, the and more than one person claims the EIC or thefull-time students. last year this treatment can apply is the earlier other tax benefits just listed using the sameof: child, the tie-breaker rule (explained in TablePermanently and totally disabled. Your
36-2) applies. However, the tie-breaker rulechild is permanently and totally disabled if both 1. The year there is a determination that the
does not apply if the other person is your spouseof the following apply. child is dead, or
and you file a joint return.
2. The year the child would have reached1. He or she cannot engage in any substan-
If another person claims the EIC using thisage 18.tial gainful activity because of a physical or
child. If your EIC is denied because your qual-mental condition. If your qualifying child has been kidnapped ifying child is treated under this rule as the quali-2. A doctor determines the condition has and meets these requirements, enter “KC,” in- fying child of another person for 2006, you maylasted or can be expected to last continu- stead of a number, on line 6 of Schedule EIC. be able to take the EIC using a different qualify-ously for at least a year or can lead to ing child, but you cannot take the EIC using thedeath. Social security number. Your qualifying child rules in Part C  for people who do not have a
must have a valid social security number (SSN) qualifying child.
unless the child was born and died in 2006. You If the other person cannot claim the EIC. Ifcannot claim the EIC on the basis of a qualifyingResidency Test you and someone else have the same qualifyingchild if: child but the other person cannot claim the EICYour child must have lived with you in the United because he or she is not eligible or his or her1. Your qualifying child’s SSN is missing fromStates for more than half of 2006. The following earned income or AGI is too high, you may beyour tax return or is incorrect,definitions clarify the residency test. able to treat the child as a qualifying child. See
2. Your qualifying child’s social security card Example 5. But also see You can choose whichUnited States. This means the 50 states and says “Not valid for employment” and was person will claim the EIC, earlier.the District of Columbia. It does not include issued for use in getting a federally fundedPuerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.
benefit, or Example 1 – child lived with parent and
Homeless shelter. Your home can be any grandparent. You and your 2-year-old son3. Instead of an SSN, your qualifying childlocation where you regularly live. You do not lived with your mother all year. You are 25 yearshas:need a traditional home. For example, if your old. Your only income was $9,000 from a
child lived with you for more than half the year in part-time job. Your mother’s only income wasa. An individual taxpayer identification
one or more homeless shelters, your child $20,000 from her job. Your son is a qualifyingnumber (ITIN), which is issued to ameets the residency test. child of both you and your mother because henoncitizen who cannot get an SSN, or
meets the relationship, age, and residency testsMilitary personnel stationed outside the b. An adoption taxpayer identification for both you and your mother. However, onlyUnited States.  U.S. military personnel sta- number (ATIN), which is issued to one of you can treat him as a qualifying child totioned outside the United States on extended adopting parents who cannot get an claim the EIC (and, if that person qualifies, theactive duty are considered to live in the United SSN for the child being adopted until other tax benefits listed in You can choose whichStates during that duty period for purposes of the adoption is final. person will claim the EIC, earlier). You agree tothe EIC. let your mother claim him.
If you have two qualifying children and onlyExtended active duty. Extended active This means, if you do not claim your son as a
one has a valid SSN, you can claim the EIC onlyduty means you are called or ordered to duty for qualifying child for the EIC or any of the other tax
on the basis of that child. For more informationan indefinite period or for a period of more than benefits listed in You can choose which person
about SSNs, see Rule 2.90 days. Once you begin serving your extended will claim the EIC , your mother can treat your
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 233

Page 236 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
son as a qualifying child to claim the EIC and Table 36-2. When More Than One Person Files a Return Claiming the
any other tax benefit listed for which she quali- Same Qualifying Child (Tie-Breaker Rule)fies.
Caution. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent
under the special rule for divorced or separated parents, described later, seeExample 2 – child lived with parent and
Applying Rule 9 to divorced or separated parents.grandparent. The facts are the same as in
Example 1 except that you and your mother both
IF more than one person files a return claiming THEN the child will be treated asclaim your son as a qualifying child. In this case,
the same qualifying child and . . . the qualifying child of the . .you as the child’s parent will be the only one
allowed to claim your son as a qualifying child for only one of the persons is the child’s parent, parent.the EIC and the other tax benefits listed in You
can choose which person will claim the EIC. The two of the persons are parents of the child, and they parent with whom the child lived
IRS will disallow your mother’s claim to the EIC do not file a joint return together, the longest during the year.
and any other tax benefit listed, unless she has
two of the persons are parents of the child, the childanother qualifying child.
lived with each parent the same amount of time
during the year, and the parents do not file a joint parent with the higher adjustedExample 3 – three children lived with par-
return together, gross income (AGI).ent and grandparent. The facts are the same
as in Example 1 except that you also have two none of the persons are the child’s parent, person with the highest AGI.other young children who are qualifying children
of both you and your mother. Only one of you
can claim each child as a qualifying child. How-
Example 7 – separated parents. The facts if your mother does not claim her as a qualifyingever, you and your mother can split the three
child for the EIC or any of the other tax benefitsare the same as in Example 6 except that youqualifying children between you. For example,
listed in You can choose which person will claimand your husband both claim your son as ayou can use one child and your mother can use
the EIC, you can claim your niece as a qualifyingqualifying child. In this case, only your husbandthe other two. child for the EIC and any other tax benefit listedwill be allowed to treat your son as a qualifying
for which you qualify.child. This is because, during 2006, the boy livedExample 4 – parent is qualifying child of
with him longer than with you. You cannot claimgrandparent. The facts are the same as in Example 11 – child did not live with athe EIC for persons either with or without aExample 1 except that you are only 18 years old. parent. The facts are the same as in Examplequalifying child. However, because you and yourThis means you are a qualifying child of your 10 except that you and your mother both claimhusband did not live apart the last 6 months ofmother. Because of Rule 10,  discussed next, your niece as a qualifying child. In this case, onlythe year your husband cannot claim head ofyou cannot claim the EIC. Only your mother may your mother will be allowed to treat your niece ashousehold filing status. As a result, his filingbe able to treat your son as a qualifying child to a qualifying child. This is because your mother’sstatus is married filing separately, so he cannotclaim the EIC. If your mother meets all the other AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300.claim the EIC or the credit for child and depen-requirements for claiming the EIC, she can treat dent care expenses. See Rule 3.both you and your son as qualifying children for Special rule for divorced or separated par-
the EIC. ents. A child will be treated as the qualifyingExample 8 – unmarried parents. You, child of his or her noncustodial parent (for pur-your 5-year-old son, and your son’s father livedExample 5 – parent can claim EIC because poses of claiming an exemption, but not for thetogether all year. You and your son’s father aregrandparent cannot. The facts are the same EIC) if all of the following apply.not married. Your son is a qualifying child of bothas in Example 1 except that your mother earned you and his father because he meets the rela- 1. The parents:$50,000 from her job. Because your mother’s tionship, age, and residency tests for both youearned income is too high for her to claim the and his father. You earned $8,000 and your a. Are divorced or legally separated underEIC, only you can claim the EIC using your son. a decree of divorce or separate mainte-son’s father earned $18,000. Neither of you had
nance,any other income. Your son’s father agrees to letExample 6 – separated parents. You, you treat the child as a qualifying child. Thisyour husband, and your 10-year-old son lived b. Are separated under a written separa-means, if your son’s father does not claim yourtogether until August 1, 2006, when your hus- tion agreement, orson as a qualifying child for the EIC or any of theband moved out of the household. In August and c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6other tax benefits listed in You can choose whichSeptember, your son lived with you. For the rest months of the year.person will claim the EIC
, earlier, you can claimof the year, your son lived with your husband. him as a qualifying child for the EIC and anyYour son is a qualifying child of both you and 2. The child received over half of his or herother tax benefit listed for which you qualify.your husband because your son lived with each support for the year from the parents.of you for more than half the year and because Example 9 – unmarried parents. The 3. The child is in the custody of one or bothhe met the relationship and age tests for both of facts are the same as in Example 8 except that parents for more than half of the year.you. At the end of the year, you and your hus- you and your son’s father both claim your son asband still were not divorced, legally separated, 4. Either of the following statements is true.a qualifying child. In this case, only your son’sor separated under a written separation agree- father will be allowed to treat your son as ament, so the special rule for divorced or sepa- a. The custodial parent signs Form 8332qualifying child. This is because his AGI, or a substantially similar statement thatrated parents does not apply. $18,000, is more than your AGI, $8,000. You he or she will not claim the child as aYou and your husband will file separate re- cannot claim the EIC for persons either with or dependent for the year, and the non-turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your without a qualifying child. custodial parent attaches the form orson as a qualifying child. This means, if your
statement to his or her return. (If thehusband does not claim your son as a qualifying Example 10 – child did not live with a divorce decree or separation agreementchild for the EIC or any of the other tax benefits parent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your went into effect after 1984, the noncus-listed in You can choose which person will claim sister’s child, lived with your mother all year. You todial parent can attach certain pagesthe EIC, earlier, you can claim him as a qualify- are 25 years old, and your only income was from the decree or agreement insteading child for the EIC and any other tax benefit $9,300 from a part-time job. Your mother’s only of Form 8332.)listed for which you qualify. However, you can- income was $15,000 from her job. Your niece is
not claim head of household filing status be- a qualifying child of both you and your mother b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
cause you and your husband did not live apart because she meets the relationship, age, and rate maintenance or written separation
the last 6 months of the year. As a result, your residency tests for both you and your mother. agreement that applies to 2006 pro-
filing status is married filing separately, so you However, only one of you can treat her as a vides that the noncustodial parent can
cannot claim the EIC or the credit for child and qualifying child. Your mother agrees to let you claim the child as a dependent and the
dependent care expenses. See Rule 3. treat the child as a qualifying child. This means, noncustodial parent provides at least
Page 234 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 237 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$600 for the support of the child during If someone else can claim you (or your
the year. spouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent on
Part C. Rules his or her return, but does not, you still cannot
For details, see chapter 3. Also see Applying claim the credit.
Rule 9 to divorced or separated parents, next. If You Do Not Have
Example 1. In 2006, you were age 25, sin-Applying Rule 9 to divorced or separated gle, and living at home with your parents. Youa Qualifying Childparents. If a child is treated as the qualifying worked and were not a student. You earnedchild of the noncustodial parent under the spe- Read this part if you: $7,500. Your parents cannot claim you as acial rule for children of divorced or separated dependent. When you file your return, you claimparents just described, only the noncustodial 1. Do not have a qualifying child, and an exemption for yourself by not checking theparent can claim an exemption and the child tax “You” box on line 5 of your Form 1040EZ and by2. Have met all the rules in Part A.credit for the child. However, the noncustodial entering $8,450 on that line. You meet this rule.parent cannot claim the child as a qualifying
child for the other tax benefits listed in You can Part C discusses Rules 11 through 14. You must Example 2. The facts are the same as inchoose which person will claim the EIC, earlier. meet all four of these rules, in addition to the Example 1, except that you earned $2,000. YourOnly the custodial parent or other eligible tax- rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for the earned parents can claim you as a dependent but de-payer can claim the child as a qualifying child for income credit without a qualifying child. cide not to. You do not meet this rule. Youthose tax benefits. However, if the custodial par- cannot claim the credit because your parentsIf you have a qualifying child, the rulesent and another eligible taxpayer both file a could have claimed you as a dependent.in this part do not apply to you. You canreturn claiming the child as a qualifying child for
claim the credit only if you meet all theCAUTION
!
any of these four tax benefits, the IRS will disal-
rules in Parts A, B, and D. See Rule 8 to find out Rule 13. You Cannot Be alow all but one of the claims using the tie-breaker
if you have a qualifying child.rule in Table 36–2. Qualifying Child of
Another PersonRule 11. You Must Be atRule 10. You Cannot Be a
You are a qualifying child of another personLeast Age 25 but UnderQualifying Child of
(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if allAge 65Another Person of the following statements are true.
You must be at least age 25 but under age 65 atYou are a qualifying child of another person 1. You are that person’s son, daughter,
the end of 2006. If you are married filing a joint(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if all stepchild, grandchild, or eligible foster
return, either you or your spouse must be atof the following statements are true. child. Or, you are that person’s brother,
least age 25 but under age 65 at the end of sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother,1. You are that person’s son, daughter, 2006. It does not matter which spouse meets the or stepsister (or the child or grandchild ofstepchild, grandchild, or eligible foster age test, as long as one of the spouses does. that person’s brother, sister, half brother,child. Or, you are that person’s brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsister).If neither you nor your spouse meets the agesister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother,
test, you cannot claim the EIC. Put “No” next to 2. At the end of the year you were under ageor stepsister (or the child or grandchild of
line 66a (Form 1040), line 40a (Form 1040A), or 19, or under age 24 and a full-time stu-that person’s brother, sister, half brother,
line 8a (Form 1040EZ). dent, or any age if you were permanentlyhalf sister, stepbrother, or stepsister).
and totally disabled at any time during the2. At the end of the year you were under age Example 1. You are age 28 and unmarried. year.19, or under age 24 and a full-time stu- You meet the age test. 3. You lived with that person in the Uniteddent, or any age if you were permanently
States for more than half of the year.and totally disabled at any time during the Example 2. You are married and filing ayear. joint return. You are age 23 and your spouse is If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)
age 27. You meet the age test because your are a qualifying child of another person, you3. You lived with that person in the United
spouse is at least age 25 but under age 65. cannot claim the EIC. This is true even if theStates for more than half of the year.
person for whom you are a qualifying child doesFor more details about the tests to be a qualify- not claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claimRule 12. You Cannot Being child, see Rule 8. the EIC. Put “No” next to line 66a (Form 1040),If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) the Dependent of Another line 40a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Formare a qualifying child of another person, you 1040EZ).Personcannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the
person for whom you are a qualifying child does Example. You lived with your mother allIf you are not filing a joint return, you meet thisnot claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim year. You are age 26 and permanently and to-rule if:the EIC. Put “No” beside line 66a (Form 1040) or tally disabled. Your only income was from aline 40a (Form 1040A). • You checked box 6a on Form 1040 or community center where you went three days a1040A, or week to answer telephones. You earned $3,400Example. You and your daughter lived with for the year and provided more than half of your• You did not check the “You” box on line 5your mother all year. You are 22 years old and own support. Because you meet the relation-of Form 1040EZ, and you entered $8,450attended a trade school full time. You had a ship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify-on that line.part-time job and earned $5,700. You had no ing child of your mother for the EIC. She canother income. Because you meet the relation- claim the EIC if she meets all the other require-If you are filing a joint return, you meet thisship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify- ments. Because you are a qualifying child ofrule if:ing child of your mother. She can claim the EIC if your mother, you cannot claim the EIC. This isshe meets all the other requirements. Because • You checked both box 6a and box 6b on so even if your mother cannot or does not claimyou are your mother’s qualifying child, you can- Form 1040 or 1040A, or the EIC.not claim the EIC. This is so even if your mother • You and your spouse did not check eithercannot or does not claim the EIC. the “You” box or the “Spouse” box on line
5 of Form 1040EZ, and you entered
$16,900 on that line.
If you are not sure whether someone else can
claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)
as a dependent, read the rules for claiming a
dependent in chapter 3.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 235

Page 238 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figuring earned income. If you are 5a of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form 1040),Rule 14. You Must Have self-employed, a statutory employee, or a mem- subtract that amount from the amount on line 7
Lived in the United States ber of the clergy or a church employee who files (Form 1040) and enter the result in the first
Schedule SE (Form 1040), you will figure your space of the worksheet in Step 5 of the FormMore Than Half of the Year earned income when you fill out Part 4 of EIC 1040 instructions for lines 66a and 66b.
Worksheet B in the Form 1040 instructions.Your home (and your spouse’s, if filing a joint
Otherwise, figure your earned income by us-return) must have been in the United States for IRS Will Figureing the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040more than half the year.
the EIC for Youinstructions for lines 66a and 66b or the FormIf it was not, put “No” next to line 66a (Form
1040A instructions for lines 40a and 40b, or the1040), line 40a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form The IRS will figure your EIC for you if you followworksheet in Step 2 of the Form 1040EZ instruc-1040EZ). the steps explained in this section.tions for lines 8a and 8b.
Do not ask the IRS to figure your EICWhen using one of those worksheets to fig-United States. This means the 50 states and
unless you are eligible for it. Read theure your earned income, you will start with thethe District of Columbia. It does not include
rules in Parts A, B, C, and D to see ifamount on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) orPuerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam. CAUTION
!
you qualify.line 1 (Form 1040EZ). You will then reduce that
amount by any amount included on that line andHomeless shelter. Your home can be any If you want the IRS to also figure thedescribed in the following list.location where you regularly live. You do not amount of your income tax, see chap-need a traditional home. If you lived in one or • Scholarship or fellowship grants not re- ter 30.
TIP
more homeless shelters in the United States for ported on a Form W-2. A scholarship or
more than half the year, you meet this rule. fellowship grant that was not reported to
you on a Form W-2 is not considered
Form 1040Military personnel stationed outside the earned income for the earned income
United States. U.S. military personnel sta- credit. If you file Form 1040 and want the IRS to figuretioned outside the United States on extended • Inmates. Amounts received for work per- your credit for you, follow these steps.active duty (defined in Rule 8) are considered to formed while an inmate in a penal institu-live in the United States during that duty period 1. Put “EIC” on the dotted line next to linetion are not earned income for the earnedfor purposes of the EIC. 66a. Then, if you have any of the types ofincome credit. This includes amounts re-
ceived for work performed while in a work income described earlier under Inmates,
release program or while in a halfway Deferred compensation plans, or Clergy,
house. If you received any amount for follow the instructions given there.
work done while an inmate in a penal insti-Part D. Figuring and 2. If you received nontaxable combat pay andtution and that amount is included in the are electing to include it in your earnedtotal on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A)Claiming the EIC income for the EIC, enter the amount onor line 1 (Form 1040EZ), put “PRI” and the line 66b. For details, see Nontaxable com-amount on the dotted line next to line 7Read this part if you have met all the rules in bat pay election in Rule 7.(Form 1040), in the space to the left of theParts A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and C.
entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or in 3. Complete all other parts of your return thatPart D  discusses Rule 15.  You must meet
the space to the left of line 1 (Formthis rule, in addition to the rules in Parts A and B, apply to you (including line 61), but do not
1040EZ).or Parts A and C, to qualify for the earned in- fill in lines 72, 73, 74a, and 76. If you do
come credit. not have a qualifying child, stop here.• Deferred compensation plans. A pen-
This part of the chapter also explains how to sion or annuity from a nonqualified de- 4. If you have a qualifying child, completefigure the amount of your credit. You have two ferred compensation plan or a Schedule EIC according to its instructions.choices. nongovernmental section 457 plan is not Be sure to enter the child’s social securityconsidered earned income for the earned number on line 2 of that schedule. If you1. Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If you income credit. If you received such an do not, your credit may be reduced or dis-want to do this, see IRS Will Figure the amount and it was included in the total on allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-EIC for You. line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or line turn.1 (Form 1040EZ), put “DFC” and the2. Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to do
amount on the dotted line next to line 7this, see How To Figure the EIC Yourself.
(Form 1040), in the space to the left of the
entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or in Form 1040A
the space to the left of line 1 (FormRule 15. Your Earned If you file Form 1040A and want the IRS to figure1040EZ). This amount may be reported inIncome Must Be Less your credit for you, follow these steps.box 11 of your Form W-2. If you received
such an amount but box 11 is blank, con-Than: 1. Put “EIC” to the left of the entry space fortact your employer for the amount re- line 40a. Then, if you have any of the typesceived as a pension or annuity.• $36,348 ($38,348 for married filing jointly) of income described earlier under Inmates
if you have more than one qualifying child, or Deferred compensation plans, follow theClergy. If you are a member of the clergy
instructions given there.• $32,001 ($34,001 for married filing jointly) who files Schedule SE and the amount on line 2
if you have one qualifying child, or of that schedule includes an amount that was 2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and
also reported on line 7 (Form 1040), subtract are electing to include it in your earned• $12,120 ($14,120 for married filing jointly) that amount from the amount on line 7 (Form income for the EIC, enter the amount onif you do not have a qualifying child. 1040) and enter the result in the first space of line 40b. For details, see Nontaxable com-
the worksheet in Step 5  of the Form 1040 in- bat pay election in Rule 7.Earned income generally means wages, sala- structions for lines 66a and 66b. Put “Clergy” onries, tips, other taxable employee pay, and net 3. Complete all other parts of your return thatthe dotted line next to line 66a (Form 1040).earnings from self-employment. Employee pay apply to you (including line 36), but do notis earned income only if it is taxable. Nontaxable Church employees.  A church employee fill in lines 43, 44, 45a, and 47. If you doemployee pay, such as certain dependent care means an employee (other than a minister or not have a qualifying child, stop here.benefits and adoption benefits, is not earned member of a religious order) of a church or
4. If you have a qualifying child, completeincome. But there is an exception for nontaxable qualified church-controlled organization that is
combat pay, which you can choose to include in Schedule EIC according to its instructions.exempt from employer social security and Medi-
earned income. Earned income is explained in Be sure to enter the child’s social securitycare taxes. If you received wages as a church
detail in Rule 7. employee and included any amount on both line number on line 2 of that schedule. If you
Page 236 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 239 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc- the top of Schedule EIC. The Smiths then  fill out
allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- tion booklet. Qualifying Child Information (lines 1–6).
turn. 3. Enter the amount of your earned income Line 1. The Smiths enter Amy’s first name
credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on and last name in the column “Child 1.”
Form 1040A, line 40a. Line 2. They enter Amy’s SSN.Form 1040EZ 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records. Line 3. They enter Amy’s year of birthDo not attach it to your income tax return.If you file Form 1040EZ and want the IRS to (2003).If you do not have a qualifying child, stopfigure your credit for you, follow these steps. here. Lines 4a and 4b. The Smiths skip lines 4a
and 4b because Amy was born after 1987.1. Put “EIC” in the space to the left of line 8a. 5. If you have a qualifying child, completeThen if you have any of the types of in- Schedule EIC according to its instructions. Line 5. The Smiths enter “Daughter.” Thiscome described earlier under Inmates or Be sure to enter the child’s social security line shows Amy’s relationship to John and Ja-Deferred compensation plans, follow the number on line 2 of that schedule. If you net.instructions given there. do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- Line 6. The Smiths enter “12.” This is howallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and many months Amy lived with them in 2006.turn.are electing to include it in your earned
income for the EIC, enter the amount on
Form 1040EZ and EIC Worksheet. If you fileline 8b. For details, see Nontaxable com- Completing the EIC WorksheetForm 1040EZ and want to figure the credit your-bat pay election in Rule 7.
self, follow these steps. Next, the Smiths will complete the EIC Work-3. Complete all other parts of your return that
sheet to figure their earned income credit.apply to you, but do not fill in lines 10, 12a, 1. Go to your form instruction booklet and
or 13. turn to the instructions for lines 8a and 8b Line 1. The Smiths enter $11,000 (their
and look for the EIC Worksheet. earned income).
2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according to Line 2. The Smiths go to the Earned IncomeHow To Figure the
its instructions. Find the amount of your Credit Table in the Form 1040A instructions.EIC Yourself credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc- The Smiths find their income of $11,000 within
tion booklet. the range of $11,000 to $11,050. They followTo figure the EIC yourself use the EIC Work- this line across to the column that describes their3. Enter the amount of your earned incomesheet in the instructions for the form you are filing status and number of children and findcredit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet onusing (Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form $2,747. They enter $2,747 on line 2.Form 1040EZ, line 8a.1040EZ).
Line 3. The Smiths enter their AGI of4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.Form 1040 and EIC Worksheet. If you file $11,000.Do not attach it to your income tax return.Form 1040 and want to figure the credit yourself,
follow these steps. Line 4. The Smiths check the “Yes” box
because lines 1 and 3 are the same ($11,000).
1. Go to your form instruction booklet and They skip line 5 and enter the amount from line 2turn to the instructions for lines 66a and ($2,747) on line 6.Examples66b, and look for Worksheet A or Work-
Line 6. The Smiths’ EIC is $2,747.sheet B.
The following two comprehensive examples2. Complete the EIC Worksheet that applies (complete with filled-in forms) may be helpful. Example 2. Kelly Greento your situation according to its instruc-
tions. Complete Worksheet B if you were 1. John and Janet Smith, a married couple (Form 1040EZ)
self-employed, a member of the clergy or a with one qualifying child and using Form
church employee who files Schedule SE, Kelly Green is age 30 and a full-time student.1040A.
or a statutory employee filing Schedule C She lived with her parents in the United States2. Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with noor C-EZ. Find the amount of your credit in for all of 2006. She had a part-time job andqualifying child and using Form 1040EZ.the EIC Table in your instruction booklet. earned $6,240. She earned $20 interest on a
savings account. She is not eligible to be3. Enter the amount of your earned income claimed as a dependent on her parents’ return.credit from Worksheet A or B on Form Example 1. John and Janet Although she lived with her parents, she is not1040, line 66a. Smith (Form 1040A) their qualifying child because she does not meet
4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records. the age test. She does not have any children.
John and Janet Smith are married and will file aDo not attach it to your income tax return. Kelly qualifies for the earned income credit.joint return. They have one child, Amy, who is 3If you do not have a qualifying child, stop Kelly will file Form 1040EZ and complete theyears old. Amy lived with John and Janet for allhere. EIC Worksheet.of 2006. John worked and earned $9,500. Janet5. If you have a qualifying child, complete worked part of the year and earned $1,500.Schedule EIC according to its instructions. Their earned income and AGI are $11,000. John Completing the EIC WorksheetBe sure to enter the child’s social security and Janet qualify for the earned income creditnumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you and fill out the EIC Worksheet and Schedule Kelly figures the amount of her earned incomedo not, your credit may be reduced or dis- EIC. The Smiths will attach Schedule EIC to credit on the EIC Worksheet as follows.allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- Form 1040A when they send their completedturn. Line 1. She enters $6,240 (her earned in-return to the IRS.
come).They took the following steps to completeForm 1040A and EIC Worksheet. If you file Schedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet. Line 2. Kelly goes to the Earned IncomeForm 1040A and want to figure the credit your-
Credit Table in the forms instruction booklet.self, follow these steps.
She finds her earned income of $6,240 in the
Completing Schedule EIC range of $6,200 to $6,250. Kelly follows this line1. Go to your form instruction booklet and
across to the column that describes her filingturn to the instructions for lines 40a and The Smiths complete Schedule EIC because status and finds $412. She enters $412 on line40b, and look for the EIC Worksheet. they have a qualifying child. They enter “John 2.2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according to and Janet Smith” and John’s SSN (the SSN that
Line 3. Kelly enters $6,260 (her AGI).its instructions. Find the amount of your appears first on their Form 1040A) on the line at
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 237

Page 240 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 4. Kelly checks the “No” box because not be entitled to get EIC. If your wages are not eligible for some or all of them, you still m ust
lines 1 and 3 are not the same. report them on your tax return.subject to federal income tax, social security tax,
or Medicare tax withholding, you cannot get theLine 5. Kelly checks the “Yes” box because You cannot use Form 1040EZ to report
advance payment of the earned income credit. Ifthe amount on line 3 ($6,260) is less than your advance payments. You must file
you are a farm worker paid on a daily basis, your$6,750. She leaves line 5 blank and enters the Form 1040 or Form 1040A.CAUTION
!
amount from line 2, $412, on line 6. employer is not required to pay you the advance
When to give your employer a new Form W-5.amount of the credit.Line 6. She enters $412 here and on Form The 2007 Form W-5 you give to your employer is1040EZ, line 8a. Kelly’s earned income credit is valid until December 31, 2007. If you expect to$412. How To Get Advance be eligible for EIC in 2008 and you want to
receive advance payments, you must give yourPayments for 2007
employer a new Form W-5 in 2008. Do this each
If you meet the rules stated above under Who year you expect to be eligible for the EIC.
Advance Earned If you no longer want to get advance pay-can get the advance payment of the earned
ments or if your situation changes and you noincome credit, give your employer a Form W-5,Income Credit longer qualify for the earned income credit, youEarned Income Credit Advance Payment Certifi-
must give your employer a new Form W-5.cate, for 2007.Do you expect to be eligible for the EIC this year Check the “No” box on line 1 of the new form.After you have read the instructions and(2007) and to have a qualifying child? If so, you If your spouse files a Form W-5 with his or
can choose to get payments of the EIC in your completed Form W-5, give the lower part of the her employer, you must file a new Form W-5
paycheck now instead of waiting to get your EIC form to your employer. Keep the top part for your with your employer. Check the “Yes” box on line
all at once in 2008 when you file your tax return records. 3.
for the year 2007. These payments are called
advance EIC payments. This chapter explains
Advance PaymentsMore than one employer. If you have morehow you may be able to get them this year and
than one employer, give a certificate to only onehow to report them on your tax return. Received in 2006
of them. If you are married and both you andWho can get the advance payment of the If you received advance payments of EIC inyour spouse are employed and expect to qualifyearned income credit? To get part of the 2006, you must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A tofor the credit, you may give a Form W-5 to yourearned income credit paid to you throughout the report the payments. Your Form W-2, box 9, willemployer and your spouse may give one to hisyear in your paycheck, you must meet all the show the amount you received. Report theor her employer.following rules. amount on line 61 (Form 1040) or line 36 (FormIf you receive advance payments of EIC in 1040A).1. You must expect that your earned income 2007, you must file a 2007 tax return (even if youand AGI will each be less than $33,241 You cannot use Form 1040EZ to reportwould not otherwise have to file) to report the($35,241 if you expect to file married filing your advance payments.payments and claim any additional EIC. Box 9 ofjointly). CAUTION
!
your Form W-2 will show the amount you re-2. You must expect to have a qualifying child. ceived. See the instructions for Form 1040 or
3. You must expect to meet all the rules in Form 1040A for the line number on which you
Parts A, B, and D of this chapter or in the report advance payments of EIC.
instructions for Form W-5.
Receipt of advance payments you do notPersons who are not entitled to receive ad-
qualify for. If you receive advance paymentsvance payments.  Under certain circum-
of EIC in 2007, and later find out that you are notstances, even if you meet these rules, you may
Page 238 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 241 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
John and Janet Smith 2222 00222
00000 2223
2003
12
Amy Smith
Daughter
/H17076
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE EIC Earned Income Credit(Form 1040A or 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 43
Qualifying Child Information
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040A
or 1040 instructions.
Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2006Cat. No. 13339M
Before you begin: See the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 40a and 40b, or Form 1040, lines 66a and
66b, to make sure that (a) you can take the EIC, and (b) you have a qualifying child.
Qualifying Child Information
● It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply
for each qualifying child.
4
2
5
6
1 Child ’s name
Child’s SSN
Child’s relationship to you
Number of months child lived with
you in the United States during 2006
months
Yes.
months
If the child was born before 1988—
Was the child permanently and totally disabled during
any part of 2006?
b
Yes.
First name Last name First name Last name
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
(99)
EIC
1040A
1040
Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040
only if you have a qualifying child.
● Be sure the child’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child’s
social security card. Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your
EIC. If the name or SSN on the child’s social security card is not correct, call the Social Security
Administration at 1-800-772-1213.
Child 1 Child 2
If you have more than two qualifying children, you
only have to list two to get the maximum credit.
The child must have an SSN as defined on page 43
of the Form 1040A instructions or page 49 of the
Form 1040 instructions unless the child was born and
died in 2006. If your child was born and died in 2006
and did not have an SSN, enter “Died” on this line
and attach a copy of the child’s birth certificate.
No. No.
Go to line 5. Go to line 5.Continue. Contin ue.
Yes. Yes. No. No.
Continue. Contin ue.The child is not a
qualifying child.
The child is not a
qualifying child.
● If the child lived with you for more than half of
2006 but less than 7 months, enter “7.”
● If the child was born or died in 2006 and your
home was the child’s home for the entire time he
or she was alive during 2006, enter “12.”
Do not enter more than 12 months. Do not enter more than 12 months.
You may also be able to take the additional child tax credit if your child (a) was under age 17 at the end of 2006, and
(b) is a U.S. citizen or resident alien. For more details, see the instructions for line 41 of Form 1040A or line 68 of
Form 1040.
. . . . . . . . . .
● If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up
to 10 years. See back of schedule for details.
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild,
niece, nephew, foster child, etc.)
Was the child under age 24 at the end of 2006 and a
student?
a
Child’s year of birth
If born after 1987, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year
If born after 1987, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year3
CAUTION
TIP
2006
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 239

Page 242 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
11,000
2,747
11,000
2,747
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 40a and 40b
1040A
Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your earned income from Step 5 on
page 42.
Look up the amount on line 1 in the EIC Table on pages 45–51 to
find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status and the number of children you have. Enter the credit here.
Enter the amount from Form 1040A, line 22.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Go to line 5.No.
If you have:
Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on
pages 45–51 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status and the number of children you
have. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 40a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
Enter “No” to the left of the entry space for line 40a.
If line 2 is zero, You cannot take the credit.
● No qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $6,750 ($8,750
if married filing jointly)?
● 1 or more qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $14,850
($16,850 if married filing jointly)?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
Reminder—
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach
Schedule EIC.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see
page 43 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit
for 2006.
/H12011
/H17076
/H17076
EIC
1040A
CAUTION
Page 240 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 243 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6,240
6,260
412
412
Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
1040EZ
Enter this amount on
Form 1040EZ, line 8a.
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 8a and 8b
Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Enter the amount from Form 1040EZ, line 4.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Go to line 5.No.
Is the amount on line 3 less than $6,750 ($8,750 if married filing jointly)?
Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on page 17
to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your
filing status. Enter the credit here.
3
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income
Credit
Enter “No” in the space to the left of line 8a.
If line 2 is zero, You cannot take the credit.
5
6.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed,
see page 15 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the
credit for 2006.
CAUTION
1Enter your earned income from Step 2 on page 14.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC Table on page 17 to
find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status. Enter the credit here.
6
2
This is your earned income credit.
/H17076
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 241

Page 244 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EIC Eligibility Checklist Keep for Your Records
You may claim the EIC if you answer “Yes” to all the following questions.*
Yes No
1. Is your AGI less than: ❏❏
• $12,120 ($14,120 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $32,001 ($34,001 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $36,348 ($38,348 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rule 1.)
2. Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN? (See Rule 2.) ❏❏
3. Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? (See ❏❏
Rule 3.)
Caution: If you are a nonresident alien, answer “Yes” only if your filing status is married filing
jointly and you are married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien. (See Rule 4.)
4. Answer “Yes” if you are not filing Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ. Otherwise, answer “No.” (See ❏❏
Rule 5.)
5. Is your investment income $2,800 or less? (See Rule 6.) ❏❏
6. Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than: ❏❏
• $12,120 ($14,120 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $32,001 ($34,001 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $36,348 ($38,348 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rules 7 and 15.)
7. Answer “Yes” if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) are not a qualifying child of another ❏❏
person. Otherwise, answer “No.” (See Rules 10 and 13.)
STOP: If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10–12. If you
do not have a qualifying child, skip questions 8 and 9 and answer 10–12.*
8. Does your child meet the age, residency, and relationship tests for a qualifying child? (See Rule ❏❏
8.)
9. Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer “Yes” if your qualifying child also meets the ❏❏
tests to be a qualifying child of another person, but the other person is not claiming any
child-related tax benefits using that child. Answer “No” if you do not know whether the other
person is claiming any child-related tax benefits using that child.
10. Were you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2006? ❏❏
(See Rule 11.)
11. Answer “Yes” if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) cannot be claimed as a dependent ❏❏
on anyone else’s return. Answer “No” if you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) can be
claimed as a dependent on someone else’s return. (See Rule 12.)
12. Was your main home (and your spouse’s if filing a joint return) in the United States for more than ❏❏
half the year? (See Rule 14.)
* PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the
EIC. Remember to fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Form
1040EZ. If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 8 and “No” to question 9, see Rule 9 to help you
determine whether you can claim the EIC. If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 7 and “No” to
question 8, answer questions 10 through 12 to see if you can claim the EIC without a qualifying child.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 7, and 10
through 12, you can claim the EIC.
If you answered “No” to any question that applies to you: You cannot claim the EIC.
Page 242 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 245 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Adoption credit. ❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage
Subsidy• Foreign tax credit.
• Mortgage interest credit. ❏ 8834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Credit37. • Retirement savings contributions credit. ❏ 8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses• Credit for prior year minimum tax.
❏ 8880 Credit for Qualified Retirement• Alternative motor vehicle credit.
Savings ContributionsOther Credits • Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property
credit. ❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Credit
• Qualified electric vehicle credit. ❏ 8910 Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit• Residential energy credits.What’s New ❏ 8911 Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling• Credit for clean renewable energy bonds
Property Creditor Gulf tax credit bonds.Residential energy credits. You may be able • Credit for excess social security tax or rail- ❏ 8912 Credit for Clean Renewable Energyto take the two new residential energy credits if road retirement tax withheld. and Gulf Tax Credit Bondsyou made energy saving improvements to your • Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain.home in 2006. See Residential Energy Credits ❏ 8913 Credit for Federal Telephone• Health coverage tax credit.for more information. Excise Tax Paid• Credit for federal telephone excise tax
Alternative motor vehicle and alternative fuel paid.
vehicle refueling property credits. You may
be able to take a credit if you placed an alterna- Several other credits are discussed in other
tive motor vehicle or alternative fuel vehicle re- chapters in this publication. Nonrefundable Creditsfueling property in service in 2006. See • Child and dependent care credit (chapter
Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit and Alternative 32). The credits discussed in this part of the chapterFuel Vehicle Refueling Property Credit for more • Credit for the elderly or the disabled can reduce your tax. However, if the total ofinformation. (chapter 33). these credits is more than your tax, the excess is
not refunded to you.• Child tax credit (chapter 34).Qualified electric vehicle credit. The maxi-
• Education credits (chapter 35).mum qualified electric vehicle credit is reduced
from $4,000 to $1,000 for any qualified vehicle • Earned income credit (chapter 36). Adoption Credit
placed in service in 2006. See Qualified Electric
Vehicle Credit for more information. You may be able to take a tax credit of up toNonrefundable credits. The first part of this $10,960 for qualified expenses paid to adopt anchapter, Nonrefundable Credits, covers tenCredit for clean renewable energy bonds or eligible child. The credit may be allowed for thecredits that you subtract from your tax. TheseGulf tax credit bonds. You may be able to adoption of a child with special needs even if youcredits may reduce your tax to zero. If thesetake a credit if you are a holder of a clean do not have any qualified expenses.credits are more than your tax, the excess is notrenewable energy bond or Gulf tax credit bond If your modified adjusted gross income (AGI)refunded to you.during 2006. The amount of any credit figured is more than $164,410, your credit is reduced. If
before applying tax liability limits must be in- your modified AGI is $204,410 or more, youRefundable credits. The second part of thiscluded as interest income on your tax return. cannot take the credit.chapter, Refundable Credits, covers four creditsSee Credits for Clean Renewable Energy Bonds
that are treated as payments and are refundableor Gulf Tax Credit Bonds for more information. Qualified adoption expenses. Qualifiedto you. These credits are added to the federal adoption expenses are reasonable and neces-Adoption credit. The maximum adoption income tax withheld and any estimated tax pay- sary expenses directly related to, and whosecredit increases to $10,960. The adoption credit ments you made. If this total is more than your principal purpose is for, the legal adoption ofcan no longer be claimed on Form 1040A. See total tax, the excess will be refunded to you. an eligible child. These expenses include:Adoption Credit for more information. • Adoption fees,
Useful Items • Court costs,Excess withholding of social security tax
You may want to see:and railroad retirement tax. Social security • Attorney fees,
tax and tier 1 railroad retirement tax (RRTA) are • Travel expenses (including amounts spentPublicationboth withheld at a rate of 6.2% of wages. The for meals and lodging) while away from
maximum wages subject to these taxes in- home, and❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses
creased to $94,200 in 2006. The withholding • Re-adoption expenses to adopt a foreign❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit forrate of tier 2 RRTA is 4.4% of wages in 2006. child.IndividualsThe maximum wages subject to this tax in-
.creased to $69,900 in 2006. If you had too much ❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time
social security or RRTA tax withheld during Homeowners Nonqualified expenses. Qualified adop-
2006, you may be entitled to a credit of the tion expenses do not include expenses:❏ 535 Business Expensesexcess withholding. For more information about • That violate state or federal law,the credit, see Credit for Excess Social Security ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements • For carrying out any surrogate parentingTax or Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld under (IRAs) arrangement,Refundable Credits, later. • For the adoption of your spouse’s child,Form (and Instructions)Credit for federal telephone excise tax paid. • For which you received funds under any
❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit (Individual,If you paid the federal telephone excise tax on federal, state, or local program,
Estate, or Trust)certain long distance or bundled telephone serv- • Allowed as a credit or deduction under any
ice, you may be able to request a credit. See other federal income tax rule,❏ 2439 Notice to Shareholder ofCredit for Federal Telephone Excise Tax Paid • Paid or reimbursed by your employer orUndistributed Long-Term Capitalfor more information. any other person or organization, orGains
• Paid before 1997.❏ 5695 Residential Energy Credits
❏ 8396 Mortgage Interest Credit Eligible child. The term “eligible child”Introduction means any individual:❏ 8801 Credit For Prior Year Minimum Tax
— Individuals, Estates, and TrustsThis chapter discusses the following credits. • Under 18 years old, or
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 243

Page 246 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Physically or mentally incapable of caring income from U.S. and foreign sources. See Pub- If you are subject to the $2,000 limit because
for himself or herself. lication 514 for more information. your certificate credit rate is more than 20%, you
cannot carry forward any amount more than
How to take the credit. Complete Form 1116Child with special needs. An eligible child $2,000 (or your share of the $2,000 if you must
and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the creditis a child with special needs if all three of the divide the credit).
on Form 1040, line 47.following apply.
How to take the credit. Figure your 2006Exception. You do not have to complete1. He or she was a citizen or resident of the credit and any carryforward to 2007 on FormForm 1116 to take the credit if all of the follow-United States (including U.S. possessions) 8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be sureing apply.at the time the adoption process began. to include any credit carryforward from 2003,• All of your foreign source gross income2. A state (including the District of Columbia) 2004, and 2005.was from passive income, which generallyhas determined that the child cannot or Include the credit in your total for Form 1040,includes interest and dividends.should not be returned to his or her par- line 54, and check box a.ents’ home. • All of your foreign source gross income
and the foreign tax paid on it were re-3. The state has determined that the child will Reduced home mortgage interest deduction.ported to you on a qualified payee state-not be adopted unless assistance is pro- If you itemize your deductions on Schedule Ament, which includes Form 1099-INT andvided to the adoptive parents. Factors (Form 1040), you must reduce your home mort-Form 1099-DIV.used by states to make this determination gage interest deduction by the amount of the
include: • The total of your creditable foreign taxes mortgage interest credit shown on Form 8396,
was not more than $300 (not more than line 3. You must do this even if part of thata. The child’s ethnic background, $600 if married filing jointly). amount is to be carried forward to 2007. Forb. The child’s age, • You elect this procedure for the tax year. more information about the home mortgage in-c. Whether the child is a member of a mi- terest deduction, see chapter 23.nority or sibling group, and For more details on these requirements, seed. Whether the child has a medical condi- the instructions for Form 1116. Recapture of federal mortgage subsidy. Iftion or a physical, mental, or emotional you received an MCC with your mortgage loan,handicap. you may have to recapture (pay back) all or partMortgage Interest Credit of the benefit you received from that program.
The recapture may be required if you sell orWhen to take the credit. Generally, until the The mortgage interest credit is intended to help dispose of your home at a gain during the first 9adoption becomes final, you take the credit in lower-income individuals own a home. If you years after the date you closed your mortgagethe year after your qualified expenses were paid qualify, you can take the credit each year for part loan. See Publication 523, Selling Your Home,or incurred. If the adoption credit becomes final, of the home mortgage interest you pay. for more information.you take the credit in the year your expenses
Who qualifies. You may be eligible for thewere paid or incurred. See the instructions for
credit if you were issued a mortgage credit certif-Form 8839 for more specific information on Retirement Savingsicate (MCC)  from your state or local govern-when to take the credit.
Contributions Creditment. Generally, an MCC is issued only inForeign child. If the child is not a U.S. citi- connection with a new mortgage for thezen or resident at the time the adoption process You may be able to take this credit if you, orpurchase of your main home.began, you cannot take the credit unless the your spouse if filing jointly, made:
adoption becomes final. You treat all adoption Amount of credit. Figure your credit on Form • Contributions (other than rollover contribu-
expenses paid or incurred in years before the 8396. If your mortgage loan amount is equal to tions) to a traditional or Roth IRA,
adoption becomes final as paid or incurred in the (or smaller than) the certified indebtedness • Elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b)year it becomes final. amount (loan) shown on your MCC, enter on plan (including designated Roth contribu-
Form 8396, line 1, all the interest you paid on tions) or to a governmental 457, SEP, orHow to take the credit. To take the credit, you your mortgage during the year. SIMPLE plan,must complete Form 8839 and attach it to your If your mortgage loan amount is larger thanForm 1040. Include the credit in your total for • Voluntary employee contributions to athe certified indebtedness amount shown onForm 1040, line 54, and check box b on that line. qualified retirement plan (including the fed-your MCC, you can figure the credit on only part eral Thrift Savings Plan), orof the interest you paid. To find the amount to • Contributions to a 501(c)(18)(D) plan.Foreign Tax Credit enter on line 1, multiply the total interest you
paid during the year on your mortgage by the However, you cannot take the credit if eitherYou generally can choose to take income taxes following fraction. of the following applies.you paid or accrued during the year to a foreign
country or U.S. possession as a credit against 1. The amount on Form 1040, line 38, or
your U.S. income tax. Or, you can deduct them Form 1040A, line 22, is more than $25,000Certified indebtedness
as an itemized deduction (see chapter 22). amount on your MCC ($37,500 if head of household; $50,000 if
You cannot take a credit (or deduction) for married filing jointly).Original amount of yourforeign income taxes paid on income that you 2. The person(s) who made the qualified con-mortgageexclude from U.S. tax under any of the follow- tribution or elective deferral (a) was born
ing. If two or more persons (other than a married after January 1, 1989, (b) is claimed as a
couple filing a joint return) hold an interest in the dependent on someone else’s 2006 tax re-1. Foreign earned income exclusion.
home to which the MCC relates, the credit must turn or (c) was a student (defined next).2. Foreign housing exclusion. be divided based on the interest held by each3. Income from Puerto Rico exempt from person. See Publication 530 for more informa-U.S. tax. Student. You were a student if during anytion. part of 5 calendar months of 2006 you:4. Possession exclusion.
If the certificate credit rate is more than • Were enrolled as a full-time student at a5. Extraterritorial income exclusion.
20%, the credit you are allowed cannot school, or
be more than $2,000.Limit on the credit. Unless you can elect not • Took a full-time, on-farm training course
CAUTION
!
to file Form 1116 (see Exception, later), your given by a school or a state, county, or
foreign tax credit cannot be more than your U.S. Carryforward. If your allowable credit is re- local government agency.
tax liability (Form 1040, line 44), multiplied by a duced because of the limit based on your tax,
fraction. The numerator of the fraction is your you can carry forward the unused portion of the School. A school includes a technical,
taxable income from sources outside the United credit to the next 3 years or until used, which- trade, or mechanical school. It d oes not include
States. The denominator is your total taxable ever comes first. an on-the-job training course, correspondence
Page 244 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 247 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
school, or school offering courses only through its domestic distributor’s) certification that a spe- • Recharge motor vehicles propelled by
the Internet. electricity, but only if the property is lo-cific make, model, and model year vehicle quali-
cated at the point where the vehicles arefies for the credit and the maximum amount of
recharged.the credit for which it qualifies. For an updatedHow to take the credit. Figure the credit on
list of certified vehicles and the specific creditForm 8880. Enter the credit on your Form 1040,
amounts for each model, go to www.irs.gov/line 51, or your Form 1040A, line 32, and attach Amount of the credit. For personal use prop-newsroom/article/0,,id=157632,00.html on theForm 8880 to your return. erty, the credit is generally the smaller of 30% ofInternet. the property’s cost or $1,000. For business use
property, the credit is generally the smaller ofAdditional requirements. In addition toCredit for Prior Year
30% of the property’s cost or $30,000. Eachthe manufacturer’s (or domestic distributor’s)Minimum Tax property’s cost must first be reduced by anycertification, the following requirements must
section 179 deduction before figuring the credit.be met to qualify for the credit:The tax laws give special treatment to some
• You placed the vehicle in service afterkinds of income and allow special deductions How to take the credit. To take the credit, you2005;and credits for some kinds of expenses. If you must complete Form 8911 and attach it to your
• The original use of the vehicle began withbenefit from these laws, you may have to pay at Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for
you;least a minimum amount of tax in addition to any Form 1040, line 55. Check box c and enter
other tax on these items. This is called the alter- • You acquired the vehicle for your use or to “8911” on the line next to box c.
native minimum tax. lease to others, and not for resale; and
More information. For more information onThe special treatment of some items of in- • You use the vehicle primarily in the United the credit, see the instructions for Form 8911.come and expenses only allows you to postpone States.
paying tax until a later year. If in prior years you
paid alternative minimum tax because of these Qualified Electric VehiclePhaseout of credit. Ordinarily the amount oftax postponement items, you may be able to the credit is 100% of the manufacturer’s (or Credittake a credit for prior year minimum tax against domestic distributor’s) certification of the maxi-your current year’s regular tax. The amount of You may be allowed a tax credit if you placed amum credit allowable as explained above. How-the credit cannot reduce your current year’s tax qualified electric vehicle in service during theever, if you purchased a qualified vehicle from abelow your current year’s tentative alternative year.manufacturer who previously sold at leastminimum tax. 60,000 qualified vehicles, the amount of your Qualified electric vehicle. Generally, this isYou may be able to take a credit against credit may be reduced. Your manufacturer a vehicle that:your regular tax if for 2005 you had: should give you the information you need to • Has at least four wheels and is manufac-• An alternative minimum tax liability and figure your phaseout percentage. See the Form tured primarily for use on public streets,adjustments or preferences other than ex- 8910 instructions roads, and highways,clusion items,
The phaseout period has begun for • Is powered primarily by an electric motor• A minimum tax credit that you are carrying
certain qualifying vehicles purchased drawing current from rechargeable batter-forward to 2006, or
for use or lease from Toyota Motor ies, fuel cells, or other portable sources ofCAUTION
!
• An unallowed nonconventional source fuel Corporation after September 30, 2006. See IRS electrical current,credit or qualified electric vehicle credit. news release IR 2006-145 on the Internet at • Is originally used by you,
www.irs.gov/newsroom/article/0,,id=162562,00. • Is acquired for your own use and not forHow to take the credit. Figure your 2006 html. resale,credit and any carryforward to 2007 on Form • Has never been used as a nonelectric ve-8801, and attach it to your Form 1040. Include Recapture of credit. If the vehicle no longer hicle, andthe credit in your total for Form 1040, line 55, qualifies for the credit, you must recapture part • Is used predominately in the Unitedand check box b. You can carry forward any or all of the credit. States.unused credit for prior year minimum tax to later
years until it is completely used.
How to take the credit. To take the credit, you Amount of credit. If you placed a qualifiedmust complete Form 8910 and attach it to yourMore information. For more information electric vehicle in service during 2006, the creditForm 1040. Include the credit in your total forabout the credit, see the instructions for Form is generally 2.5% of the cost of the vehicle.Form 1040, line 55. Check box c and enter8801. However, if the vehicle is a depreciable busi-“8910” on the line next to box c. ness asset, you must reduce the cost of the
vehicle by any section 179 deduction beforeAlternative Motor Vehicle More information. For more information on figuring the credit. See Publication 463, Travel,
the credit, see the instructions for Form 8910.Credit Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses, for infor-
mation on the section 179 deduction.
You may be able to take a credit if you place an The credit is limited to $1,000 for each vehi-Alternative Fuel Vehiclealternative motor vehicle in service in 2006. You cle placed in service in 2006.Refueling Property Creditcan no longer take a deduction for clean-fuel
Recapture.  If the vehicle no longer qualifiesvehicles.
You may be able to take a credit if you place for the credit within 3 years of the date you
qualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling prop- placed it in service, you must recapture part orAlternative motor vehicle. An alternative
erty in service in 2006. You can no longer take a all of the credit. You recapture the credit bymotor vehicle is a new vehicle that qualifies as
deduction for clean fuel vehicle refueling prop- adding part or all of it to your income tax for theone of the following four types of vehicles.
erty. year in which the recapture event occurs.• Qualified hybrid vehicle. The vehicle will no longer qualify if it is• Advanced lean burn technology vehicle. changed in either of the following ways.Qualified alternative fuel refueling property.• Qualified alternative fuel vehicle. Qualified alternative fuel vehicle property is any • The vehicle is modified so that it is no• Qualified fuel cell vehicle. property (other than a building or its structural longer primarily powered by electricity.
components) used to do either of the following. • It becomes nonqualifying property.
• Store or dispense a clean-burning fuel intoAmount of credit. Generally, for a passenger
the fuel tank of a motor vehicle propelledcar or light duty truck that is either a qualified Sale or other disposition. Generally, no
by the fuel, but only if the storage or dis-hybrid vehicle or an advanced lean burn tech- recapture occurs on the sale or other disposition
pensing is at the point where the fuel isnology vehicle, you can rely on the manufac- of the vehicle. However, if the vehicle will be
delivered into the tank.turer’s (or, in the case of a foreign manufacturer, modified after you dispose of it so that it no
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 245

Page 248 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
longer qualifies for the credit, the credit may be proportionate share of any costs of such associ- these credits, withheld feder al income tax, and
subject to recapture. ation or corporation for purposes of these cred- estimated tax payments is more than your total
See Publication 535, chapter 12, for more its. tax, the excess can be refunded to you.
information. Basis reduction. You must reduce the basis
Credit for Excess Socialof your home by the amount of any credits al-How to take the credit. To take the credit,
lowed.complete Form 8834 and attach it to your Form Security Tax or Railroad1040. Include the credit in your total for Form How to take the credits. To take either of the Retirement Tax Withheld1040, line 55. Check box c and enter “8834” on credits, you must complete Form 5695 and at-the line next to box c. tach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit on Most employers must withhold social security
Do not confuse this credit with the al- Form 1040, line 52. tax from your wages. If you work for a railroadternative motor vehicle credit which is employer, that employer must withhold tier 1More information. For more information ondiscussed above.CAUTION
!
railroad retirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTAthese credits, see the instructions for Form
tax.5695.
If you worked for two or more employers inResidential Energy Credits
2006, you may have had too much social secur-Credit for CleanYou may be eligible for 2 credits, the nonbusi- ity or RRTA tax withheld from your pay. You can
Renewable Energy Bondsness energy property credit and the residential claim the excess social security or RRTA tier 1
energy efficient property credit, if you made en- tax as a credit against your income tax. Theor Gulf Tax Credit Bondsergy saving improvements to your home. following table shows the maximum amount of
wages subject to tax and the maximum amountYou may be able to take a credit if you are aNonbusiness energy property credit You holder of a clean renewable energy bond of tax that should have been withheld in 2006.may be able to take this credit for any of the (CREB) or Gulf tax credit bond (GTCB). CREBsfollowing improvements to your main home lo- Maximum taxare tax credit bonds issued after 2005 by certaincated in the United States in 2006 if they are Maximum that shouldtax-exempt electricity providers to finance re- wages have beennew and meet certain requirements for energy newable energy projects. GTCBs are tax credit Type of tax subject to tax withheldefficiency. bonds issued after 2005 by the state of Ala- Social security• Any insulation material or system primarily bama, Louisiana, or Mississippi that are desig- ordesigned to reduce heat gain or loss in nated by the governor of those states as GTCBs RRTA tier 1 $94,200 $5,840.40your home. and that meet certain other requirements. The RRTA tier 2 $69,900 $3,075.60• Exterior windows (including skylights). issuers do not pay interest on both types of
• Exterior doors. bonds. Instead of receiving interest, the bond- All wages are subject to Medicare tax• A metal roof with pigmented coatings pri- holders qualify to claim a tax credit. withholding.marily designed to reduce heat gain in
Who can claim the credits. If you hold a
CAUTION
!
your home.
CREB and/or a GTCB on 1 or more credit
Use Form 843, Claim for Refund andallowance dates, you can claim either theYou may also be able to claim this credit for Request for Abatement, to claim a re-CREB credit or the GTCB credit by filing Formthe cost of any of the following items if the fund of excess RRTA tier 2 tax. See
TIP
8912. The credit allowance dates are:items meet certain performance and quality Publication 505, Tax Withholding and Estimated• March 15,standards. Tax, for details.• June 15,• Certain electric heat pump water heaters,
electric heat pumps, geothermal heat • September 15, and
pumps, central air conditioners, and natu- • December 15. Employer’s error. If any one employer with-
ral gas, propane, or oil water heaters. held too much social security or RRTA tax, youThe credit allowance date also includes the last• A qualified natural gas, propane, or oil fur- cannot take the excess as a credit against yourday on which the CREB or GTCB is outstanding.nace or hot water boiler. income tax. The employer should adjust the tax
• An advanced main air circulating fan used for you. If the employer does not adjust theAmount of credit. The amount of the creditin a natural gas, propane, or oil furnace. overcollection, you can file a claim for refundwith respect to each credit allowance date is
using Form 843.generally equal to 25 percent of the annualFor more information about the nonbusiness credit for the bond. However, the 25% will beenergy property credit, see the Instructions for prorated for the quarters in which the bond is Joint return. If you are filing a joint return, youForm 5695. issued, redeemed or matures. cannot add the social security or RRTA tax with-
Residential energy efficient property credit. held from your spouse’s wages to the amountInterest income. The amount of any tax creditYou may be able to take this credit if you paid withheld from your wages. Figure the withhold-allowed (figured before applying tax liability lim-for any of the following during 2006. ing separately for you and your spouse to deter-its) must be included as interest income on your
• Qualified photovoltaic property for use in mine if either of you has excess withholding.tax return.
your home located in the United States.
How to take the credit. To take either credit,• Qualified solar water heating property for How to figure the credit if you did not workyou must complete Form 8912 and attach it touse in your home located in the United for a railroad. If you did not work for a railroadyour Form 1040. Include the credit in your totalStates. during 2006, figure the credit as follows:for Form 1040, line 55. Check box c, and enter• Qualified fuel cell property installed on or “8912” on the line next to box c.in connection with your main home located
1. Add all social security tax withheldin the United States. More information. For more information on (but not more than $5,840.40 for
these credits, see the instructions for Form each employer). Enter the totalFor more information about the residential en- 8912. here ....................ergy efficient property credit, see the instruc-
2. Enter any uncollected socialtions for Form 5695.
security tax on tips or group-term
life insurance included in the totalCondominiums and cooperative apartments.
on Form 1040, line 63 ........If you are a member of a condominium manage- Refundable Credits
ment association for a condominium you own or 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $5,840.40 or
a tenant-stockholder in a cooperative housing The credits discussed in this part of the chapter less, stop here. You cannot take
the credit .................corporation, you are treated as having paid your are treated as payments of tax. If the total of
Page 246 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 249 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax on the capital gain, you are allowed a credit • Received a trade readjustment allowance,4. Social security tax limit ........ 5,840.40
orfor the tax since it is considered paid by you. The
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3. mutual fund or REIT will send you Form 2439, • Would have been entitled to receive suchEnter the result here and on Form Notice to Shareholder of Undistributed an allowance except that you had not ex-1040, line 67 (or Form 1040A, line Long-Term Capital Gains, showing the undis- hausted all rights to any unemployment4 3 ) ....................
tributed capital gains and the tax paid, if any. insurance (except additional compensa-
Take the credit for the tax paid by entering the tion that is funded by a state and is notExample. You are married and file a joint
amount on Form 1040, line 70, and checking reimbursed from any federal funds) toreturn with your spouse who had no gross in-
box a. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your which you were entitled (or would be enti-come in 2006. During 2006, you worked for the
return. See Capital Gain Distributions in chapter tled if you applied).Brown Shoe Company and earned $58,000 in
8 for more information on undistributed capitalwages. Social security tax of $3,596 was with-
Example. You received a trade adjustmentgains.held. You also worked for another employer in
allowance for January 2006. You were an eligi-2006 and earned $47,000 in wages. $2,914 of
ble TAA recipient on the first day of January andsocial security tax was withheld from these Health Coverage Tax February.wages. Because you worked for more than one
Creditemployer and your total wages were more than
$94,200, you can take a credit of $669.60 for the You may be able to take this credit for any Alternative TAA Recipientexcess social security tax withheld. month in which all the following statements
You were an eligible alternative TAA recipientwere true on the first day of the month.
1. Add all social security tax withheld on the first day of the month if, for that month or• You were an eligible trade adjustment as-(but not more than $5,840.40 for the prior month, you received benefits under ansistance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAAeach employer). Enter the total alternative trade adjustment assistance pro-recipient, or Pension Benefit Guarantyhere .................... $6,510.00 gram for older workers established by the De-Corporation (PBGC) pension recipient (de-2. Enter any uncollected social partment of Labor.fined later).security tax on tips or group-term
• You were covered by a qualified health Example. You received benefits under anlife insurance included in the total
insurance plan for which you paid the pre-on Form 1040, line 63 ........ - 0 - alternative trade adjustment assistance pro-
miums. gram for older workers for October 2006. The3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $5,840.40 or
• You were not entitled to Medicare Part A program was established by the Department ofless, stop here. You cannot take the
or enrolled in Medicare Part B. Labor. You were an eligible alternative TAA re-credit ................... 6,510.00
cipient on the first day of October and Novem-• You were not enrolled in Medicaid or State4. Social security tax limit ........ 5,840.40 ber.Children’s Health Insurance Program
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3. (SCHIP).Enter the result here and on Form • You were not enrolled in the Federal Em-1040, line 67 (or Form 1040A, line PBGC Pension Recipientployees Health Benefits Program or eligi-4 3 ) .................... $669.60
ble to receive benefits under the U.S. You were an eligible PBGC pension recipientmilitary health system (TRICARE).How to figure the credit if you worked for a on the first day of the month, if both of the• You were not covered by, or eligible forrailroad. If you were a railroad employee at following apply.coverage under, any employer-sponsoredany time during 2006, figure the credit as fol-
1. You were age 55 or older on the first dayhealth insurance plan (including any em-lows:
of the month.ployer-sponsored health insurance plan of
2. You received a benefit for that month thatyour spouse).1. Add all social security and tier 1 was paid by the PBGC under title IV of the• You were not imprisoned under federal,RRTA tax withheld (but not more
Employee Retirement Income Security Actthan $5,840.40 for each employer). state, or local authority.
of 1974 (ERISA).Enter the total here .......... But, you cannot take the credit if you can be
2. Enter any uncollected social If you received a lump-sum payment from theclaimed as a dependent on someone else’ssecurity and tier 1 RRTA tax on PBGC after August 5, 2002, you meet item (2)2006 tax return. If you meet all of these condi-tips or group-term life insurance above for any month that you would have re-tions, you may be able to take a credit of up toincluded in the total on Form 1040, ceived a PBGC benefit if you had not received65% of the amount you paid for qualified healthline 63 .................. the lump-sum payment.insurance coverage. The amount you paid for3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $5,840.40 or qualified health insurance coverage must be re-less, stop here. You cannot take duced by any (a) Archer MSA and health sav-the credit ................. How To Take the Creditings account distributions used to pay for the
4. Social security and tier 1 RRTA coverage, and (b) National Emergency Grants To take the credit, complete Form 8885 andtax limit .................. 5,840.40 you received for health insurance in 2006. attach it to your Form 1040. Include your credit5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3. You can take this credit on your tax return or in the total for Form 1040, line 70, and check boxEnter the result here and on Form
have it paid on your behalf in advance to your c.1040, line 67 (or Form 1040A, line
insurance company. If the credit is paid on your4 3 ) .................... You must attach invoices and proof of pay-
behalf in advance, that amount will reduce the ment for any amounts you include on Form
amount of the credit you can take on your taxHow to take the credit. Enter the credit on 8885, line 2, for which you did not receive an
return.Form 1040, line 67, or include it in the total for advance payment. For details, see Publication
For definitions and special rules includingForm 1040A, line 43. 502 or Form 8885.
those relating to qualified health insurance plans
and employer-sponsored health insuranceCredit for Tax on Credit for Federalplans, see Publication 502 and the instructions
Undistributed Capital Gain Telephone Excise Tax Paidfor Form 8885.
You must include in your income any amounts If you were billed after February 28, 2003, and
that regulated investment companies (com- before August 1, 2006, for the federal telephoneTAA Recipient
monly called mutual funds) or real estate invest- excise tax on long distance or bundled service,
You were an eligible TAA recipient on the firstment trusts (REITs) allocated to you as capital you may be able to request a credit for the tax
day of the month if, for any day in that month orgain distributions, even if you did not actually paid. You had bundled service if your local and
the prior month, you:receive them. If the mutual fund or REIT paid a long distance service was provided under a plan
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 247

Page 250 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that does not separately state the charge for return, the standard amount depends on the If you request the standard amount and y ou
local service. number of exemptions you would be allowed to later want to change it to the actual amount, file
You cannot request the credit if you have claim if you were required to file. See chapter 3 an amended return. See Amended Returns and
already received a credit or refund from your for information on exemptions. The standard Claims for Refund in chapter 1 for information on
service provider. If you request the credit, you amounts, which include both the tax paid and amended returns.
cannot ask your service provider for a credit or interest owed on that tax, are shown in the If you request the standard amount, you do
refund and must withdraw any request previ- following table. not have to include the credit in income for any
ously submitted to your provider. tax year.
IF the number of THEN theYou can request a credit for either the actual How to request the credit. To request thisexemptions standard amountamount of tax paid or a standard amount. credit, enter the amount on Form 1040, line 71;claimed is ... is ...
It usually will be to your benefit to re- Form 1040A, line 42; or Form 1040-EZ, line 9.
0$  0 *quest the actual amount if it is larger Attach Form 8913 if requesting the actual
than the standard amount. amount. If you are not otherwise required to file
TIP
13 0 a federal income tax return, you must neverthe-
Actual amount. If you request the actual less file Form 1040EZ-T, Request for Refund of24 0
amount paid, you must attach Form 8913 show- Federal Telephone Excise Tax, to request the35 0ing the amount paid and keep records to sub- credit.
stantiate the amount. See the Form 8913 4 or more 60
instructions for details.
* Even though your standard amount is zero, you
Standard amount. The standard amount de- can request the actual amount paid on Form 8913.
pends on the number of exemptions claimed on
your return. If you are not required to file a tax
Page 248 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 251 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your taxable income shown on Form 1040, line
2006 43, or Form 1040A, line 27, is less than
CAUTION
!
$100,000, you must use the following Tax Table
Tax Table to figure your tax. If your taxable income is
$100,000 or more, use the Tax Computation
Worksheet that immediately follows the Tax
Tables.
Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their
taxable income on Form 1040, line 43, is $25,300. First,
they find the $25,300–25,350 taxable income line. Next,
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,406
3,414
3,421
3,429
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
3,029
3,036
3,044
3,051
3,406
3,414
3,421
3,429
3,246
3,254
3,261
3,269
they find the column for married filing jointly and read down
the column. The amount shown where the taxable income
line and filing status column meet is $3,044. This is the tax
amount they should enter on Form 1040, line 44, or Form
1040A, line 28.
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
05 0000 1,000 2,00051 5 1111
1,000 1,025 101 101 101 101 2,000 2,025 201 201 201 20115 25 2222 1,025 1,050 104 104 104 104 2,025 2,050 204 204 204 20425 50 4444 1,050 1,075 106 106 106 106 2,050 2,075 206 206 206 20650 75 6666 1,075 1,100 109 109 109 109 2,075 2,100 209 209 209 20975 100 9999
2,100 2,125 211 211 211 2111,100 1,125 111 111 111 111100 125 11 11 11 11 2,125 2,150 214 214 214 2141,125 1,150 114 114 114 114125 150 14 14 14 14 2,150 2,175 216 216 216 2161,150 1,175 116 116 116 116150 175 16 16 16 16 2,175 2,200 219 219 219 2191,175 1,200 119 119 119 119175 200 19 19 19 19 2,200 2,225 221 221 221 2211,200 1,225 121 121 121 121200 225 21 21 21 21 2,225 2,250 224 224 224 2241,225 1,250 124 124 124 124225 250 24 24 24 24 2,250 2,275 226 226 226 2261,250 1,275 126 126 126 126250 275 26 26 26 26 2,275 2,300 229 229 229 2291,275 1,300 129 129 129 129275 300 29 29 29 29 2,300 2,325 231 231 231 231300 325 31 31 31 31 2,325 2,350 234 234 234 234325 350 34 34 34 34 1,300 1,325 131 131 131 131 2,350 2,375 236 236 236 236350 375 36 36 36 36 1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134 2,375 2,400 239 239 239 239375 400 39 39 39 39 1,350 1,375 136 136 136 136 2,400 2,425 241 241 241 2411,375 1,400 139 139 139 139400 425 41 41 41 41 2,425 2,450 244 244 244 244
425 450 44 44 44 44 1,400 1,425 141 141 141 141 2,450 2,475 246 246 246 246
450 475 46 46 46 46 1,425 1,450 144 144 144 144 2,475 2,500 249 249 249 249
475 500 49 49 49 49 1,450 1,475 146 146 146 146 2,500 2,525 251 251 251 2511,475 1,500 149 149 149 149500 525 51 51 51 51 2,525 2,550 254 254 254 254
525 550 54 54 54 54 1,500 1,525 151 151 151 151 2,550 2,575 256 256 256 256
550 575 56 56 56 56 1,525 1,550 154 154 154 154 2,575 2,600 259 259 259 259
575 600 59 59 59 59 1,550 1,575 156 156 156 156 2,600 2,625 261 261 261 2611,575 1,600 159 159 159 159600 625 61 61 61 61 2,625 2,650 264 264 264 264
625 650 64 64 64 64 1,600 1,625 161 161 161 161 2,650 2,675 266 266 266 266
650 675 66 66 66 66 1,625 1,650 164 164 164 164 2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269
675 700 69 69 69 69 1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166 2,700 2,725 271 271 271 2711,675 1,700 169 169 169 169700 725 71 71 71 71 2,725 2,750 274 274 274 274
725 750 74 74 74 74 1,700 1,725 171 171 171 171 2,750 2,775 276 276 276 276
750 775 76 76 76 76 1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174 2,775 2,800 279 279 279 279
775 800 79 79 79 79 1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176 2,800 2,825 281 281 281 2811,775 1,800 179 179 179 179800 825 81 81 81 81 2,825 2,850 284 284 284 284
825 850 84 84 84 84 1,800 1,825 181 181 181 181 2,850 2,875 286 286 286 286
850 875 86 86 86 86 1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184 2,875 2,900 289 289 289 289
875 900 89 89 89 89 1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186 2,900 2,925 291 291 291 2911,875 1,900 189 189 189 189900 925 91 91 91 91 2,925 2,950 294 294 294 294
925 950 94 94 94 94 1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191 2,950 2,975 296 296 296 296
950 975 96 96 96 96 1,925 1,950 194 194 194 194 2,975 3,000 299 299 299 299
975 1,000 99 99 99 99 1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196
1,975 2,000 199 199 199 199
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 250)
- 249 -

Page 252 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
3,000 6,000 9,000
3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303 6,000 6,050 603 603 603 603 9,000 9,050 976 903 976 903
3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308 6,050 6,100 608 608 608 608 9,050 9,100 984 908 984 908
3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313 6,100 6,150 613 613 613 613 9,100 9,150 991 913 991 913
3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318 6,150 6,200 618 618 618 618 9,150 9,200 999 918 999 918
3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323 6,200 6,250 623 623 623 623 9,200 9,250 1,006 923 1,006 923
3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328 6,250 6,300 628 628 628 628 9,250 9,300 1,014 928 1,014 928
3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333 6,300 6,350 633 633 633 633 9,300 9,350 1,021 933 1,021 933
3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338 6,350 6,400 638 638 638 638 9,350 9,400 1,029 938 1,029 938
3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343 6,400 6,450 643 643 643 643 9,400 9,450 1,036 943 1,036 943
3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348 6,450 6,500 648 648 648 648 9,450 9,500 1,044 948 1,044 948
3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353 6,500 6,550 653 653 653 653 9,500 9,550 1,051 953 1,051 953
3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358 6,550 6,600 658 658 658 658 9,550 9,600 1,059 958 1,059 958
3,600 3,650 363 363 363 363 6,600 6,650 663 663 663 663 9,600 9,650 1,066 963 1,066 963
3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368 6,650 6,700 668 668 668 668 9,650 9,700 1,074 968 1,074 968
3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373 6,700 6,750 673 673 673 673 9,700 9,750 1,081 973 1,081 973
3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378 6,750 6,800 678 678 678 678 9,750 9,800 1,089 978 1,089 978
3,800 3,850 383 383 383 383 6,800 6,850 683 683 683 683 9,800 9,850 1,096 983 1,096 983
3,850 3,900 388 388 388 388 6,850 6,900 688 688 688 688 9,850 9,900 1,104 988 1,104 988
3,900 3,950 393 393 393 393 6,900 6,950 693 693 693 693 9,900 9,950 1,111 993 1,111 993
3,950 4,000 398 398 398 398 6,950 7,000 698 698 698 698 9,950 10,000 1,119 998 1,119 998
4,000 7,000 10,000
4,000 4,050 403 403 403 403 7,000 7,050 703 703 703 703 10,000 10,050 1,126 1,003 1,126 1,003
4,050 4,100 408 408 408 408 7,050 7,100 708 708 708 708 10,050 10,100 1,134 1,008 1,134 1,008
4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413 7,100 7,150 713 713 713 713 10,100 10,150 1,141 1,013 1,141 1,013
4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418 7,150 7,200 718 718 718 718 10,150 10,200 1,149 1,018 1,149 1,018
7,200 7,250 723 723 723 723 10,200 10,250 1,156 1,023 1,156 1,0234,200 4,250 423 423 423 423 7,250 7,300 728 728 728 728 10,250 10,300 1,164 1,028 1,164 1,0284,250 4,300 428 428 428 428 7,300 7,350 733 733 733 733 10,300 10,350 1,171 1,033 1,171 1,0334,300 4,350 433 433 433 433 7,350 7,400 738 738 738 738 10,350 10,400 1,179 1,038 1,179 1,0384,350 4,400 438 438 438 438
7,400 7,450 743 743 743 743 10,400 10,450 1,186 1,043 1,186 1,0434,400 4,450 443 443 443 443 7,450 7,500 748 748 748 748 10,450 10,500 1,194 1,048 1,194 1,0484,450 4,500 448 448 448 448 7,500 7,550 753 753 753 753 10,500 10,550 1,201 1,053 1,201 1,0534,500 4,550 453 453 453 453 7,550 7,600 759 758 759 758 10,550 10,600 1,209 1,058 1,209 1,0584,550 4,600 458 458 458 458
7,600 7,650 766 763 766 763 10,600 10,650 1,216 1,063 1,216 1,0634,600 4,650 463 463 463 463 7,650 7,700 774 768 774 768 10,650 10,700 1,224 1,068 1,224 1,0684,650 4,700 468 468 468 468 7,700 7,750 781 773 781 773 10,700 10,750 1,231 1,073 1,231 1,0734,700 4,750 473 473 473 473 7,750 7,800 789 778 789 778 10,750 10,800 1,239 1,078 1,239 1,0794,750 4,800 478 478 478 478 7,800 7,850 796 783 796 783 10,800 10,850 1,246 1,083 1,246 1,0864,800 4,850 483 483 483 483 7,850 7,900 804 788 804 788 10,850 10,900 1,254 1,088 1,254 1,0944,850 4,900 488 488 488 488 7,900 7,950 811 793 811 793 10,900 10,950 1,261 1,093 1,261 1,1014,900 4,950 493 493 493 493 7,950 8,000 819 798 819 798 10,950 11,000 1,269 1,098 1,269 1,1094,950 5,000 498 498 498 498
8,000 11,0005,000
8,000 8,050 826 803 826 803 11,000 11,050 1,276 1,103 1,276 1,1165,000 5,050 503 503 503 503 8,050 8,100 834 808 834 808 11,050 11,100 1,284 1,108 1,284 1,1245,050 5,100 508 508 508 508 8,100 8,150 841 813 841 813 11,100 11,150 1,291 1,113 1,291 1,1315,100 5,150 513 513 513 513 8,150 8,200 849 818 849 818 11,150 11,200 1,299 1,118 1,299 1,1395,150 5,200 518 518 518 518 8,200 8,250 856 823 856 823 11,200 11,250 1,306 1,123 1,306 1,1465,200 5,250 523 523 523 523 8,250 8,300 864 828 864 828 11,250 11,300 1,314 1,128 1,314 1,1545,250 5,300 528 528 528 528 8,300 8,350 871 833 871 833 11,300 11,350 1,321 1,133 1,321 1,1615,300 5,350 533 533 533 533 8,350 8,400 879 838 879 838 11,350 11,400 1,329 1,138 1,329 1,1695,350 5,400 538 538 538 538 8,400 8,450 886 843 886 843 11,400 11,450 1,336 1,143 1,336 1,1765,400 5,450 543 543 543 543 8,450 8,500 894 848 894 848 11,450 11,500 1,344 1,148 1,344 1,1845,450 5,500 548 548 548 548 8,500 8,550 901 853 901 853 11,500 11,550 1,351 1,153 1,351 1,1915,500 5,550 553 553 553 553 8,550 8,600 909 858 909 858 11,550 11,600 1,359 1,158 1,359 1,1995,550 5,600 558 558 558 558 8,600 8,650 916 863 916 863 11,600 11,650 1,366 1,163 1,366 1,2065,600 5,650 563 563 563 563 8,650 8,700 924 868 924 868 11,650 11,700 1,374 1,168 1,374 1,2145,650 5,700 568 568 568 568 8,700 8,750 931 873 931 873 11,700 11,750 1,381 1,173 1,381 1,2215,700 5,750 573 573 573 573 8,750 8,800 939 878 939 878 11,750 11,800 1,389 1,178 1,389 1,2295,750 5,800 578 578 578 578 8,800 8,850 946 883 946 883 11,800 11,850 1,396 1,183 1,396 1,2365,800 5,850 583 583 583 583 8,850 8,900 954 888 954 888 11,850 11,900 1,404 1,188 1,404 1,2445,850 5,900 588 588 588 588 8,900 8,950 961 893 961 893 11,900 11,950 1,411 1,193 1,411 1,2515,900 5,950 593 593 593 593 8,950 9,000 969 898 969 898 11,950 12,000 1,419 1,198 1,419 1,2595,950 6,000 598 598 598 598
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 251)
- 250 -

Page 253 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
12,000 15,000 18,000
12,000 12,050 1,426 1,203 1,426 1,266 15,000 15,050 1,876 1,503 1,876 1,716 18,000 18,050 2,326 1,949 2,326 2,166
12,050 12,100 1,434 1,208 1,434 1,274 15,050 15,100 1,884 1,508 1,884 1,724 18,050 18,100 2,334 1,956 2,334 2,174
12,100 12,150 1,441 1,213 1,441 1,281 15,100 15,150 1,891 1,514 1,891 1,731 18,100 18,150 2,341 1,964 2,341 2,181
12,150 12,200 1,449 1,218 1,449 1,289 15,150 15,200 1,899 1,521 1,899 1,739 18,150 18,200 2,349 1,971 2,349 2,189
12,200 12,250 1,456 1,223 1,456 1,296 15,200 15,250 1,906 1,529 1,906 1,746 18,200 18,250 2,356 1,979 2,356 2,196
12,250 12,300 1,464 1,228 1,464 1,304 15,250 15,300 1,914 1,536 1,914 1,754 18,250 18,300 2,364 1,986 2,364 2,204
12,300 12,350 1,471 1,233 1,471 1,311 15,300 15,350 1,921 1,544 1,921 1,761 18,300 18,350 2,371 1,994 2,371 2,211
12,350 12,400 1,479 1,238 1,479 1,319 15,350 15,400 1,929 1,551 1,929 1,769 18,350 18,400 2,379 2,001 2,379 2,219
12,400 12,450 1,486 1,243 1,486 1,326 15,400 15,450 1,936 1,559 1,936 1,776 18,400 18,450 2,386 2,009 2,386 2,226
12,450 12,500 1,494 1,248 1,494 1,334 15,450 15,500 1,944 1,566 1,944 1,784 18,450 18,500 2,394 2,016 2,394 2,234
12,500 12,550 1,501 1,253 1,501 1,341 15,500 15,550 1,951 1,574 1,951 1,791 18,500 18,550 2,401 2,024 2,401 2,241
12,550 12,600 1,509 1,258 1,509 1,349 15,550 15,600 1,959 1,581 1,959 1,799 18,550 18,600 2,409 2,031 2,409 2,249
12,600 12,650 1,516 1,263 1,516 1,356 15,600 15,650 1,966 1,589 1,966 1,806 18,600 18,650 2,416 2,039 2,416 2,256
12,650 12,700 1,524 1,268 1,524 1,364 15,650 15,700 1,974 1,596 1,974 1,814 18,650 18,700 2,424 2,046 2,424 2,264
12,700 12,750 1,531 1,273 1,531 1,371 15,700 15,750 1,981 1,604 1,981 1,821 18,700 18,750 2,431 2,054 2,431 2,271
12,750 12,800 1,539 1,278 1,539 1,379 15,750 15,800 1,989 1,611 1,989 1,829 18,750 18,800 2,439 2,061 2,439 2,279
12,800 12,850 1,546 1,283 1,546 1,386 15,800 15,850 1,996 1,619 1,996 1,836 18,800 18,850 2,446 2,069 2,446 2,286
12,850 12,900 1,554 1,288 1,554 1,394 15,850 15,900 2,004 1,626 2,004 1,844 18,850 18,900 2,454 2,076 2,454 2,294
12,900 12,950 1,561 1,293 1,561 1,401 15,900 15,950 2,011 1,634 2,011 1,851 18,900 18,950 2,461 2,084 2,461 2,301
12,950 13,000 1,569 1,298 1,569 1,409 15,950 16,000 2,019 1,641 2,019 1,859 18,950 19,000 2,469 2,091 2,469 2,309
13,000 16,000 19,000
13,000 13,050 1,576 1,303 1,576 1,416 16,000 16,050 2,026 1,649 2,026 1,866 19,000 19,050 2,476 2,099 2,476 2,316
13,050 13,100 1,584 1,308 1,584 1,424 16,050 16,100 2,034 1,656 2,034 1,874 19,050 19,100 2,484 2,106 2,484 2,324
13,100 13,150 1,591 1,313 1,591 1,431 16,100 16,150 2,041 1,664 2,041 1,881 19,100 19,150 2,491 2,114 2,491 2,331
13,150 13,200 1,599 1,318 1,599 1,439 16,150 16,200 2,049 1,671 2,049 1,889 19,150 19,200 2,499 2,121 2,499 2,339
13,200 13,250 1,606 1,323 1,606 1,446 16,200 16,250 2,056 1,679 2,056 1,896 19,200 19,250 2,506 2,129 2,506 2,346
13,250 13,300 1,614 1,328 1,614 1,454 16,250 16,300 2,064 1,686 2,064 1,904 19,250 19,300 2,514 2,136 2,514 2,354
13,300 13,350 1,621 1,333 1,621 1,461 16,300 16,350 2,071 1,694 2,071 1,911 19,300 19,350 2,521 2,144 2,521 2,361
13,350 13,400 1,629 1,338 1,629 1,469 16,350 16,400 2,079 1,701 2,079 1,919 19,350 19,400 2,529 2,151 2,529 2,369
13,400 13,450 1,636 1,343 1,636 1,476 16,400 16,450 2,086 1,709 2,086 1,926 19,400 19,450 2,536 2,159 2,536 2,376
13,450 13,500 1,644 1,348 1,644 1,484 16,450 16,500 2,094 1,716 2,094 1,934 19,450 19,500 2,544 2,166 2,544 2,384
13,500 13,550 1,651 1,353 1,651 1,491 16,500 16,550 2,101 1,724 2,101 1,941 19,500 19,550 2,551 2,174 2,551 2,391
13,550 13,600 1,659 1,358 1,659 1,499 16,550 16,600 2,109 1,731 2,109 1,949 19,550 19,600 2,559 2,181 2,559 2,399
13,600 13,650 1,666 1,363 1,666 1,506 16,600 16,650 2,116 1,739 2,116 1,956 19,600 19,650 2,566 2,189 2,566 2,406
13,650 13,700 1,674 1,368 1,674 1,514 16,650 16,700 2,124 1,746 2,124 1,964 19,650 19,700 2,574 2,196 2,574 2,414
13,700 13,750 1,681 1,373 1,681 1,521 16,700 16,750 2,131 1,754 2,131 1,971 19,700 19,750 2,581 2,204 2,581 2,421
13,750 13,800 1,689 1,378 1,689 1,529 16,750 16,800 2,139 1,761 2,139 1,979 19,750 19,800 2,589 2,211 2,589 2,429
13,800 13,850 1,696 1,383 1,696 1,536 16,800 16,850 2,146 1,769 2,146 1,986 19,800 19,850 2,596 2,219 2,596 2,436
13,850 13,900 1,704 1,388 1,704 1,544 16,850 16,900 2,154 1,776 2,154 1,994 19,850 19,900 2,604 2,226 2,604 2,444
13,900 13,950 1,711 1,393 1,711 1,551 16,900 16,950 2,161 1,784 2,161 2,001 19,900 19,950 2,611 2,234 2,611 2,451
13,950 14,000 1,719 1,398 1,719 1,559 16,950 17,000 2,169 1,791 2,169 2,009 19,950 20,000 2,619 2,241 2,619 2,459
14,000 17,000 20,000
14,000 14,050 1,726 1,403 1,726 1,566 17,000 17,050 2,176 1,799 2,176 2,016 20,000 20,050 2,626 2,249 2,626 2,466
14,050 14,100 1,734 1,408 1,734 1,574 17,050 17,100 2,184 1,806 2,184 2,024 20,050 20,100 2,634 2,256 2,634 2,474
14,100 14,150 1,741 1,413 1,741 1,581 17,100 17,150 2,191 1,814 2,191 2,031 20,100 20,150 2,641 2,264 2,641 2,481
14,150 14,200 1,749 1,418 1,749 1,589 17,150 17,200 2,199 1,821 2,199 2,039 20,150 20,200 2,649 2,271 2,649 2,489
14,200 14,250 1,756 1,423 1,756 1,596 17,200 17,250 2,206 1,829 2,206 2,046 20,200 20,250 2,656 2,279 2,656 2,496
14,250 14,300 1,764 1,428 1,764 1,604 17,250 17,300 2,214 1,836 2,214 2,054 20,250 20,300 2,664 2,286 2,664 2,504
14,300 14,350 1,771 1,433 1,771 1,611 17,300 17,350 2,221 1,844 2,221 2,061 20,300 20,350 2,671 2,294 2,671 2,511
14,350 14,400 1,779 1,438 1,779 1,619 17,350 17,400 2,229 1,851 2,229 2,069 20,350 20,400 2,679 2,301 2,679 2,519
14,400 14,450 1,786 1,443 1,786 1,626 17,400 17,450 2,236 1,859 2,236 2,076 20,400 20,450 2,686 2,309 2,686 2,526
14,450 14,500 1,794 1,448 1,794 1,634 17,450 17,500 2,244 1,866 2,244 2,084 20,450 20,500 2,694 2,316 2,694 2,534
14,500 14,550 1,801 1,453 1,801 1,641 17,500 17,550 2,251 1,874 2,251 2,091 20,500 20,550 2,701 2,324 2,701 2,541
14,550 14,600 1,809 1,458 1,809 1,649 17,550 17,600 2,259 1,881 2,259 2,099 20,550 20,600 2,709 2,331 2,709 2,549
14,600 14,650 1,816 1,463 1,816 1,656 17,600 17,650 2,266 1,889 2,266 2,106 20,600 20,650 2,716 2,339 2,716 2,556
14,650 14,700 1,824 1,468 1,824 1,664 17,650 17,700 2,274 1,896 2,274 2,114 20,650 20,700 2,724 2,346 2,724 2,564
14,700 14,750 1,831 1,473 1,831 1,671 17,700 17,750 2,281 1,904 2,281 2,121 20,700 20,750 2,731 2,354 2,731 2,571
14,750 14,800 1,839 1,478 1,839 1,679 17,750 17,800 2,289 1,911 2,289 2,129 20,750 20,800 2,739 2,361 2,739 2,579
14,800 14,850 1,846 1,483 1,846 1,686 17,800 17,850 2,296 1,919 2,296 2,136 20,800 20,850 2,746 2,369 2,746 2,586
14,850 14,900 1,854 1,488 1,854 1,694 17,850 17,900 2,304 1,926 2,304 2,144 20,850 20,900 2,754 2,376 2,754 2,594
14,900 14,950 1,861 1,493 1,861 1,701 17,900 17,950 2,311 1,934 2,311 2,151 20,900 20,950 2,761 2,384 2,761 2,601
14,950 15,000 1,869 1,498 1,869 1,709 17,950 18,000 2,319 1,941 2,319 2,159 20,950 21,000 2,769 2,391 2,769 2,609
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 252)
- 251 -

Page 254 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
21,000 24,000 27,000
21,000 21,050 2,776 2,399 2,776 2,616 24,000 24,050 3,226 2,849 3,226 3,066 27,000 27,050 3,676 3,299 3,676 3,516
21,050 21,100 2,784 2,406 2,784 2,624 24,050 24,100 3,234 2,856 3,234 3,074 27,050 27,100 3,684 3,306 3,684 3,524
21,100 21,150 2,791 2,414 2,791 2,631 24,100 24,150 3,241 2,864 3,241 3,081 27,100 27,150 3,691 3,314 3,691 3,531
21,150 21,200 2,799 2,421 2,799 2,639 24,150 24,200 3,249 2,871 3,249 3,089 27,150 27,200 3,699 3,321 3,699 3,539
21,200 21,250 2,806 2,429 2,806 2,646 24,200 24,250 3,256 2,879 3,256 3,096 27,200 27,250 3,706 3,329 3,706 3,546
21,250 21,300 2,814 2,436 2,814 2,654 24,250 24,300 3,264 2,886 3,264 3,104 27,250 27,300 3,714 3,336 3,714 3,554
21,300 21,350 2,821 2,444 2,821 2,661 24,300 24,350 3,271 2,894 3,271 3,111 27,300 27,350 3,721 3,344 3,721 3,561
21,350 21,400 2,829 2,451 2,829 2,669 24,350 24,400 3,279 2,901 3,279 3,119 27,350 27,400 3,729 3,351 3,729 3,569
21,400 21,450 2,836 2,459 2,836 2,676 24,400 24,450 3,286 2,909 3,286 3,126 27,400 27,450 3,736 3,359 3,736 3,576
21,450 21,500 2,844 2,466 2,844 2,684 24,450 24,500 3,294 2,916 3,294 3,134 27,450 27,500 3,744 3,366 3,744 3,584
21,500 21,550 2,851 2,474 2,851 2,691 24,500 24,550 3,301 2,924 3,301 3,141 27,500 27,550 3,751 3,374 3,751 3,591
21,550 21,600 2,859 2,481 2,859 2,699 24,550 24,600 3,309 2,931 3,309 3,149 27,550 27,600 3,759 3,381 3,759 3,599
21,600 21,650 2,866 2,489 2,866 2,706 24,600 24,650 3,316 2,939 3,316 3,156 27,600 27,650 3,766 3,389 3,766 3,606
21,650 21,700 2,874 2,496 2,874 2,714 24,650 24,700 3,324 2,946 3,324 3,164 27,650 27,700 3,774 3,396 3,774 3,614
21,700 21,750 2,881 2,504 2,881 2,721 24,700 24,750 3,331 2,954 3,331 3,171 27,700 27,750 3,781 3,404 3,781 3,621
21,750 21,800 2,889 2,511 2,889 2,729 24,750 24,800 3,339 2,961 3,339 3,179 27,750 27,800 3,789 3,411 3,789 3,629
21,800 21,850 2,896 2,519 2,896 2,736 24,800 24,850 3,346 2,969 3,346 3,186 27,800 27,850 3,796 3,419 3,796 3,636
21,850 21,900 2,904 2,526 2,904 2,744 24,850 24,900 3,354 2,976 3,354 3,194 27,850 27,900 3,804 3,426 3,804 3,644
21,900 21,950 2,911 2,534 2,911 2,751 24,900 24,950 3,361 2,984 3,361 3,201 27,900 27,950 3,811 3,434 3,811 3,651
21,950 22,000 2,919 2,541 2,919 2,759 24,950 25,000 3,369 2,991 3,369 3,209 27,950 28,000 3,819 3,441 3,819 3,659
22,000 25,000 28,000
22,000 22,050 2,926 2,549 2,926 2,766 25,000 25,050 3,376 2,999 3,376 3,216 28,000 28,050 3,826 3,449 3,826 3,666
22,050 22,100 2,934 2,556 2,934 2,774 25,050 25,100 3,384 3,006 3,384 3,224 28,050 28,100 3,834 3,456 3,834 3,674
22,100 22,150 2,941 2,564 2,941 2,781 25,100 25,150 3,391 3,014 3,391 3,231 28,100 28,150 3,841 3,464 3,841 3,681
22,150 22,200 2,949 2,571 2,949 2,789 25,150 25,200 3,399 3,021 3,399 3,239 28,150 28,200 3,849 3,471 3,849 3,689
22,200 22,250 2,956 2,579 2,956 2,796 25,200 25,250 3,406 3,029 3,406 3,246 28,200 28,250 3,856 3,479 3,856 3,696
22,250 22,300 2,964 2,586 2,964 2,804 25,250 25,300 3,414 3,036 3,414 3,254 28,250 28,300 3,864 3,486 3,864 3,704
22,300 22,350 2,971 2,594 2,971 2,811 25,300 25,350 3,421 3,044 3,421 3,261 28,300 28,350 3,871 3,494 3,871 3,711
22,350 22,400 2,979 2,601 2,979 2,819 25,350 25,400 3,429 3,051 3,429 3,269 28,350 28,400 3,879 3,501 3,879 3,719
22,400 22,450 2,986 2,609 2,986 2,826 25,400 25,450 3,436 3,059 3,436 3,276 28,400 28,450 3,886 3,509 3,886 3,726
22,450 22,500 2,994 2,616 2,994 2,834 25,450 25,500 3,444 3,066 3,444 3,284 28,450 28,500 3,894 3,516 3,894 3,734
22,500 22,550 3,001 2,624 3,001 2,841 25,500 25,550 3,451 3,074 3,451 3,291 28,500 28,550 3,901 3,524 3,901 3,741
22,550 22,600 3,009 2,631 3,009 2,849 25,550 25,600 3,459 3,081 3,459 3,299 28,550 28,600 3,909 3,531 3,909 3,749
22,600 22,650 3,016 2,639 3,016 2,856 25,600 25,650 3,466 3,089 3,466 3,306 28,600 28,650 3,916 3,539 3,916 3,756
22,650 22,700 3,024 2,646 3,024 2,864 25,650 25,700 3,474 3,096 3,474 3,314 28,650 28,700 3,924 3,546 3,924 3,764
22,700 22,750 3,031 2,654 3,031 2,871 25,700 25,750 3,481 3,104 3,481 3,321 28,700 28,750 3,931 3,554 3,931 3,771
22,750 22,800 3,039 2,661 3,039 2,879 25,750 25,800 3,489 3,111 3,489 3,329 28,750 28,800 3,939 3,561 3,939 3,779
22,800 22,850 3,046 2,669 3,046 2,886 25,800 25,850 3,496 3,119 3,496 3,336 28,800 28,850 3,946 3,569 3,946 3,786
22,850 22,900 3,054 2,676 3,054 2,894 25,850 25,900 3,504 3,126 3,504 3,344 28,850 28,900 3,954 3,576 3,954 3,794
22,900 22,950 3,061 2,684 3,061 2,901 25,900 25,950 3,511 3,134 3,511 3,351 28,900 28,950 3,961 3,584 3,961 3,801
22,950 23,000 3,069 2,691 3,069 2,909 25,950 26,000 3,519 3,141 3,519 3,359 28,950 29,000 3,969 3,591 3,969 3,809
23,000 26,000 29,000
23,000 23,050 3,076 2,699 3,076 2,916 26,000 26,050 3,526 3,149 3,526 3,366 29,000 29,050 3,976 3,599 3,976 3,816
23,050 23,100 3,084 2,706 3,084 2,924 26,050 26,100 3,534 3,156 3,534 3,374 29,050 29,100 3,984 3,606 3,984 3,824
23,100 23,150 3,091 2,714 3,091 2,931 26,100 26,150 3,541 3,164 3,541 3,381 29,100 29,150 3,991 3,614 3,991 3,831
23,150 23,200 3,099 2,721 3,099 2,939 26,150 26,200 3,549 3,171 3,549 3,389 29,150 29,200 3,999 3,621 3,999 3,839
23,200 23,250 3,106 2,729 3,106 2,946 26,200 26,250 3,556 3,179 3,556 3,396 29,200 29,250 4,006 3,629 4,006 3,846
23,250 23,300 3,114 2,736 3,114 2,954 26,250 26,300 3,564 3,186 3,564 3,404 29,250 29,300 4,014 3,636 4,014 3,854
23,300 23,350 3,121 2,744 3,121 2,961 26,300 26,350 3,571 3,194 3,571 3,411 29,300 29,350 4,021 3,644 4,021 3,861
23,350 23,400 3,129 2,751 3,129 2,969 26,350 26,400 3,579 3,201 3,579 3,419 29,350 29,400 4,029 3,651 4,029 3,869
23,400 23,450 3,136 2,759 3,136 2,976 26,400 26,450 3,586 3,209 3,586 3,426 29,400 29,450 4,036 3,659 4,036 3,876
23,450 23,500 3,144 2,766 3,144 2,984 26,450 26,500 3,594 3,216 3,594 3,434 29,450 29,500 4,044 3,666 4,044 3,884
23,500 23,550 3,151 2,774 3,151 2,991 26,500 26,550 3,601 3,224 3,601 3,441 29,500 29,550 4,051 3,674 4,051 3,891
23,550 23,600 3,159 2,781 3,159 2,999 26,550 26,600 3,609 3,231 3,609 3,449 29,550 29,600 4,059 3,681 4,059 3,899
23,600 23,650 3,166 2,789 3,166 3,006 26,600 26,650 3,616 3,239 3,616 3,456 29,600 29,650 4,066 3,689 4,066 3,906
23,650 23,700 3,174 2,796 3,174 3,014 26,650 26,700 3,624 3,246 3,624 3,464 29,650 29,700 4,074 3,696 4,074 3,914
23,700 23,750 3,181 2,804 3,181 3,021 26,700 26,750 3,631 3,254 3,631 3,471 29,700 29,750 4,081 3,704 4,081 3,921
23,750 23,800 3,189 2,811 3,189 3,029 26,750 26,800 3,639 3,261 3,639 3,479 29,750 29,800 4,089 3,711 4,089 3,929
23,800 23,850 3,196 2,819 3,196 3,036 26,800 26,850 3,646 3,269 3,646 3,486 29,800 29,850 4,096 3,719 4,096 3,936
23,850 23,900 3,204 2,826 3,204 3,044 26,850 26,900 3,654 3,276 3,654 3,494 29,850 29,900 4,104 3,726 4,104 3,944
23,900 23,950 3,211 2,834 3,211 3,051 26,900 26,950 3,661 3,284 3,661 3,501 29,900 29,950 4,111 3,734 4,111 3,951
23,950 24,000 3,219 2,841 3,219 3,059 26,950 27,000 3,669 3,291 3,669 3,509 29,950 30,000 4,119 3,741 4,119 3,959
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 253)
- 252 -

Page 255 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
30,000 33,000 36,000
30,000 30,050 4,126 3,749 4,126 3,966 33,000 33,050 4,814 4,199 4,814 4,416 36,000 36,050 5,564 4,649 5,564 4,866
30,050 30,100 4,134 3,756 4,134 3,974 33,050 33,100 4,826 4,206 4,826 4,424 36,050 36,100 5,576 4,656 5,576 4,874
30,100 30,150 4,141 3,764 4,141 3,981 33,100 33,150 4,839 4,214 4,839 4,431 36,100 36,150 5,589 4,664 5,589 4,881
30,150 30,200 4,149 3,771 4,149 3,989 33,150 33,200 4,851 4,221 4,851 4,439 36,150 36,200 5,601 4,671 5,601 4,889
30,200 30,250 4,156 3,779 4,156 3,996 33,200 33,250 4,864 4,229 4,864 4,446 36,200 36,250 5,614 4,679 5,614 4,896
30,250 30,300 4,164 3,786 4,164 4,004 33,250 33,300 4,876 4,236 4,876 4,454 36,250 36,300 5,626 4,686 5,626 4,904
30,300 30,350 4,171 3,794 4,171 4,011 33,300 33,350 4,889 4,244 4,889 4,461 36,300 36,350 5,639 4,694 5,639 4,911
30,350 30,400 4,179 3,801 4,179 4,019 33,350 33,400 4,901 4,251 4,901 4,469 36,350 36,400 5,651 4,701 5,651 4,919
30,400 30,450 4,186 3,809 4,186 4,026 33,400 33,450 4,914 4,259 4,914 4,476 36,400 36,450 5,664 4,709 5,664 4,926
30,450 30,500 4,194 3,816 4,194 4,034 33,450 33,500 4,926 4,266 4,926 4,484 36,450 36,500 5,676 4,716 5,676 4,934
30,500 30,550 4,201 3,824 4,201 4,041 33,500 33,550 4,939 4,274 4,939 4,491 36,500 36,550 5,689 4,724 5,689 4,941
30,550 30,600 4,209 3,831 4,209 4,049 33,550 33,600 4,951 4,281 4,951 4,499 36,550 36,600 5,701 4,731 5,701 4,949
30,600 30,650 4,216 3,839 4,216 4,056 33,600 33,650 4,964 4,289 4,964 4,506 36,600 36,650 5,714 4,739 5,714 4,956
30,650 30,700 4,226 3,846 4,226 4,064 33,650 33,700 4,976 4,296 4,976 4,514 36,650 36,700 5,726 4,746 5,726 4,964
30,700 30,750 4,239 3,854 4,239 4,071 33,700 33,750 4,989 4,304 4,989 4,521 36,700 36,750 5,739 4,754 5,739 4,971
30,750 30,800 4,251 3,861 4,251 4,079 33,750 33,800 5,001 4,311 5,001 4,529 36,750 36,800 5,751 4,761 5,751 4,979
30,800 30,850 4,264 3,869 4,264 4,086 33,800 33,850 5,014 4,319 5,014 4,536 36,800 36,850 5,764 4,769 5,764 4,986
30,850 30,900 4,276 3,876 4,276 4,094 33,850 33,900 5,026 4,326 5,026 4,544 36,850 36,900 5,776 4,776 5,776 4,994
30,900 30,950 4,289 3,884 4,289 4,101 33,900 33,950 5,039 4,334 5,039 4,551 36,900 36,950 5,789 4,784 5,789 5,001
30,950 31,000 4,301 3,891 4,301 4,109 33,950 34,000 5,051 4,341 5,051 4,559 36,950 37,000 5,801 4,791 5,801 5,009
31,000 34,000 37,000
31,000 31,050 4,314 3,899 4,314 4,116 34,000 34,050 5,064 4,349 5,064 4,566 37,000 37,050 5,814 4,799 5,814 5,016
31,050 31,100 4,326 3,906 4,326 4,124 34,050 34,100 5,076 4,356 5,076 4,574 37,050 37,100 5,826 4,806 5,826 5,024
31,100 31,150 4,339 3,914 4,339 4,131 34,100 34,150 5,089 4,364 5,089 4,581 37,100 37,150 5,839 4,814 5,839 5,031
31,150 31,200 4,351 3,921 4,351 4,139 34,150 34,200 5,101 4,371 5,101 4,589 37,150 37,200 5,851 4,821 5,851 5,039
31,200 31,250 4,364 3,929 4,364 4,146 34,200 34,250 5,114 4,379 5,114 4,596 37,200 37,250 5,864 4,829 5,864 5,046
31,250 31,300 4,376 3,936 4,376 4,154 34,250 34,300 5,126 4,386 5,126 4,604 37,250 37,300 5,876 4,836 5,876 5,054
31,300 31,350 4,389 3,944 4,389 4,161 34,300 34,350 5,139 4,394 5,139 4,611 37,300 37,350 5,889 4,844 5,889 5,061
31,350 31,400 4,401 3,951 4,401 4,169 34,350 34,400 5,151 4,401 5,151 4,619 37,350 37,400 5,901 4,851 5,901 5,069
31,400 31,450 4,414 3,959 4,414 4,176 34,400 34,450 5,164 4,409 5,164 4,626 37,400 37,450 5,914 4,859 5,914 5,076
31,450 31,500 4,426 3,966 4,426 4,184 34,450 34,500 5,176 4,416 5,176 4,634 37,450 37,500 5,926 4,866 5,926 5,084
31,500 31,550 4,439 3,974 4,439 4,191 34,500 34,550 5,189 4,424 5,189 4,641 37,500 37,550 5,939 4,874 5,939 5,091
31,550 31,600 4,451 3,981 4,451 4,199 34,550 34,600 5,201 4,431 5,201 4,649 37,550 37,600 5,951 4,881 5,951 5,099
31,600 31,650 4,464 3,989 4,464 4,206 34,600 34,650 5,214 4,439 5,214 4,656 37,600 37,650 5,964 4,889 5,964 5,106
31,650 31,700 4,476 3,996 4,476 4,214 34,650 34,700 5,226 4,446 5,226 4,664 37,650 37,700 5,976 4,896 5,976 5,114
31,700 31,750 4,489 4,004 4,489 4,221 34,700 34,750 5,239 4,454 5,239 4,671 37,700 37,750 5,989 4,904 5,989 5,121
31,750 31,800 4,501 4,011 4,501 4,229 34,750 34,800 5,251 4,461 5,251 4,679 37,750 37,800 6,001 4,911 6,001 5,129
31,800 31,850 4,514 4,019 4,514 4,236 34,800 34,850 5,264 4,469 5,264 4,686 37,800 37,850 6,014 4,919 6,014 5,136
31,850 31,900 4,526 4,026 4,526 4,244 34,850 34,900 5,276 4,476 5,276 4,694 37,850 37,900 6,026 4,926 6,026 5,144
31,900 31,950 4,539 4,034 4,539 4,251 34,900 34,950 5,289 4,484 5,289 4,701 37,900 37,950 6,039 4,934 6,039 5,151
31,950 32,000 4,551 4,041 4,551 4,259 34,950 35,000 5,301 4,491 5,301 4,709 37,950 38,000 6,051 4,941 6,051 5,159
32,000 35,000 38,000
32,000 32,050 4,564 4,049 4,564 4,266 35,000 35,050 5,314 4,499 5,314 4,716 38,000 38,050 6,064 4,949 6,064 5,166
32,050 32,100 4,576 4,056 4,576 4,274 35,050 35,100 5,326 4,506 5,326 4,724 38,050 38,100 6,076 4,956 6,076 5,174
32,100 32,150 4,589 4,064 4,589 4,281 35,100 35,150 5,339 4,514 5,339 4,731 38,100 38,150 6,089 4,964 6,089 5,181
32,150 32,200 4,601 4,071 4,601 4,289 35,150 35,200 5,351 4,521 5,351 4,739 38,150 38,200 6,101 4,971 6,101 5,189
32,200 32,250 4,614 4,079 4,614 4,296 35,200 35,250 5,364 4,529 5,364 4,746 38,200 38,250 6,114 4,979 6,114 5,196
32,250 32,300 4,626 4,086 4,626 4,304 35,250 35,300 5,376 4,536 5,376 4,754 38,250 38,300 6,126 4,986 6,126 5,204
32,300 32,350 4,639 4,094 4,639 4,311 35,300 35,350 5,389 4,544 5,389 4,761 38,300 38,350 6,139 4,994 6,139 5,211
32,350 32,400 4,651 4,101 4,651 4,319 35,350 35,400 5,401 4,551 5,401 4,769 38,350 38,400 6,151 5,001 6,151 5,219
32,400 32,450 4,664 4,109 4,664 4,326 35,400 35,450 5,414 4,559 5,414 4,776 38,400 38,450 6,164 5,009 6,164 5,226
32,450 32,500 4,676 4,116 4,676 4,334 35,450 35,500 5,426 4,566 5,426 4,784 38,450 38,500 6,176 5,016 6,176 5,234
32,500 32,550 4,689 4,124 4,689 4,341 35,500 35,550 5,439 4,574 5,439 4,791 38,500 38,550 6,189 5,024 6,189 5,241
32,550 32,600 4,701 4,131 4,701 4,349 35,550 35,600 5,451 4,581 5,451 4,799 38,550 38,600 6,201 5,031 6,201 5,249
32,600 32,650 4,714 4,139 4,714 4,356 35,600 35,650 5,464 4,589 5,464 4,806 38,600 38,650 6,214 5,039 6,214 5,256
32,650 32,700 4,726 4,146 4,726 4,364 35,650 35,700 5,476 4,596 5,476 4,814 38,650 38,700 6,226 5,046 6,226 5,264
32,700 32,750 4,739 4,154 4,739 4,371 35,700 35,750 5,489 4,604 5,489 4,821 38,700 38,750 6,239 5,054 6,239 5,271
32,750 32,800 4,751 4,161 4,751 4,379 35,750 35,800 5,501 4,611 5,501 4,829 38,750 38,800 6,251 5,061 6,251 5,279
32,800 32,850 4,764 4,169 4,764 4,386 35,800 35,850 5,514 4,619 5,514 4,836 38,800 38,850 6,264 5,069 6,264 5,286
32,850 32,900 4,776 4,176 4,776 4,394 35,850 35,900 5,526 4,626 5,526 4,844 38,850 38,900 6,276 5,076 6,276 5,294
32,900 32,950 4,789 4,184 4,789 4,401 35,900 35,950 5,539 4,634 5,539 4,851 38,900 38,950 6,289 5,084 6,289 5,301
32,950 33,000 4,801 4,191 4,801 4,409 35,950 36,000 5,551 4,641 5,551 4,859 38,950 39,000 6,301 5,091 6,301 5,309
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 254)
- 253 -

Page 256 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
39,000 42,000 45,000
39,000 39,050 6,314 5,099 6,314 5,316 42,000 42,050 7,064 5,549 7,064 5,864 45,000 45,050 7,814 5,999 7,814 6,614
39,050 39,100 6,326 5,106 6,326 5,324 42,050 42,100 7,076 5,556 7,076 5,876 45,050 45,100 7,826 6,006 7,826 6,626
39,100 39,150 6,339 5,114 6,339 5,331 42,100 42,150 7,089 5,564 7,089 5,889 45,100 45,150 7,839 6,014 7,839 6,639
39,150 39,200 6,351 5,121 6,351 5,339 42,150 42,200 7,101 5,571 7,101 5,901 45,150 45,200 7,851 6,021 7,851 6,651
39,200 39,250 6,364 5,129 6,364 5,346 42,200 42,250 7,114 5,579 7,114 5,914 45,200 45,250 7,864 6,029 7,864 6,664
39,250 39,300 6,376 5,136 6,376 5,354 42,250 42,300 7,126 5,586 7,126 5,926 45,250 45,300 7,876 6,036 7,876 6,676
39,300 39,350 6,389 5,144 6,389 5,361 42,300 42,350 7,139 5,594 7,139 5,939 45,300 45,350 7,889 6,044 7,889 6,689
39,350 39,400 6,401 5,151 6,401 5,369 42,350 42,400 7,151 5,601 7,151 5,951 45,350 45,400 7,901 6,051 7,901 6,701
39,400 39,450 6,414 5,159 6,414 5,376 42,400 42,450 7,164 5,609 7,164 5,964 45,400 45,450 7,914 6,059 7,914 6,714
39,450 39,500 6,426 5,166 6,426 5,384 42,450 42,500 7,176 5,616 7,176 5,976 45,450 45,500 7,926 6,066 7,926 6,726
39,500 39,550 6,439 5,174 6,439 5,391 42,500 42,550 7,189 5,624 7,189 5,989 45,500 45,550 7,939 6,074 7,939 6,739
39,550 39,600 6,451 5,181 6,451 5,399 42,550 42,600 7,201 5,631 7,201 6,001 45,550 45,600 7,951 6,081 7,951 6,751
39,600 39,650 6,464 5,189 6,464 5,406 42,600 42,650 7,214 5,639 7,214 6,014 45,600 45,650 7,964 6,089 7,964 6,764
39,650 39,700 6,476 5,196 6,476 5,414 42,650 42,700 7,226 5,646 7,226 6,026 45,650 45,700 7,976 6,096 7,976 6,776
39,700 39,750 6,489 5,204 6,489 5,421 42,700 42,750 7,239 5,654 7,239 6,039 45,700 45,750 7,989 6,104 7,989 6,789
39,750 39,800 6,501 5,211 6,501 5,429 42,750 42,800 7,251 5,661 7,251 6,051 45,750 45,800 8,001 6,111 8,001 6,801
39,800 39,850 6,514 5,219 6,514 5,436 42,800 42,850 7,264 5,669 7,264 6,064 45,800 45,850 8,014 6,119 8,014 6,814
39,850 39,900 6,526 5,226 6,526 5,444 42,850 42,900 7,276 5,676 7,276 6,076 45,850 45,900 8,026 6,126 8,026 6,826
39,900 39,950 6,539 5,234 6,539 5,451 42,900 42,950 7,289 5,684 7,289 6,089 45,900 45,950 8,039 6,134 8,039 6,839
39,950 40,000 6,551 5,241 6,551 5,459 42,950 43,000 7,301 5,691 7,301 6,101 45,950 46,000 8,051 6,141 8,051 6,851
40,000 43,000 46,000
40,000 40,050 6,564 5,249 6,564 5,466 43,000 43,050 7,314 5,699 7,314 6,114 46,000 46,050 8,064 6,149 8,064 6,864
40,050 40,100 6,576 5,256 6,576 5,474 43,050 43,100 7,326 5,706 7,326 6,126 46,050 46,100 8,076 6,156 8,076 6,876
40,100 40,150 6,589 5,264 6,589 5,481 43,100 43,150 7,339 5,714 7,339 6,139 46,100 46,150 8,089 6,164 8,089 6,889
40,150 40,200 6,601 5,271 6,601 5,489 43,150 43,200 7,351 5,721 7,351 6,151 46,150 46,200 8,101 6,171 8,101 6,901
40,200 40,250 6,614 5,279 6,614 5,496 43,200 43,250 7,364 5,729 7,364 6,164 46,200 46,250 8,114 6,179 8,114 6,914
40,250 40,300 6,626 5,286 6,626 5,504 43,250 43,300 7,376 5,736 7,376 6,176 46,250 46,300 8,126 6,186 8,126 6,926
40,300 40,350 6,639 5,294 6,639 5,511 43,300 43,350 7,389 5,744 7,389 6,189 46,300 46,350 8,139 6,194 8,139 6,939
40,350 40,400 6,651 5,301 6,651 5,519 43,350 43,400 7,401 5,751 7,401 6,201 46,350 46,400 8,151 6,201 8,151 6,951
40,400 40,450 6,664 5,309 6,664 5,526 43,400 43,450 7,414 5,759 7,414 6,214 46,400 46,450 8,164 6,209 8,164 6,964
40,450 40,500 6,676 5,316 6,676 5,534 43,450 43,500 7,426 5,766 7,426 6,226 46,450 46,500 8,176 6,216 8,176 6,976
40,500 40,550 6,689 5,324 6,689 5,541 43,500 43,550 7,439 5,774 7,439 6,239 46,500 46,550 8,189 6,224 8,189 6,989
40,550 40,600 6,701 5,331 6,701 5,549 43,550 43,600 7,451 5,781 7,451 6,251 46,550 46,600 8,201 6,231 8,201 7,001
40,600 40,650 6,714 5,339 6,714 5,556 43,600 43,650 7,464 5,789 7,464 6,264 46,600 46,650 8,214 6,239 8,214 7,014
40,650 40,700 6,726 5,346 6,726 5,564 43,650 43,700 7,476 5,796 7,476 6,276 46,650 46,700 8,226 6,246 8,226 7,026
40,700 40,750 6,739 5,354 6,739 5,571 43,700 43,750 7,489 5,804 7,489 6,289 46,700 46,750 8,239 6,254 8,239 7,039
40,750 40,800 6,751 5,361 6,751 5,579 43,750 43,800 7,501 5,811 7,501 6,301 46,750 46,800 8,251 6,261 8,251 7,051
40,800 40,850 6,764 5,369 6,764 5,586 43,800 43,850 7,514 5,819 7,514 6,314 46,800 46,850 8,264 6,269 8,264 7,064
40,850 40,900 6,776 5,376 6,776 5,594 43,850 43,900 7,526 5,826 7,526 6,326 46,850 46,900 8,276 6,276 8,276 7,076
40,900 40,950 6,789 5,384 6,789 5,601 43,900 43,950 7,539 5,834 7,539 6,339 46,900 46,950 8,289 6,284 8,289 7,089
40,950 41,000 6,801 5,391 6,801 5,609 43,950 44,000 7,551 5,841 7,551 6,351 46,950 47,000 8,301 6,291 8,301 7,101
41,000 44,000 47,000
41,000 41,050 6,814 5,399 6,814 5,616 44,000 44,050 7,564 5,849 7,564 6,364 47,000 47,050 8,314 6,299 8,314 7,114
41,050 41,100 6,826 5,406 6,826 5,626 44,050 44,100 7,576 5,856 7,576 6,376 47,050 47,100 8,326 6,306 8,326 7,126
41,100 41,150 6,839 5,414 6,839 5,639 44,100 44,150 7,589 5,864 7,589 6,389 47,100 47,150 8,339 6,314 8,339 7,139
41,150 41,200 6,851 5,421 6,851 5,651 44,150 44,200 7,601 5,871 7,601 6,401 47,150 47,200 8,351 6,321 8,351 7,151
41,200 41,250 6,864 5,429 6,864 5,664 44,200 44,250 7,614 5,879 7,614 6,414 47,200 47,250 8,364 6,329 8,364 7,164
41,250 41,300 6,876 5,436 6,876 5,676 44,250 44,300 7,626 5,886 7,626 6,426 47,250 47,300 8,376 6,336 8,376 7,176
41,300 41,350 6,889 5,444 6,889 5,689 44,300 44,350 7,639 5,894 7,639 6,439 47,300 47,350 8,389 6,344 8,389 7,189
41,350 41,400 6,901 5,451 6,901 5,701 44,350 44,400 7,651 5,901 7,651 6,451 47,350 47,400 8,401 6,351 8,401 7,201
41,400 41,450 6,914 5,459 6,914 5,714 44,400 44,450 7,664 5,909 7,664 6,464 47,400 47,450 8,414 6,359 8,414 7,214
41,450 41,500 6,926 5,466 6,926 5,726 44,450 44,500 7,676 5,916 7,676 6,476 47,450 47,500 8,426 6,366 8,426 7,226
41,500 41,550 6,939 5,474 6,939 5,739 44,500 44,550 7,689 5,924 7,689 6,489 47,500 47,550 8,439 6,374 8,439 7,239
41,550 41,600 6,951 5,481 6,951 5,751 44,550 44,600 7,701 5,931 7,701 6,501 47,550 47,600 8,451 6,381 8,451 7,251
41,600 41,650 6,964 5,489 6,964 5,764 44,600 44,650 7,714 5,939 7,714 6,514 47,600 47,650 8,464 6,389 8,464 7,264
41,650 41,700 6,976 5,496 6,976 5,776 44,650 44,700 7,726 5,946 7,726 6,526 47,650 47,700 8,476 6,396 8,476 7,276
41,700 41,750 6,989 5,504 6,989 5,789 44,700 44,750 7,739 5,954 7,739 6,539 47,700 47,750 8,489 6,404 8,489 7,289
41,750 41,800 7,001 5,511 7,001 5,801 44,750 44,800 7,751 5,961 7,751 6,551 47,750 47,800 8,501 6,411 8,501 7,301
41,800 41,850 7,014 5,519 7,014 5,814 44,800 44,850 7,764 5,969 7,764 6,564 47,800 47,850 8,514 6,419 8,514 7,314
41,850 41,900 7,026 5,526 7,026 5,826 44,850 44,900 7,776 5,976 7,776 6,576 47,850 47,900 8,526 6,426 8,526 7,326
41,900 41,950 7,039 5,534 7,039 5,839 44,900 44,950 7,789 5,984 7,789 6,589 47,900 47,950 8,539 6,434 8,539 7,339
41,950 42,000 7,051 5,541 7,051 5,851 44,950 45,000 7,801 5,991 7,801 6,601 47,950 48,000 8,551 6,441 8,551 7,351
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 255)
- 254 -

Page 257 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
48,000 51,000 54,000
48,000 48,050 8,564 6,449 8,564 7,364 51,000 51,050 9,314 6,899 9,314 8,114 54,000 54,050 10,064 7,349 10,064 8,864
48,050 48,100 8,576 6,456 8,576 7,376 51,050 51,100 9,326 6,906 9,326 8,126 54,050 54,100 10,076 7,356 10,076 8,876
48,100 48,150 8,589 6,464 8,589 7,389 51,100 51,150 9,339 6,914 9,339 8,139 54,100 54,150 10,089 7,364 10,089 8,889
48,150 48,200 8,601 6,471 8,601 7,401 51,150 51,200 9,351 6,921 9,351 8,151 54,150 54,200 10,101 7,371 10,101 8,901
48,200 48,250 8,614 6,479 8,614 7,414 51,200 51,250 9,364 6,929 9,364 8,164 54,200 54,250 10,114 7,379 10,114 8,914
48,250 48,300 8,626 6,486 8,626 7,426 51,250 51,300 9,376 6,936 9,376 8,176 54,250 54,300 10,126 7,386 10,126 8,926
48,300 48,350 8,639 6,494 8,639 7,439 51,300 51,350 9,389 6,944 9,389 8,189 54,300 54,350 10,139 7,394 10,139 8,939
48,350 48,400 8,651 6,501 8,651 7,451 51,350 51,400 9,401 6,951 9,401 8,201 54,350 54,400 10,151 7,401 10,151 8,951
48,400 48,450 8,664 6,509 8,664 7,464 51,400 51,450 9,414 6,959 9,414 8,214 54,400 54,450 10,164 7,409 10,164 8,964
48,450 48,500 8,676 6,516 8,676 7,476 51,450 51,500 9,426 6,966 9,426 8,226 54,450 54,500 10,176 7,416 10,176 8,976
48,500 48,550 8,689 6,524 8,689 7,489 51,500 51,550 9,439 6,974 9,439 8,239 54,500 54,550 10,189 7,424 10,189 8,989
48,550 48,600 8,701 6,531 8,701 7,501 51,550 51,600 9,451 6,981 9,451 8,251 54,550 54,600 10,201 7,431 10,201 9,001
48,600 48,650 8,714 6,539 8,714 7,514 51,600 51,650 9,464 6,989 9,464 8,264 54,600 54,650 10,214 7,439 10,214 9,014
48,650 48,700 8,726 6,546 8,726 7,526 51,650 51,700 9,476 6,996 9,476 8,276 54,650 54,700 10,226 7,446 10,226 9,026
48,700 48,750 8,739 6,554 8,739 7,539 51,700 51,750 9,489 7,004 9,489 8,289 54,700 54,750 10,239 7,454 10,239 9,039
48,750 48,800 8,751 6,561 8,751 7,551 51,750 51,800 9,501 7,011 9,501 8,301 54,750 54,800 10,251 7,461 10,251 9,051
48,800 48,850 8,764 6,569 8,764 7,564 51,800 51,850 9,514 7,019 9,514 8,314 54,800 54,850 10,264 7,469 10,264 9,064
48,850 48,900 8,776 6,576 8,776 7,576 51,850 51,900 9,526 7,026 9,526 8,326 54,850 54,900 10,276 7,476 10,276 9,076
48,900 48,950 8,789 6,584 8,789 7,589 51,900 51,950 9,539 7,034 9,539 8,339 54,900 54,950 10,289 7,484 10,289 9,089
48,950 49,000 8,801 6,591 8,801 7,601 51,950 52,000 9,551 7,041 9,551 8,351 54,950 55,000 10,301 7,491 10,301 9,101
49,000 52,000 55,000
49,000 49,050 8,814 6,599 8,814 7,614 52,000 52,050 9,564 7,049 9,564 8,364 55,000 55,050 10,314 7,499 10,314 9,114
49,050 49,100 8,826 6,606 8,826 7,626 52,050 52,100 9,576 7,056 9,576 8,376 55,050 55,100 10,326 7,506 10,326 9,126
49,100 49,150 8,839 6,614 8,839 7,639 52,100 52,150 9,589 7,064 9,589 8,389 55,100 55,150 10,339 7,514 10,339 9,139
49,150 49,200 8,851 6,621 8,851 7,651 52,150 52,200 9,601 7,071 9,601 8,401 55,150 55,200 10,351 7,521 10,351 9,151
49,200 49,250 8,864 6,629 8,864 7,664 52,200 52,250 9,614 7,079 9,614 8,414 55,200 55,250 10,364 7,529 10,364 9,164
49,250 49,300 8,876 6,636 8,876 7,676 52,250 52,300 9,626 7,086 9,626 8,426 55,250 55,300 10,376 7,536 10,376 9,176
49,300 49,350 8,889 6,644 8,889 7,689 52,300 52,350 9,639 7,094 9,639 8,439 55,300 55,350 10,389 7,544 10,389 9,189
49,350 49,400 8,901 6,651 8,901 7,701 52,350 52,400 9,651 7,101 9,651 8,451 55,350 55,400 10,401 7,551 10,401 9,201
49,400 49,450 8,914 6,659 8,914 7,714 52,400 52,450 9,664 7,109 9,664 8,464 55,400 55,450 10,414 7,559 10,414 9,214
49,450 49,500 8,926 6,666 8,926 7,726 52,450 52,500 9,676 7,116 9,676 8,476 55,450 55,500 10,426 7,566 10,426 9,226
49,500 49,550 8,939 6,674 8,939 7,739 52,500 52,550 9,689 7,124 9,689 8,489 55,500 55,550 10,439 7,574 10,439 9,239
49,550 49,600 8,951 6,681 8,951 7,751 52,550 52,600 9,701 7,131 9,701 8,501 55,550 55,600 10,451 7,581 10,451 9,251
49,600 49,650 8,964 6,689 8,964 7,764 52,600 52,650 9,714 7,139 9,714 8,514 55,600 55,650 10,464 7,589 10,464 9,264
49,650 49,700 8,976 6,696 8,976 7,776 52,650 52,700 9,726 7,146 9,726 8,526 55,650 55,700 10,476 7,596 10,476 9,276
49,700 49,750 8,989 6,704 8,989 7,789 52,700 52,750 9,739 7,154 9,739 8,539 55,700 55,750 10,489 7,604 10,489 9,289
49,750 49,800 9,001 6,711 9,001 7,801 52,750 52,800 9,751 7,161 9,751 8,551 55,750 55,800 10,501 7,611 10,501 9,301
49,800 49,850 9,014 6,719 9,014 7,814 52,800 52,850 9,764 7,169 9,764 8,564 55,800 55,850 10,514 7,619 10,514 9,314
49,850 49,900 9,026 6,726 9,026 7,826 52,850 52,900 9,776 7,176 9,776 8,576 55,850 55,900 10,526 7,626 10,526 9,326
49,900 49,950 9,039 6,734 9,039 7,839 52,900 52,950 9,789 7,184 9,789 8,589 55,900 55,950 10,539 7,634 10,539 9,339
49,950 50,000 9,051 6,741 9,051 7,851 52,950 53,000 9,801 7,191 9,801 8,601 55,950 56,000 10,551 7,641 10,551 9,351
50,000 53,000 56,000
50,000 50,050 9,064 6,749 9,064 7,864 53,000 53,050 9,814 7,199 9,814 8,614 56,000 56,050 10,564 7,649 10,564 9,364
50,050 50,100 9,076 6,756 9,076 7,876 53,050 53,100 9,826 7,206 9,826 8,626 56,050 56,100 10,576 7,656 10,576 9,376
50,100 50,150 9,089 6,764 9,089 7,889 53,100 53,150 9,839 7,214 9,839 8,639 56,100 56,150 10,589 7,664 10,589 9,389
50,150 50,200 9,101 6,771 9,101 7,901 53,150 53,200 9,851 7,221 9,851 8,651 56,150 56,200 10,601 7,671 10,601 9,401
50,200 50,250 9,114 6,779 9,114 7,914 53,200 53,250 9,864 7,229 9,864 8,664 56,200 56,250 10,614 7,679 10,614 9,414
50,250 50,300 9,126 6,786 9,126 7,926 53,250 53,300 9,876 7,236 9,876 8,676 56,250 56,300 10,626 7,686 10,626 9,426
50,300 50,350 9,139 6,794 9,139 7,939 53,300 53,350 9,889 7,244 9,889 8,689 56,300 56,350 10,639 7,694 10,639 9,439
50,350 50,400 9,151 6,801 9,151 7,951 53,350 53,400 9,901 7,251 9,901 8,701 56,350 56,400 10,651 7,701 10,651 9,451
50,400 50,450 9,164 6,809 9,164 7,964 53,400 53,450 9,914 7,259 9,914 8,714 56,400 56,450 10,664 7,709 10,664 9,464
50,450 50,500 9,176 6,816 9,176 7,976 53,450 53,500 9,926 7,266 9,926 8,726 56,450 56,500 10,676 7,716 10,676 9,476
50,500 50,550 9,189 6,824 9,189 7,989 53,500 53,550 9,939 7,274 9,939 8,739 56,500 56,550 10,689 7,724 10,689 9,489
50,550 50,600 9,201 6,831 9,201 8,001 53,550 53,600 9,951 7,281 9,951 8,751 56,550 56,600 10,701 7,731 10,701 9,501
50,600 50,650 9,214 6,839 9,214 8,014 53,600 53,650 9,964 7,289 9,964 8,764 56,600 56,650 10,714 7,739 10,714 9,514
50,650 50,700 9,226 6,846 9,226 8,026 53,650 53,700 9,976 7,296 9,976 8,776 56,650 56,700 10,726 7,746 10,726 9,526
50,700 50,750 9,239 6,854 9,239 8,039 53,700 53,750 9,989 7,304 9,989 8,789 56,700 56,750 10,739 7,754 10,739 9,539
50,750 50,800 9,251 6,861 9,251 8,051 53,750 53,800 10,001 7,311 10,001 8,801 56,750 56,800 10,751 7,761 10,751 9,551
50,800 50,850 9,264 6,869 9,264 8,064 53,800 53,850 10,014 7,319 10,014 8,814 56,800 56,850 10,764 7,769 10,764 9,564
50,850 50,900 9,276 6,876 9,276 8,076 53,850 53,900 10,026 7,326 10,026 8,826 56,850 56,900 10,776 7,776 10,776 9,576
50,900 50,950 9,289 6,884 9,289 8,089 53,900 53,950 10,039 7,334 10,039 8,839 56,900 56,950 10,789 7,784 10,789 9,589
50,950 51,000 9,301 6,891 9,301 8,101 53,950 54,000 10,051 7,341 10,051 8,851 56,950 57,000 10,801 7,791 10,801 9,601
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 256)
- 255 -

Page 258 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
57,000 60,000 63,000
57,000 57,050 10,814 7,799 10,814 9,614 60,000 60,050 11,564 8,249 11,564 10,364 63,000 63,050 12,314 8,871 12,349 11,114
57,050 57,100 10,826 7,806 10,826 9,626 60,050 60,100 11,576 8,256 11,576 10,376 63,050 63,100 12,326 8,884 12,363 11,126
57,100 57,150 10,839 7,814 10,839 9,639 60,100 60,150 11,589 8,264 11,589 10,389 63,100 63,150 12,339 8,896 12,377 11,139
57,150 57,200 10,851 7,821 10,851 9,651 60,150 60,200 11,601 8,271 11,601 10,401 63,150 63,200 12,351 8,909 12,391 11,151
57,200 57,250 10,864 7,829 10,864 9,664 60,200 60,250 11,614 8,279 11,614 10,414 63,200 63,250 12,364 8,921 12,405 11,164
57,250 57,300 10,876 7,836 10,876 9,676 60,250 60,300 11,626 8,286 11,626 10,426 63,250 63,300 12,376 8,934 12,419 11,176
57,300 57,350 10,889 7,844 10,889 9,689 60,300 60,350 11,639 8,294 11,639 10,439 63,300 63,350 12,389 8,946 12,433 11,189
57,350 57,400 10,901 7,851 10,901 9,701 60,350 60,400 11,651 8,301 11,651 10,451 63,350 63,400 12,401 8,959 12,447 11,201
57,400 57,450 10,914 7,859 10,914 9,714 60,400 60,450 11,664 8,309 11,664 10,464 63,400 63,450 12,414 8,971 12,461 11,214
57,450 57,500 10,926 7,866 10,926 9,726 60,450 60,500 11,676 8,316 11,676 10,476 63,450 63,500 12,426 8,984 12,475 11,226
57,500 57,550 10,939 7,874 10,939 9,739 60,500 60,550 11,689 8,324 11,689 10,489 63,500 63,550 12,439 8,996 12,489 11,239
57,550 57,600 10,951 7,881 10,951 9,751 60,550 60,600 11,701 8,331 11,701 10,501 63,550 63,600 12,451 9,009 12,503 11,251
57,600 57,650 10,964 7,889 10,964 9,764 60,600 60,650 11,714 8,339 11,714 10,514 63,600 63,650 12,464 9,021 12,517 11,264
57,650 57,700 10,976 7,896 10,976 9,776 60,650 60,700 11,726 8,346 11,726 10,526 63,650 63,700 12,476 9,034 12,531 11,276
57,700 57,750 10,989 7,904 10,989 9,789 60,700 60,750 11,739 8,354 11,739 10,539 63,700 63,750 12,489 9,046 12,545 11,289
57,750 57,800 11,001 7,911 11,001 9,801 60,750 60,800 11,751 8,361 11,751 10,551 63,750 63,800 12,501 9,059 12,559 11,301
57,800 57,850 11,014 7,919 11,014 9,814 60,800 60,850 11,764 8,369 11,764 10,564 63,800 63,850 12,514 9,071 12,573 11,314
57,850 57,900 11,026 7,926 11,026 9,826 60,850 60,900 11,776 8,376 11,776 10,576 63,850 63,900 12,526 9,084 12,587 11,326
57,900 57,950 11,039 7,934 11,039 9,839 60,900 60,950 11,789 8,384 11,789 10,589 63,900 63,950 12,539 9,096 12,601 11,339
57,950 58,000 11,051 7,941 11,051 9,851 60,950 61,000 11,801 8,391 11,801 10,601 63,950 64,000 12,551 9,109 12,615 11,351
58,000 61,000 64,000
58,000 58,050 11,064 7,949 11,064 9,864 61,000 61,050 11,814 8,399 11,814 10,614 64,000 64,050 12,564 9,121 12,629 11,364
58,050 58,100 11,076 7,956 11,076 9,876 61,050 61,100 11,826 8,406 11,826 10,626 64,050 64,100 12,576 9,134 12,643 11,376
58,100 58,150 11,089 7,964 11,089 9,889 61,100 61,150 11,839 8,414 11,839 10,639 64,100 64,150 12,589 9,146 12,657 11,389
58,150 58,200 11,101 7,971 11,101 9,901 61,150 61,200 11,851 8,421 11,851 10,651 64,150 64,200 12,601 9,159 12,671 11,401
58,200 58,250 11,114 7,979 11,114 9,914 61,200 61,250 11,864 8,429 11,864 10,664 64,200 64,250 12,614 9,171 12,685 11,414
58,250 58,300 11,126 7,986 11,126 9,926 61,250 61,300 11,876 8,436 11,876 10,676 64,250 64,300 12,626 9,184 12,699 11,426
58,300 58,350 11,139 7,994 11,139 9,939 61,300 61,350 11,889 8,446 11,889 10,689 64,300 64,350 12,639 9,196 12,713 11,439
58,350 58,400 11,151 8,001 11,151 9,951 61,350 61,400 11,901 8,459 11,901 10,701 64,350 64,400 12,651 9,209 12,727 11,451
58,400 58,450 11,164 8,009 11,164 9,964 61,400 61,450 11,914 8,471 11,914 10,714 64,400 64,450 12,664 9,221 12,741 11,464
58,450 58,500 11,176 8,016 11,176 9,976 61,450 61,500 11,926 8,484 11,926 10,726 64,450 64,500 12,676 9,234 12,755 11,476
58,500 58,550 11,189 8,024 11,189 9,989 61,500 61,550 11,939 8,496 11,939 10,739 64,500 64,550 12,689 9,246 12,769 11,489
58,550 58,600 11,201 8,031 11,201 10,001 61,550 61,600 11,951 8,509 11,951 10,751 64,550 64,600 12,701 9,259 12,783 11,501
58,600 58,650 11,214 8,039 11,214 10,014 61,600 61,650 11,964 8,521 11,964 10,764 64,600 64,650 12,714 9,271 12,797 11,514
58,650 58,700 11,226 8,046 11,226 10,026 61,650 61,700 11,976 8,534 11,976 10,776 64,650 64,700 12,726 9,284 12,811 11,526
58,700 58,750 11,239 8,054 11,239 10,039 61,700 61,750 11,989 8,546 11,989 10,789 64,700 64,750 12,739 9,296 12,825 11,539
58,750 58,800 11,251 8,061 11,251 10,051 61,750 61,800 12,001 8,559 12,001 10,801 64,750 64,800 12,751 9,309 12,839 11,551
58,800 58,850 11,264 8,069 11,264 10,064 61,800 61,850 12,014 8,571 12,014 10,814 64,800 64,850 12,764 9,321 12,853 11,564
58,850 58,900 11,276 8,076 11,276 10,076 61,850 61,900 12,026 8,584 12,027 10,826 64,850 64,900 12,776 9,334 12,867 11,576
58,900 58,950 11,289 8,084 11,289 10,089 61,900 61,950 12,039 8,596 12,041 10,839 64,900 64,950 12,789 9,346 12,881 11,589
58,950 59,000 11,301 8,091 11,301 10,101 61,950 62,000 12,051 8,609 12,055 10,851 64,950 65,000 12,801 9,359 12,895 11,601
59,000 62,000 65,000
59,000 59,050 11,314 8,099 11,314 10,114 62,000 62,050 12,064 8,621 12,069 10,864 65,000 65,050 12,814 9,371 12,909 11,614
59,050 59,100 11,326 8,106 11,326 10,126 62,050 62,100 12,076 8,634 12,083 10,876 65,050 65,100 12,826 9,384 12,923 11,626
59,100 59,150 11,339 8,114 11,339 10,139 62,100 62,150 12,089 8,646 12,097 10,889 65,100 65,150 12,839 9,396 12,937 11,639
59,150 59,200 11,351 8,121 11,351 10,151 62,150 62,200 12,101 8,659 12,111 10,901 65,150 65,200 12,851 9,409 12,951 11,651
59,200 59,250 11,364 8,129 11,364 10,164 62,200 62,250 12,114 8,671 12,125 10,914 65,200 65,250 12,864 9,421 12,965 11,664
59,250 59,300 11,376 8,136 11,376 10,176 62,250 62,300 12,126 8,684 12,139 10,926 65,250 65,300 12,876 9,434 12,979 11,676
59,300 59,350 11,389 8,144 11,389 10,189 62,300 62,350 12,139 8,696 12,153 10,939 65,300 65,350 12,889 9,446 12,993 11,689
59,350 59,400 11,401 8,151 11,401 10,201 62,350 62,400 12,151 8,709 12,167 10,951 65,350 65,400 12,901 9,459 13,007 11,701
59,400 59,450 11,414 8,159 11,414 10,214 62,400 62,450 12,164 8,721 12,181 10,964 65,400 65,450 12,914 9,471 13,021 11,714
59,450 59,500 11,426 8,166 11,426 10,226 62,450 62,500 12,176 8,734 12,195 10,976 65,450 65,500 12,926 9,484 13,035 11,726
59,500 59,550 11,439 8,174 11,439 10,239 62,500 62,550 12,189 8,746 12,209 10,989 65,500 65,550 12,939 9,496 13,049 11,739
59,550 59,600 11,451 8,181 11,451 10,251 62,550 62,600 12,201 8,759 12,223 11,001 65,550 65,600 12,951 9,509 13,063 11,751
59,600 59,650 11,464 8,189 11,464 10,264 62,600 62,650 12,214 8,771 12,237 11,014 65,600 65,650 12,964 9,521 13,077 11,764
59,650 59,700 11,476 8,196 11,476 10,276 62,650 62,700 12,226 8,784 12,251 11,026 65,650 65,700 12,976 9,534 13,091 11,776
59,700 59,750 11,489 8,204 11,489 10,289 62,700 62,750 12,239 8,796 12,265 11,039 65,700 65,750 12,989 9,546 13,105 11,789
59,750 59,800 11,501 8,211 11,501 10,301 62,750 62,800 12,251 8,809 12,279 11,051 65,750 65,800 13,001 9,559 13,119 11,801
59,800 59,850 11,514 8,219 11,514 10,314 62,800 62,850 12,264 8,821 12,293 11,064 65,800 65,850 13,014 9,571 13,133 11,814
59,850 59,900 11,526 8,226 11,526 10,326 62,850 62,900 12,276 8,834 12,307 11,076 65,850 65,900 13,026 9,584 13,147 11,826
59,900 59,950 11,539 8,234 11,539 10,339 62,900 62,950 12,289 8,846 12,321 11,089 65,900 65,950 13,039 9,596 13,161 11,839
59,950 60,000 11,551 8,241 11,551 10,351 62,950 63,000 12,301 8,859 12,335 11,101 65,950 66,000 13,051 9,609 13,175 11,851
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 257)
- 256 -

Page 259 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
66,000 69,000 72,000
66,000 66,050 13,064 9,621 13,189 11,864 69,000 69,050 13,814 10,371 14,029 12,614 72,000 72,050 14,564 11,121 14,869 13,364
66,050 66,100 13,076 9,634 13,203 11,876 69,050 69,100 13,826 10,384 14,043 12,626 72,050 72,100 14,576 11,134 14,883 13,376
66,100 66,150 13,089 9,646 13,217 11,889 69,100 69,150 13,839 10,396 14,057 12,639 72,100 72,150 14,589 11,146 14,897 13,389
66,150 66,200 13,101 9,659 13,231 11,901 69,150 69,200 13,851 10,409 14,071 12,651 72,150 72,200 14,601 11,159 14,911 13,401
66,200 66,250 13,114 9,671 13,245 11,914 69,200 69,250 13,864 10,421 14,085 12,664 72,200 72,250 14,614 11,171 14,925 13,414
66,250 66,300 13,126 9,684 13,259 11,926 69,250 69,300 13,876 10,434 14,099 12,676 72,250 72,300 14,626 11,184 14,939 13,426
66,300 66,350 13,139 9,696 13,273 11,939 69,300 69,350 13,889 10,446 14,113 12,689 72,300 72,350 14,639 11,196 14,953 13,439
66,350 66,400 13,151 9,709 13,287 11,951 69,350 69,400 13,901 10,459 14,127 12,701 72,350 72,400 14,651 11,209 14,967 13,451
66,400 66,450 13,164 9,721 13,301 11,964 69,400 69,450 13,914 10,471 14,141 12,714 72,400 72,450 14,664 11,221 14,981 13,464
66,450 66,500 13,176 9,734 13,315 11,976 69,450 69,500 13,926 10,484 14,155 12,726 72,450 72,500 14,676 11,234 14,995 13,476
66,500 66,550 13,189 9,746 13,329 11,989 69,500 69,550 13,939 10,496 14,169 12,739 72,500 72,550 14,689 11,246 15,009 13,489
66,550 66,600 13,201 9,759 13,343 12,001 69,550 69,600 13,951 10,509 14,183 12,751 72,550 72,600 14,701 11,259 15,023 13,501
66,600 66,650 13,214 9,771 13,357 12,014 69,600 69,650 13,964 10,521 14,197 12,764 72,600 72,650 14,714 11,271 15,037 13,514
66,650 66,700 13,226 9,784 13,371 12,026 69,650 69,700 13,976 10,534 14,211 12,776 72,650 72,700 14,726 11,284 15,051 13,526
66,700 66,750 13,239 9,796 13,385 12,039 69,700 69,750 13,989 10,546 14,225 12,789 72,700 72,750 14,739 11,296 15,065 13,539
66,750 66,800 13,251 9,809 13,399 12,051 69,750 69,800 14,001 10,559 14,239 12,801 72,750 72,800 14,751 11,309 15,079 13,551
66,800 66,850 13,264 9,821 13,413 12,064 69,800 69,850 14,014 10,571 14,253 12,814 72,800 72,850 14,764 11,321 15,093 13,564
66,850 66,900 13,276 9,834 13,427 12,076 69,850 69,900 14,026 10,584 14,267 12,826 72,850 72,900 14,776 11,334 15,107 13,576
66,900 66,950 13,289 9,846 13,441 12,089 69,900 69,950 14,039 10,596 14,281 12,839 72,900 72,950 14,789 11,346 15,121 13,589
66,950 67,000 13,301 9,859 13,455 12,101 69,950 70,000 14,051 10,609 14,295 12,851 72,950 73,000 14,801 11,359 15,135 13,601
67,000 70,000 73,000
67,000 67,050 13,314 9,871 13,469 12,114 70,000 70,050 14,064 10,621 14,309 12,864 73,000 73,050 14,814 11,371 15,149 13,614
67,050 67,100 13,326 9,884 13,483 12,126 70,050 70,100 14,076 10,634 14,323 12,876 73,050 73,100 14,826 11,384 15,163 13,626
67,100 67,150 13,339 9,896 13,497 12,139 70,100 70,150 14,089 10,646 14,337 12,889 73,100 73,150 14,839 11,396 15,177 13,639
67,150 67,200 13,351 9,909 13,511 12,151 70,150 70,200 14,101 10,659 14,351 12,901 73,150 73,200 14,851 11,409 15,191 13,651
67,200 67,250 13,364 9,921 13,525 12,164 70,200 70,250 14,114 10,671 14,365 12,914 73,200 73,250 14,864 11,421 15,205 13,664
67,250 67,300 13,376 9,934 13,539 12,176 70,250 70,300 14,126 10,684 14,379 12,926 73,250 73,300 14,876 11,434 15,219 13,676
67,300 67,350 13,389 9,946 13,553 12,189 70,300 70,350 14,139 10,696 14,393 12,939 73,300 73,350 14,889 11,446 15,233 13,689
67,350 67,400 13,401 9,959 13,567 12,201 70,350 70,400 14,151 10,709 14,407 12,951 73,350 73,400 14,901 11,459 15,247 13,701
67,400 67,450 13,414 9,971 13,581 12,214 70,400 70,450 14,164 10,721 14,421 12,964 73,400 73,450 14,914 11,471 15,261 13,714
67,450 67,500 13,426 9,984 13,595 12,226 70,450 70,500 14,176 10,734 14,435 12,976 73,450 73,500 14,926 11,484 15,275 13,726
67,500 67,550 13,439 9,996 13,609 12,239 70,500 70,550 14,189 10,746 14,449 12,989 73,500 73,550 14,939 11,496 15,289 13,739
67,550 67,600 13,451 10,009 13,623 12,251 70,550 70,600 14,201 10,759 14,463 13,001 73,550 73,600 14,951 11,509 15,303 13,751
67,600 67,650 13,464 10,021 13,637 12,264 70,600 70,650 14,214 10,771 14,477 13,014 73,600 73,650 14,964 11,521 15,317 13,764
67,650 67,700 13,476 10,034 13,651 12,276 70,650 70,700 14,226 10,784 14,491 13,026 73,650 73,700 14,976 11,534 15,331 13,776
67,700 67,750 13,489 10,046 13,665 12,289 70,700 70,750 14,239 10,796 14,505 13,039 73,700 73,750 14,989 11,546 15,345 13,789
67,750 67,800 13,501 10,059 13,679 12,301 70,750 70,800 14,251 10,809 14,519 13,051 73,750 73,800 15,001 11,559 15,359 13,801
67,800 67,850 13,514 10,071 13,693 12,314 70,800 70,850 14,264 10,821 14,533 13,064 73,800 73,850 15,014 11,571 15,373 13,814
67,850 67,900 13,526 10,084 13,707 12,326 70,850 70,900 14,276 10,834 14,547 13,076 73,850 73,900 15,026 11,584 15,387 13,826
67,900 67,950 13,539 10,096 13,721 12,339 70,900 70,950 14,289 10,846 14,561 13,089 73,900 73,950 15,039 11,596 15,401 13,839
67,950 68,000 13,551 10,109 13,735 12,351 70,950 71,000 14,301 10,859 14,575 13,101 73,950 74,000 15,051 11,609 15,415 13,851
68,000 71,000 74,000
68,000 68,050 13,564 10,121 13,749 12,364 71,000 71,050 14,314 10,871 14,589 13,114 74,000 74,050 15,064 11,621 15,429 13,864
68,050 68,100 13,576 10,134 13,763 12,376 71,050 71,100 14,326 10,884 14,603 13,126 74,050 74,100 15,076 11,634 15,443 13,876
68,100 68,150 13,589 10,146 13,777 12,389 71,100 71,150 14,339 10,896 14,617 13,139 74,100 74,150 15,089 11,646 15,457 13,889
68,150 68,200 13,601 10,159 13,791 12,401 71,150 71,200 14,351 10,909 14,631 13,151 74,150 74,200 15,101 11,659 15,471 13,901
68,200 68,250 13,614 10,171 13,805 12,414 71,200 71,250 14,364 10,921 14,645 13,164 74,200 74,250 15,115 11,671 15,485 13,914
68,250 68,300 13,626 10,184 13,819 12,426 71,250 71,300 14,376 10,934 14,659 13,176 74,250 74,300 15,129 11,684 15,499 13,926
68,300 68,350 13,639 10,196 13,833 12,439 71,300 71,350 14,389 10,946 14,673 13,189 74,300 74,350 15,143 11,696 15,513 13,939
68,350 68,400 13,651 10,209 13,847 12,451 71,350 71,400 14,401 10,959 14,687 13,201 74,350 74,400 15,157 11,709 15,527 13,951
68,400 68,450 13,664 10,221 13,861 12,464 71,400 71,450 14,414 10,971 14,701 13,214 74,400 74,450 15,171 11,721 15,541 13,964
68,450 68,500 13,676 10,234 13,875 12,476 71,450 71,500 14,426 10,984 14,715 13,226 74,450 74,500 15,185 11,734 15,555 13,976
68,500 68,550 13,689 10,246 13,889 12,489 71,500 71,550 14,439 10,996 14,729 13,239 74,500 74,550 15,199 11,746 15,569 13,989
68,550 68,600 13,701 10,259 13,903 12,501 71,550 71,600 14,451 11,009 14,743 13,251 74,550 74,600 15,213 11,759 15,583 14,001
68,600 68,650 13,714 10,271 13,917 12,514 71,600 71,650 14,464 11,021 14,757 13,264 74,600 74,650 15,227 11,771 15,597 14,014
68,650 68,700 13,726 10,284 13,931 12,526 71,650 71,700 14,476 11,034 14,771 13,276 74,650 74,700 15,241 11,784 15,611 14,026
68,700 68,750 13,739 10,296 13,945 12,539 71,700 71,750 14,489 11,046 14,785 13,289 74,700 74,750 15,255 11,796 15,625 14,039
68,750 68,800 13,751 10,309 13,959 12,551 71,750 71,800 14,501 11,059 14,799 13,301 74,750 74,800 15,269 11,809 15,639 14,051
68,800 68,850 13,764 10,321 13,973 12,564 71,800 71,850 14,514 11,071 14,813 13,314 74,800 74,850 15,283 11,821 15,653 14,064
68,850 68,900 13,776 10,334 13,987 12,576 71,850 71,900 14,526 11,084 14,827 13,326 74,850 74,900 15,297 11,834 15,667 14,076
68,900 68,950 13,789 10,346 14,001 12,589 71,900 71,950 14,539 11,096 14,841 13,339 74,900 74,950 15,311 11,846 15,681 14,089
68,950 69,000 13,801 10,359 14,015 12,601 71,950 72,000 14,551 11,109 14,855 13,351 74,950 75,000 15,325 11,859 15,695 14,101
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 258)
- 257 -

Page 260 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
75,000 78,000 81,000
75,000 75,050 15,339 11,871 15,709 14,114 78,000 78,050 16,179 12,621 16,549 14,864 81,000 81,050 17,019 13,371 17,389 15,614
75,050 75,100 15,353 11,884 15,723 14,126 78,050 78,100 16,193 12,634 16,563 14,876 81,050 81,100 17,033 13,384 17,403 15,626
75,100 75,150 15,367 11,896 15,737 14,139 78,100 78,150 16,207 12,646 16,577 14,889 81,100 81,150 17,047 13,396 17,417 15,639
75,150 75,200 15,381 11,909 15,751 14,151 78,150 78,200 16,221 12,659 16,591 14,901 81,150 81,200 17,061 13,409 17,431 15,651
75,200 75,250 15,395 11,921 15,765 14,164 78,200 78,250 16,235 12,671 16,605 14,914 81,200 81,250 17,075 13,421 17,445 15,664
75,250 75,300 15,409 11,934 15,779 14,176 78,250 78,300 16,249 12,684 16,619 14,926 81,250 81,300 17,089 13,434 17,459 15,676
75,300 75,350 15,423 11,946 15,793 14,189 78,300 78,350 16,263 12,696 16,633 14,939 81,300 81,350 17,103 13,446 17,473 15,689
75,350 75,400 15,437 11,959 15,807 14,201 78,350 78,400 16,277 12,709 16,647 14,951 81,350 81,400 17,117 13,459 17,487 15,701
75,400 75,450 15,451 11,971 15,821 14,214 78,400 78,450 16,291 12,721 16,661 14,964 81,400 81,450 17,131 13,471 17,501 15,714
75,450 75,500 15,465 11,984 15,835 14,226 78,450 78,500 16,305 12,734 16,675 14,976 81,450 81,500 17,145 13,484 17,515 15,726
75,500 75,550 15,479 11,996 15,849 14,239 78,500 78,550 16,319 12,746 16,689 14,989 81,500 81,550 17,159 13,496 17,529 15,739
75,550 75,600 15,493 12,009 15,863 14,251 78,550 78,600 16,333 12,759 16,703 15,001 81,550 81,600 17,173 13,509 17,543 15,751
75,600 75,650 15,507 12,021 15,877 14,264 78,600 78,650 16,347 12,771 16,717 15,014 81,600 81,650 17,187 13,521 17,557 15,764
75,650 75,700 15,521 12,034 15,891 14,276 78,650 78,700 16,361 12,784 16,731 15,026 81,650 81,700 17,201 13,534 17,571 15,776
75,700 75,750 15,535 12,046 15,905 14,289 78,700 78,750 16,375 12,796 16,745 15,039 81,700 81,750 17,215 13,546 17,585 15,789
75,750 75,800 15,549 12,059 15,919 14,301 78,750 78,800 16,389 12,809 16,759 15,051 81,750 81,800 17,229 13,559 17,599 15,801
75,800 75,850 15,563 12,071 15,933 14,314 78,800 78,850 16,403 12,821 16,773 15,064 81,800 81,850 17,243 13,571 17,613 15,814
75,850 75,900 15,577 12,084 15,947 14,326 78,850 78,900 16,417 12,834 16,787 15,076 81,850 81,900 17,257 13,584 17,627 15,826
75,900 75,950 15,591 12,096 15,961 14,339 78,900 78,950 16,431 12,846 16,801 15,089 81,900 81,950 17,271 13,596 17,641 15,839
75,950 76,000 15,605 12,109 15,975 14,351 78,950 79,000 16,445 12,859 16,815 15,101 81,950 82,000 17,285 13,609 17,655 15,851
76,000 79,000 82,000
76,000 76,050 15,619 12,121 15,989 14,364 79,000 79,050 16,459 12,871 16,829 15,114 82,000 82,050 17,299 13,621 17,669 15,864
76,050 76,100 15,633 12,134 16,003 14,376 79,050 79,100 16,473 12,884 16,843 15,126 82,050 82,100 17,313 13,634 17,683 15,876
76,100 76,150 15,647 12,146 16,017 14,389 79,100 79,150 16,487 12,896 16,857 15,139 82,100 82,150 17,327 13,646 17,697 15,889
76,150 76,200 15,661 12,159 16,031 14,401 79,150 79,200 16,501 12,909 16,871 15,151 82,150 82,200 17,341 13,659 17,711 15,901
76,200 76,250 15,675 12,171 16,045 14,414 79,200 79,250 16,515 12,921 16,885 15,164 82,200 82,250 17,355 13,671 17,725 15,914
76,250 76,300 15,689 12,184 16,059 14,426 79,250 79,300 16,529 12,934 16,899 15,176 82,250 82,300 17,369 13,684 17,739 15,926
76,300 76,350 15,703 12,196 16,073 14,439 79,300 79,350 16,543 12,946 16,913 15,189 82,300 82,350 17,383 13,696 17,753 15,939
76,350 76,400 15,717 12,209 16,087 14,451 79,350 79,400 16,557 12,959 16,927 15,201 82,350 82,400 17,397 13,709 17,767 15,951
76,400 76,450 15,731 12,221 16,101 14,464 79,400 79,450 16,571 12,971 16,941 15,214 82,400 82,450 17,411 13,721 17,781 15,964
76,450 76,500 15,745 12,234 16,115 14,476 79,450 79,500 16,585 12,984 16,955 15,226 82,450 82,500 17,425 13,734 17,795 15,976
76,500 76,550 15,759 12,246 16,129 14,489 79,500 79,550 16,599 12,996 16,969 15,239 82,500 82,550 17,439 13,746 17,809 15,989
76,550 76,600 15,773 12,259 16,143 14,501 79,550 79,600 16,613 13,009 16,983 15,251 82,550 82,600 17,453 13,759 17,823 16,001
76,600 76,650 15,787 12,271 16,157 14,514 79,600 79,650 16,627 13,021 16,997 15,264 82,600 82,650 17,467 13,771 17,837 16,014
76,650 76,700 15,801 12,284 16,171 14,526 79,650 79,700 16,641 13,034 17,011 15,276 82,650 82,700 17,481 13,784 17,851 16,026
76,700 76,750 15,815 12,296 16,185 14,539 79,700 79,750 16,655 13,046 17,025 15,289 82,700 82,750 17,495 13,796 17,865 16,039
76,750 76,800 15,829 12,309 16,199 14,551 79,750 79,800 16,669 13,059 17,039 15,301 82,750 82,800 17,509 13,809 17,879 16,051
76,800 76,850 15,843 12,321 16,213 14,564 79,800 79,850 16,683 13,071 17,053 15,314 82,800 82,850 17,523 13,821 17,893 16,064
76,850 76,900 15,857 12,334 16,227 14,576 79,850 79,900 16,697 13,084 17,067 15,326 82,850 82,900 17,537 13,834 17,907 16,076
76,900 76,950 15,871 12,346 16,241 14,589 79,900 79,950 16,711 13,096 17,081 15,339 82,900 82,950 17,551 13,846 17,921 16,089
76,950 77,000 15,885 12,359 16,255 14,601 79,950 80,000 16,725 13,109 17,095 15,351 82,950 83,000 17,565 13,859 17,935 16,101
77,000 80,000 83,000
77,000 77,050 15,899 12,371 16,269 14,614 80,000 80,050 16,739 13,121 17,109 15,364 83,000 83,050 17,579 13,871 17,949 16,114
77,050 77,100 15,913 12,384 16,283 14,626 80,050 80,100 16,753 13,134 17,123 15,376 83,050 83,100 17,593 13,884 17,963 16,126
77,100 77,150 15,927 12,396 16,297 14,639 80,100 80,150 16,767 13,146 17,137 15,389 83,100 83,150 17,607 13,896 17,977 16,139
77,150 77,200 15,941 12,409 16,311 14,651 80,150 80,200 16,781 13,159 17,151 15,401 83,150 83,200 17,621 13,909 17,991 16,151
77,200 77,250 15,955 12,421 16,325 14,664 80,200 80,250 16,795 13,171 17,165 15,414 83,200 83,250 17,635 13,921 18,005 16,164
77,250 77,300 15,969 12,434 16,339 14,676 80,250 80,300 16,809 13,184 17,179 15,426 83,250 83,300 17,649 13,934 18,019 16,176
77,300 77,350 15,983 12,446 16,353 14,689 80,300 80,350 16,823 13,196 17,193 15,439 83,300 83,350 17,663 13,946 18,033 16,189
77,350 77,400 15,997 12,459 16,367 14,701 80,350 80,400 16,837 13,209 17,207 15,451 83,350 83,400 17,677 13,959 18,047 16,201
77,400 77,450 16,011 12,471 16,381 14,714 80,400 80,450 16,851 13,221 17,221 15,464 83,400 83,450 17,691 13,971 18,061 16,214
77,450 77,500 16,025 12,484 16,395 14,726 80,450 80,500 16,865 13,234 17,235 15,476 83,450 83,500 17,705 13,984 18,075 16,226
77,500 77,550 16,039 12,496 16,409 14,739 80,500 80,550 16,879 13,246 17,249 15,489 83,500 83,550 17,719 13,996 18,089 16,239
77,550 77,600 16,053 12,509 16,423 14,751 80,550 80,600 16,893 13,259 17,263 15,501 83,550 83,600 17,733 14,009 18,103 16,251
77,600 77,650 16,067 12,521 16,437 14,764 80,600 80,650 16,907 13,271 17,277 15,514 83,600 83,650 17,747 14,021 18,117 16,264
77,650 77,700 16,081 12,534 16,451 14,776 80,650 80,700 16,921 13,284 17,291 15,526 83,650 83,700 17,761 14,034 18,131 16,276
77,700 77,750 16,095 12,546 16,465 14,789 80,700 80,750 16,935 13,296 17,305 15,539 83,700 83,750 17,775 14,046 18,145 16,289
77,750 77,800 16,109 12,559 16,479 14,801 80,750 80,800 16,949 13,309 17,319 15,551 83,750 83,800 17,789 14,059 18,159 16,301
77,800 77,850 16,123 12,571 16,493 14,814 80,800 80,850 16,963 13,321 17,333 15,564 83,800 83,850 17,803 14,071 18,173 16,314
77,850 77,900 16,137 12,584 16,507 14,826 80,850 80,900 16,977 13,334 17,347 15,576 83,850 83,900 17,817 14,084 18,187 16,326
77,900 77,950 16,151 12,596 16,521 14,839 80,900 80,950 16,991 13,346 17,361 15,589 83,900 83,950 17,831 14,096 18,201 16,339
77,950 78,000 16,165 12,609 16,535 14,851 80,950 81,000 17,005 13,359 17,375 15,601 83,950 84,000 17,845 14,109 18,215 16,351
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 259)
- 258 -

Page 261 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
84,000 87,000 90,000
84,000 84,050 17,859 14,121 18,229 16,364 87,000 87,050 18,699 14,871 19,069 17,114 90,000 90,050 19,539 15,621 19,909 17,864
84,050 84,100 17,873 14,134 18,243 16,376 87,050 87,100 18,713 14,884 19,083 17,126 90,050 90,100 19,553 15,634 19,923 17,876
84,100 84,150 17,887 14,146 18,257 16,389 87,100 87,150 18,727 14,896 19,097 17,139 90,100 90,150 19,567 15,646 19,937 17,889
84,150 84,200 17,901 14,159 18,271 16,401 87,150 87,200 18,741 14,909 19,111 17,151 90,150 90,200 19,581 15,659 19,951 17,901
84,200 84,250 17,915 14,171 18,285 16,414 87,200 87,250 18,755 14,921 19,125 17,164 90,200 90,250 19,595 15,671 19,965 17,914
84,250 84,300 17,929 14,184 18,299 16,426 87,250 87,300 18,769 14,934 19,139 17,176 90,250 90,300 19,609 15,684 19,979 17,926
84,300 84,350 17,943 14,196 18,313 16,439 87,300 87,350 18,783 14,946 19,153 17,189 90,300 90,350 19,623 15,696 19,993 17,939
84,350 84,400 17,957 14,209 18,327 16,451 87,350 87,400 18,797 14,959 19,167 17,201 90,350 90,400 19,637 15,709 20,007 17,951
84,400 84,450 17,971 14,221 18,341 16,464 87,400 87,450 18,811 14,971 19,181 17,214 90,400 90,450 19,651 15,721 20,021 17,964
84,450 84,500 17,985 14,234 18,355 16,476 87,450 87,500 18,825 14,984 19,195 17,226 90,450 90,500 19,665 15,734 20,035 17,976
84,500 84,550 17,999 14,246 18,369 16,489 87,500 87,550 18,839 14,996 19,209 17,239 90,500 90,550 19,679 15,746 20,049 17,989
84,550 84,600 18,013 14,259 18,383 16,501 87,550 87,600 18,853 15,009 19,223 17,251 90,550 90,600 19,693 15,759 20,063 18,001
84,600 84,650 18,027 14,271 18,397 16,514 87,600 87,650 18,867 15,021 19,237 17,264 90,600 90,650 19,707 15,771 20,077 18,014
84,650 84,700 18,041 14,284 18,411 16,526 87,650 87,700 18,881 15,034 19,251 17,276 90,650 90,700 19,721 15,784 20,091 18,026
84,700 84,750 18,055 14,296 18,425 16,539 87,700 87,750 18,895 15,046 19,265 17,289 90,700 90,750 19,735 15,796 20,105 18,039
84,750 84,800 18,069 14,309 18,439 16,551 87,750 87,800 18,909 15,059 19,279 17,301 90,750 90,800 19,749 15,809 20,119 18,051
84,800 84,850 18,083 14,321 18,453 16,564 87,800 87,850 18,923 15,071 19,293 17,314 90,800 90,850 19,763 15,821 20,133 18,064
84,850 84,900 18,097 14,334 18,467 16,576 87,850 87,900 18,937 15,084 19,307 17,326 90,850 90,900 19,777 15,834 20,147 18,076
84,900 84,950 18,111 14,346 18,481 16,589 87,900 87,950 18,951 15,096 19,321 17,339 90,900 90,950 19,791 15,846 20,161 18,089
84,950 85,000 18,125 14,359 18,495 16,601 87,950 88,000 18,965 15,109 19,335 17,351 90,950 91,000 19,805 15,859 20,175 18,101
85,000 88,000 91,000
85,000 85,050 18,139 14,371 18,509 16,614 88,000 88,050 18,979 15,121 19,349 17,364 91,000 91,050 19,819 15,871 20,189 18,114
85,050 85,100 18,153 14,384 18,523 16,626 88,050 88,100 18,993 15,134 19,363 17,376 91,050 91,100 19,833 15,884 20,203 18,126
85,100 85,150 18,167 14,396 18,537 16,639 88,100 88,150 19,007 15,146 19,377 17,389 91,100 91,150 19,847 15,896 20,217 18,139
85,150 85,200 18,181 14,409 18,551 16,651 88,150 88,200 19,021 15,159 19,391 17,401 91,150 91,200 19,861 15,909 20,231 18,151
85,200 85,250 18,195 14,421 18,565 16,664 88,200 88,250 19,035 15,171 19,405 17,414 91,200 91,250 19,875 15,921 20,245 18,164
85,250 85,300 18,209 14,434 18,579 16,676 88,250 88,300 19,049 15,184 19,419 17,426 91,250 91,300 19,889 15,934 20,259 18,176
85,300 85,350 18,223 14,446 18,593 16,689 88,300 88,350 19,063 15,196 19,433 17,439 91,300 91,350 19,903 15,946 20,273 18,189
85,350 85,400 18,237 14,459 18,607 16,701 88,350 88,400 19,077 15,209 19,447 17,451 91,350 91,400 19,917 15,959 20,287 18,201
85,400 85,450 18,251 14,471 18,621 16,714 88,400 88,450 19,091 15,221 19,461 17,464 91,400 91,450 19,931 15,971 20,301 18,214
85,450 85,500 18,265 14,484 18,635 16,726 88,450 88,500 19,105 15,234 19,475 17,476 91,450 91,500 19,945 15,984 20,315 18,226
85,500 85,550 18,279 14,496 18,649 16,739 88,500 88,550 19,119 15,246 19,489 17,489 91,500 91,550 19,959 15,996 20,329 18,239
85,550 85,600 18,293 14,509 18,663 16,751 88,550 88,600 19,133 15,259 19,503 17,501 91,550 91,600 19,973 16,009 20,343 18,251
85,600 85,650 18,307 14,521 18,677 16,764 88,600 88,650 19,147 15,271 19,517 17,514 91,600 91,650 19,987 16,021 20,357 18,264
85,650 85,700 18,321 14,534 18,691 16,776 88,650 88,700 19,161 15,284 19,531 17,526 91,650 91,700 20,001 16,034 20,371 18,276
85,700 85,750 18,335 14,546 18,705 16,789 88,700 88,750 19,175 15,296 19,545 17,539 91,700 91,750 20,015 16,046 20,385 18,289
85,750 85,800 18,349 14,559 18,719 16,801 88,750 88,800 19,189 15,309 19,559 17,551 91,750 91,800 20,029 16,059 20,399 18,301
85,800 85,850 18,363 14,571 18,733 16,814 88,800 88,850 19,203 15,321 19,573 17,564 91,800 91,850 20,043 16,071 20,413 18,314
85,850 85,900 18,377 14,584 18,747 16,826 88,850 88,900 19,217 15,334 19,587 17,576 91,850 91,900 20,057 16,084 20,427 18,326
85,900 85,950 18,391 14,596 18,761 16,839 88,900 88,950 19,231 15,346 19,601 17,589 91,900 91,950 20,071 16,096 20,441 18,339
85,950 86,000 18,405 14,609 18,775 16,851 88,950 89,000 19,245 15,359 19,615 17,601 91,950 92,000 20,085 16,109 20,455 18,351
86,000 89,000 92,000
86,000 86,050 18,419 14,621 18,789 16,864 89,000 89,050 19,259 15,371 19,629 17,614 92,000 92,050 20,099 16,121 20,469 18,364
86,050 86,100 18,433 14,634 18,803 16,876 89,050 89,100 19,273 15,384 19,643 17,626 92,050 92,100 20,113 16,134 20,483 18,376
86,100 86,150 18,447 14,646 18,817 16,889 89,100 89,150 19,287 15,396 19,657 17,639 92,100 92,150 20,127 16,146 20,497 18,389
86,150 86,200 18,461 14,659 18,831 16,901 89,150 89,200 19,301 15,409 19,671 17,651 92,150 92,200 20,141 16,159 20,511 18,401
86,200 86,250 18,475 14,671 18,845 16,914 89,200 89,250 19,315 15,421 19,685 17,664 92,200 92,250 20,155 16,171 20,525 18,414
86,250 86,300 18,489 14,684 18,859 16,926 89,250 89,300 19,329 15,434 19,699 17,676 92,250 92,300 20,169 16,184 20,539 18,426
86,300 86,350 18,503 14,696 18,873 16,939 89,300 89,350 19,343 15,446 19,713 17,689 92,300 92,350 20,183 16,196 20,553 18,439
86,350 86,400 18,517 14,709 18,887 16,951 89,350 89,400 19,357 15,459 19,727 17,701 92,350 92,400 20,197 16,209 20,567 18,451
86,400 86,450 18,531 14,721 18,901 16,964 89,400 89,450 19,371 15,471 19,741 17,714 92,400 92,450 20,211 16,221 20,581 18,464
86,450 86,500 18,545 14,734 18,915 16,976 89,450 89,500 19,385 15,484 19,755 17,726 92,450 92,500 20,225 16,234 20,595 18,476
86,500 86,550 18,559 14,746 18,929 16,989 89,500 89,550 19,399 15,496 19,769 17,739 92,500 92,550 20,239 16,246 20,609 18,489
86,550 86,600 18,573 14,759 18,943 17,001 89,550 89,600 19,413 15,509 19,783 17,751 92,550 92,600 20,253 16,259 20,623 18,501
86,600 86,650 18,587 14,771 18,957 17,014 89,600 89,650 19,427 15,521 19,797 17,764 92,600 92,650 20,267 16,271 20,637 18,514
86,650 86,700 18,601 14,784 18,971 17,026 89,650 89,700 19,441 15,534 19,811 17,776 92,650 92,700 20,281 16,284 20,651 18,526
86,700 86,750 18,615 14,796 18,985 17,039 89,700 89,750 19,455 15,546 19,825 17,789 92,700 92,750 20,295 16,296 20,665 18,539
86,750 86,800 18,629 14,809 18,999 17,051 89,750 89,800 19,469 15,559 19,839 17,801 92,750 92,800 20,309 16,309 20,679 18,551
86,800 86,850 18,643 14,821 19,013 17,064 89,800 89,850 19,483 15,571 19,853 17,814 92,800 92,850 20,323 16,321 20,693 18,564
86,850 86,900 18,657 14,834 19,027 17,076 89,850 89,900 19,497 15,584 19,867 17,826 92,850 92,900 20,337 16,334 20,707 18,576
86,900 86,950 18,671 14,846 19,041 17,089 89,900 89,950 19,511 15,596 19,881 17,839 92,900 92,950 20,351 16,346 20,721 18,589
86,950 87,000 18,685 14,859 19,055 17,101 89,950 90,000 19,525 15,609 19,895 17,851 92,950 93,000 20,365 16,359 20,735 18,601
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 260)
- 259 -

Page 262 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Table– Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are — (taxable And you are — (taxable And you are —
income) is — income) is — income) is —
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is — Your tax is — Your tax is —
93,000 96,000 99,000
93,000 93,050 20,379 16,371 20,749 18,614 96,000 96,050 21,219 17,121 21,679 19,364 99,000 99,050 22,059 17,871 22,669 20,114
93,050 93,100 20,393 16,384 20,763 18,626 96,050 96,100 21,233 17,134 21,696 19,376 99,050 99,100 22,073 17,884 22,686 20,126
93,100 93,150 20,407 16,396 20,777 18,639 96,100 96,150 21,247 17,146 21,712 19,389 99,100 99,150 22,087 17,896 22,702 20,139
93,150 93,200 20,421 16,409 20,791 18,651 96,150 96,200 21,261 17,159 21,729 19,401 99,150 99,200 22,101 17,909 22,719 20,151
93,200 93,250 20,435 16,421 20,805 18,664 96,200 96,250 21,275 17,171 21,745 19,414 99,200 99,250 22,115 17,921 22,735 20,164
93,250 93,300 20,449 16,434 20,819 18,676 96,250 96,300 21,289 17,184 21,762 19,426 99,250 99,300 22,129 17,934 22,752 20,176
93,300 93,350 20,463 16,446 20,833 18,689 96,300 96,350 21,303 17,196 21,778 19,439 99,300 99,350 22,143 17,946 22,768 20,189
93,350 93,400 20,477 16,459 20,847 18,701 96,350 96,400 21,317 17,209 21,795 19,451 99,350 99,400 22,157 17,959 22,785 20,201
93,400 93,450 20,491 16,471 20,861 18,714 96,400 96,450 21,331 17,221 21,811 19,464 99,400 99,450 22,171 17,971 22,801 20,214
93,450 93,500 20,505 16,484 20,875 18,726 96,450 96,500 21,345 17,234 21,828 19,476 99,450 99,500 22,185 17,984 22,818 20,226
93,500 93,550 20,519 16,496 20,889 18,739 96,500 96,550 21,359 17,246 21,844 19,489 99,500 99,550 22,199 17,996 22,834 20,239
93,550 93,600 20,533 16,509 20,903 18,751 96,550 96,600 21,373 17,259 21,861 19,501 99,550 99,600 22,213 18,009 22,851 20,251
93,600 93,650 20,547 16,521 20,917 18,764 96,600 96,650 21,387 17,271 21,877 19,514 99,600 99,650 22,227 18,021 22,867 20,264
93,650 93,700 20,561 16,534 20,931 18,776 96,650 96,700 21,401 17,284 21,894 19,526 99,650 99,700 22,241 18,034 22,884 20,276
93,700 93,750 20,575 16,546 20,945 18,789 96,700 96,750 21,415 17,296 21,910 19,539 99,700 99,750 22,255 18,046 22,900 20,289
93,750 93,800 20,589 16,559 20,959 18,801 96,750 96,800 21,429 17,309 21,927 19,551 99,750 99,800 22,269 18,059 22,917 20,301
93,800 93,850 20,603 16,571 20,973 18,814 96,800 96,850 21,443 17,321 21,943 19,564 99,800 99,850 22,283 18,071 22,933 20,314
93,850 93,900 20,617 16,584 20,987 18,826 96,850 96,900 21,457 17,334 21,960 19,576 99,850 99,900 22,297 18,084 22,950 20,326
93,900 93,950 20,631 16,596 21,001 18,839 96,900 96,950 21,471 17,346 21,976 19,589 99,900 99,950 22,311 18,096 22,966 20,339
93,950 94,000 20,645 16,609 21,015 18,851 96,950 97,000 21,485 17,359 21,993 19,601 99,950 100,000 22,325 18,109 22,983 20,351
94,000 97,000
94,000 94,050 20,659 16,621 21,029 18,864 97,000 97,050 21,499 17,371 22,009 19,614
94,050 94,100 20,673 16,634 21,043 18,876 97,050 97,100 21,513 17,384 22,026 19,626
94,100 94,150 20,687 16,646 21,057 18,889 97,100 97,150 21,527 17,396 22,042 19,639
94,150 94,200 20,701 16,659 21,071 18,901 97,150 97,200 21,541 17,409 22,059 19,651
94,200 94,250 20,715 16,671 21,085 18,914 97,200 97,250 21,555 17,421 22,075 19,664
94,250 94,300 20,729 16,684 21,102 18,926 97,250 97,300 21,569 17,434 22,092 19,676
94,300 94,350 20,743 16,696 21,118 18,939 97,300 97,350 21,583 17,446 22,108 19,689 $100,000 or over —94,350 94,400 20,757 16,709 21,135 18,951 97,350 97,400 21,597 17,459 22,125 19,701 use the Tax
Computation94,400 94,450 20,771 16,721 21,151 18,964 97,400 97,450 21,611 17,471 22,141 19,714 Worksheet that94,450 94,500 20,785 16,734 21,168 18,976 97,450 97,500 21,625 17,484 22,158 19,726 immediately follows94,500 94,550 20,799 16,746 21,184 18,989 97,500 97,550 21,639 17,496 22,174 19,739 the Tax Tables94,550 94,600 20,813 16,759 21,201 19,001 97,550 97,600 21,653 17,509 22,191 19,751
94,600 94,650 20,827 16,771 21,217 19,014 97,600 97,650 21,667 17,521 22,207 19,764
94,650 94,700 20,841 16,784 21,234 19,026 97,650 97,700 21,681 17,534 22,224 19,776
94,700 94,750 20,855 16,796 21,250 19,039 97,700 97,750 21,695 17,546 22,240 19,789
94,750 94,800 20,869 16,809 21,267 19,051 97,750 97,800 21,709 17,559 22,257 19,801
94,800 94,850 20,883 16,821 21,283 19,064 97,800 97,850 21,723 17,571 22,273 19,814
94,850 94,900 20,897 16,834 21,300 19,076 97,850 97,900 21,737 17,584 22,290 19,826
94,900 94,950 20,911 16,846 21,316 19,089 97,900 97,950 21,751 17,596 22,306 19,839
94,950 95,000 20,925 16,859 21,333 19,101 97,950 98,000 21,765 17,609 22,323 19,851
95,000 98,000
95,000 95,050 20,939 16,871 21,349 19,114 98,000 98,050 21,779 17,621 22,339 19,864
95,050 95,100 20,953 16,884 21,366 19,126 98,050 98,100 21,793 17,634 22,356 19,876
95,100 95,150 20,967 16,896 21,382 19,139 98,100 98,150 21,807 17,646 22,372 19,889
95,150 95,200 20,981 16,909 21,399 19,151 98,150 98,200 21,821 17,659 22,389 19,901
95,200 95,250 20,995 16,921 21,415 19,164 98,200 98,250 21,835 17,671 22,405 19,914
95,250 95,300 21,009 16,934 21,432 19,176 98,250 98,300 21,849 17,684 22,422 19,926
95,300 95,350 21,023 16,946 21,448 19,189 98,300 98,350 21,863 17,696 22,438 19,939
95,350 95,400 21,037 16,959 21,465 19,201 98,350 98,400 21,877 17,709 22,455 19,951
95,400 95,450 21,051 16,971 21,481 19,214 98,400 98,450 21,891 17,721 22,471 19,964
95,450 95,500 21,065 16,984 21,498 19,226 98,450 98,500 21,905 17,734 22,488 19,976
95,500 95,550 21,079 16,996 21,514 19,239 98,500 98,550 21,919 17,746 22,504 19,989
95,550 95,600 21,093 17,009 21,531 19,251 98,550 98,600 21,933 17,759 22,521 20,001
95,600 95,650 21,107 17,021 21,547 19,264 98,600 98,650 21,947 17,771 22,537 20,014
95,650 95,700 21,121 17,034 21,564 19,276 98,650 98,700 21,961 17,784 22,554 20,026
95,700 95,750 21,135 17,046 21,580 19,289 98,700 98,750 21,975 17,796 22,570 20,039
95,750 95,800 21,149 17,059 21,597 19,301 98,750 98,800 21,989 17,809 22,587 20,051
95,800 95,850 21,163 17,071 21,613 19,314 98,800 98,850 22,003 17,821 22,603 20,064
95,850 95,900 21,177 17,084 21,630 19,326 98,850 98,900 22,017 17,834 22,620 20,076
95,900 95,950 21,191 17,096 21,646 19,339 98,900 98,950 22,031 17,846 22,636 20,089
95,950 96,000 21,205 17,109 21,663 19,351 98,950 99,000 22,045 17,859 22,653 20,101
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er)
- 260 -

Page 263 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 Tax Computation Worksheet—Line 44
See the instructions for line 44 in the instructions for Form 1040 to see if you must use the worksheet below to figure your tax.
CAUTION
!
Note. If you are required to use this worksheet to figure the tax on an amount from another form or worksheet, such as the Qualified
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, the Schedule D Tax Worksheet, Schedule J, Form 8615, or the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet, enter the amount from that form or worksheet in column (a) of the row that applies to the amount you are looking up. Enter the
result on the appropriate line of the form or worksheet that you are completing.
Section A— Use if your filing status is Single. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 is— 43 amount (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$154,800  $ × 28% (.28)  $  $ 5,668.50  $
Over $154,800 but not over
$336,550  $ × 33% (.33)  $  $ 13,408.50  $
Over $336,550  $ × 35% (.35)  $  $ 20,139.50  $
Section B— Use if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er). Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
(a) (b) (c) (d) Subtract (d) from (c).
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction Enter the result here and
If line 43 is— 43 amount (a) by (b) amount on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$123,700  $ × 25% (.25)  $  $ 6,885.00  $
Over $123,700 but not over
$188,450  $ × 28% (.28)  $  $ 10,596.00  $
Over $188,450 but not over
$336,550  $ × 33% (.33)  $  $ 20,018.50  $
Over $336,550  $ × 35% (.35)  $  $ 26,749.50  $
Section C— Use if your filing status is Married filing separately. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 is— 43 amount (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$168,275  $ × 33% (.33)  $  $ 10,009.25  $
Over $168,275  $ × 35% (.35)  $  $ 13,374.75  $
Section D— Use if your filing status is Head of household. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 is— 43 amount (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$106,000  $ × 25% (.25)  $  $ 4,642.50  $
Over $106,000 but not over
$171,650  $ × 28% (.28)  $  $  7,822.50  $
Over $171,650 but not over
$336,550  $ × 33% (.33)  $  $ 16,405.00  $
Over $336,550  $ × 35% (.35)  $  $ 23,136.00  $
Publication 17 (2006) Page 261

Page 264 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006
Tax Rate
Schedules
The Tax Rate Schedules are shown so you can see the tax rate that applies
to all levels of taxable income. Do not use them to figure your tax. Instead,
see Chapter 30.
Schedule Z—If your filing status is Head of household
Schedule X—If your filing status is Single
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Schedule Y-2—If your filing status is Married filing separately
Schedule Y-1—If your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
CAUTION
$0
7,550
30,650
74,200
154,800
336,550
$7,550
30,650
74,200
154,800
336,550
$0
7,550
30,650
74,200
154,800
336,550
$0
15,100
61,300
123,700
188,450
336,550
$0
7,550
30,650
61,850
94,225
168,275
$0
10,750
41,050
106,000
171,650
336,550
$15,100
61,300
123,700
188,450
336,550
$7,550
30,650
61,850
94,225
168,275
$10,750
41,050
106,000
171,650
336,550
$0
15,100
61,300
123,700
188,450
336,550
$0
7,550
30,650
61,850
94,225
168,275
$0
10,750
41,050
106,000
171,650
336,550
10%
$755.00 + 15%
4,220.00 + 25%
15,107.50 + 28%
37,675.50 + 33%
97,653.00 + 35%
10%
$1,510.00 + 15%
8,440.00 + 25%
24,040.00 + 28%
42,170.00 + 33%
91,043.00 + 35%
10%
$755.00 + 15%
4,220.00 + 25%
12,020.00 + 28%
21,085.00 + 33%
45,521.50 + 35%
10%
$1,075.00 + 15%
5,620.00 + 25%
21,857.50 + 28%
40,239.50 + 33%
94,656.50 + 35%
Page 262 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 265 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
This section explains some of your to review your case. You may also changes. If you do not agree with Your collection appeal righ ts are
most important rights as a tax- ask a court to review your case. these changes, you can meet with explained in detail in Publication
payer, including the examination, the examiner’s supervisor. 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.Relief from certain penalties andappeal, collection, and refund interest. The IRS will waive pen- Repeat examinations. If we ex- Innocent spouse relief. Gener-processes. alties when allowed by law if you amined your return for the same ally, both you and your spouse are
can show you acted reasonably items in either of the 2 previous each responsible for paying the full
and in good faith or relied on the years and proposed no change to amount of any tax, interest, and
Declaration of Taxpayer incorrect advice of an IRS em- your tax liability, please contact us penalties due on your joint return.
ployee. We will waive interest that as soon as possible so we can see However, if you qualify for innocentRights
is the result of certain errors or de- if we should discontinue the exami- spouse relief, you may be relieved
lays caused by an IRS employee. nation. of all or part of the joint liability. ToProtection of your rights. IRS request relief, you must file Formemployees will explain and protect 8857, Request for Innocentyour rights as a taxpayer through- Spouse Relief, no later than 2
Examinations (Audits) Appealsout your contact with us. years after the date on which theWe accept most taxpayers’ returns If you do not agree with the exam-Privacy and confidentiality. IRS first attempted to collect the taxas filed. If we inquire about your iner’s proposed changes, you canThe IRS will not disclose to anyone from you. For example, thereturn or select it for examination, it appeal them to the Appeals Officethe information you give us, except two-year period for filing your claimdoes not suggest that you are dis- of IRS. Most differences can beas authorized by law. You have the may start if the IRS applies your taxhonest. The inquiry or examination settled without expensive andright to know why we are asking refund from one year to the taxesmay or may not result in more tax. time-consuming court trials. Youryou for information, how we will use that you and your spouse owe forWe may close your case without appeal rights are explained in detailit, and what will happen if you do another year. For more informationchange or you may receive a re- in both Publication 5, Your Appealnot provide requested information. on innocent spouse relief, see Pub-fund. Rights and How To Prepare a Pro- lication 971, Innocent Spouse Re-Professional and courteous The process of selecting a re- test If You Don’t Agree, and Publi- lief, and Form 8857.service. If you believe that an turn for examination usually begins cation 556, Examination ofIRS employee has not treated you in one of two ways. First, we use Returns, Appeal Rights, andin a professional, fair, and courte- computer programs to identify re- Claims for Refund. Potential Third Partyous manner, you should tell that turns that may have incorrect If you do not wish to use the Contactsemployee’s supervisor. If the su- amounts. These programs may be Appeals Office or disagree with itspervisor’s response is not satisfac- based on information returns, such findings, you may be able to take Generally, the IRS will deal directlytory, you should write to the IRS as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies your case to the U.S. Tax Court, with you or your duly authorizeddirector for your area or the center of past examinations, or on certain U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or representative. However, wewhere you filed your return. issues identified by compliance the U.S. District Court where you sometimes talk with other persons
projects. Second, we use informa- live. If you take your case to court,Representation. You may either if we need information that you
tion from outside sources that indi- the IRS will have the burden ofrepresent yourself or, with proper have been unable to provide, or to
cates that a return may have proving certain facts if you kept ad-written authorization, have some- verify information we have re-
incorrect amounts. These sources equate records to show your taxone else represent you in your ceived. If we do contact other per-
may include newspapers, public liability, cooperated with the IRS,place. Your representative must be sons, such as a neighbor, bank,
records, and individuals. If we de- and meet certain other conditions.a person allowed to practice before employer, or employees, we will
termine that the information is ac- If the court agrees with you on mostthe IRS, such as an attorney, certi- generally need to tell them limited
curate and reliable, we may use it issues in your case and finds thatfied public accountant, or enrolled information, such as your name.
to select a return for examination. our position was largely unjustified,agent. If you are in an interview and The law prohibits us from disclos-
Publication 556, Examination of you may be able to recover some ofask to consult such a person, then ing any more information than is
Returns, Appeal Rights, and your administrative and litigationwe must stop and reschedule the necessary to obtain or verify the
Claims for Refund, explains the costs. You will not be eligible tointerview in most cases. information we are seeking. Our
rules and procedures that we follow recover these costs unless youYou can have someone accom- need to contact other persons may
in examinations. The following sec- tried to resolve your case adminis-pany you at an interview. You may continue as long as there is activity
tions give an overview of how we tratively, including going throughmake sound recordings of any in your case. If we do contact other
conduct examinations. the appeals system, and you gavemeetings with our examination, ap- persons, you have a right to re-
us the information necessary to re-peal, or collection personnel, pro- quest a list of those contacted.By mail. We handle many exami- solve the case.vided you tell us in writing 10 days nations and inquiries by mail. Webefore the meeting. will send you a letter with either a Refundsrequest for more information or aPayment of only the correct Collectionsreason why we believe a change toamount of tax. You are respon- You may file a claim for refund ifyour return may be needed. Yousible for paying only the correct Publication 594, The IRS Collec- you think you paid too much tax.can respond by mail or you canamount of tax due under the law— tion Process, explains your rights You must generally file the claimrequest a personal interview withno more, no less. If you cannot pay and responsibilities regarding pay- within 3 years from the date youan examiner. If you mail us the re-all of your tax when it is due, you ment of federal taxes. It describes: filed your original return or 2 yearsquested information or provide anmay be able to make monthly in- from the date you paid the tax,• What to do when you oweexplanation, we may or may notstallment payments. whichever is later. The law gener-taxes. It describes what to doagree with you, and we will explain ally provides for interest on yourHelp with unresolved tax if you get a tax bill and whatthe reasons for any changes. refund if it is not paid within 45 daysproblems. The Taxpayer Advo- to do if you think your bill isPlease do not hesitate to write to us of the date you filed your return orcate Service can help you if you wrong. It also covers makingabout anything you do not under- claim for refund. Publication 556have tried unsuccessfully to re- installment payments, delay-stand. has more information on refunds.solve a problem with the IRS. Your ing collection action, and sub- If you were due a refund but youBy interview. If we notify youlocal Taxpayer Advocate can offer mitting an offer in did not file a return, you generallythat we will conduct your examina-you special help if you have a sig- compromise. must file within 3 years from thetion through a personal interview,nificant hardship as a result of a tax • IRS collection actions. It cov- date the return was due (includingor you request such an interview,problem. For more information, see ers liens, releasing a lien, le- extensions) to get that refund.you have the right to ask that theContacting your Taxpayer Advo- vies, releasing a levy,examination take place at a rea-cate under How To Get Tax Help. seizures and sales, and re-sonable time and place that is con-Appeals and judicial review. If lease of property.venient for both you and the IRS. Ifyou disagree with us about the our examiner proposes anyamount of your tax liability or cer- changes to your return, he or shetain collection actions, you have will explain the reasons for thethe right to ask the Appeals Office
■
Publication 17 (2006) Page 263

Page 266 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved from the date you filed your • Refund information. To check Center and leave a message
tax issues, order free publications return (3 weeks if you filed the status of your 2006 re- requesting an appointment to
and forms, ask tax questions, and electronically). Have your fund, call 1-800-829-4477 resolve a tax account issue. A
get information from the IRS in sev- 2006 tax return available be- and press 1 for automated re- representative will call you
eral ways. By selecting the method cause you will need to know fund information or call back within 2 business days
that is best for you, you will have your social security number, 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to to schedule an in-person ap-
quick and easy access to tax help. your filing status, and the ex- wait at least 6 weeks from the pointment at your conve-
act whole dollar amount of date you filed your return (3 nience. To find the number,Contacting your Taxpayer Advo- your refund. weeks if you filed electroni- go to www.irs.gov/localcon-cate. The Taxpayer Advocate cally). Have your 2006 tax re- tacts or look in the phoneService is an independent organi-
• Download forms, instructions, turn available because you book under United Stateszation within the IRS whose em- and publications. will need to know your social Government, Internal Reve-ployees assist taxpayers who are • Order IRS products online. security number, your filing nue Service.experiencing economic harm, who status, and the exact whole• Research your tax questionsare seeking help in resolving tax dollar amount of your refund. Mail. You can send youronline.problems that have not been re- order for forms, instruc-solved through normal channels, or • Search publications online by tions, and publications towho believe that an IRS system or Evaluating the quality of ourtopic or keyword. the address below. You should re-procedure is not working as it telephone services. To ensure ceive a response within 10 busi-• View Internal Revenue Bulle-should. IRS representatives give accurate, ness days after your request istins (IRBs) published in theYou can contact the Taxpayer courteous, and professional an- received.last few years.Advocate Service by calling swers, we use several methods to
toll-free 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/ evaluate the quality of our tele-• Figure your withholding al- National Distribution CenterTDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you phone services. One method is forlowances using our withhold- P.O. Box 8903are eligible for assistance. You can a second IRS representative to lis-ing calculator. Bloomington, IL 61702-8903also call or write to your local tax- ten in on or record random tele-
• Sign up to receive local andpayer advocate, whose phone phone calls. Another is to ask some CD for tax products. Younational tax news by email.number and address are listed in callers to complete a short survey can order Publicationyour local telephone directory and at the end of the call.• Get information on starting 1796, IRS Tax Productsin Publication 1546, The Taxpayer and operating a small busi- CD, and obtain:Advocate Service of the IRS - How Walk-in. Many productsness. • A CD that is released twiceto Get Help With Unresolved Tax and services are available so you have the latest prod-Problems. You can file Form 911, on a walk-in basis. ucts. The first release ships inPhone. Many servicesApplication for Taxpayer Assis-
January and the final releaseare available by phone.tance Order, or ask an IRS em- • Products. You can walk in to ships in March.ployee to complete it on your many post offices, libraries,behalf. For more information, go to • Current-year forms, instruc-and IRS offices to pick upwww.irs.gov/advocate. tions, and publications.certain forms, instructions,• Ordering forms, instructions,Low income tax clinics and publications. Some IRS • Prior-year forms, instructions,and publications. Call(LITCs). LITCs are independent offices, libraries, grocery and publications.1-800-829-3676 to order cur-organizations that provide low in- stores, copy centers, city andrent-year forms, instructions, • Bonus: Historical Tax Prod-come taxpayers with representa- county government offices,and publications, and ucts DVD - Ships with the fi-tion in federal tax controversies credit unions, and office sup-prior-year forms and instruc- nal release.with the IRS for free or for a nomi- ply stores have a collection oftions. You should receivenal charge. The clinics also provide products available to print • Tax Map: an electronic re-your order within 10 days.tax education and outreach for tax- from a CD or photocopy from search tool and finding aid.• Asking tax questions. Call thepayers with limited English profi- reproducible proofs. Also, • Tax law frequently askedIRS with your tax questions atciency or who speak English as a some IRS offices and libraries questions.1-800-829-1040.second language. Publication have the Internal Revenue
4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic Code, regulations, Internal • Tax Topics from the IRS tele-• Solving problems. You canList, provides information on clinics Revenue Bulletins, and Cu- phone response system.get face-to-face help solvingin your area. It is available at www. mulative Bulletins availabletax problems every business • Fill-in, print, and save fea-irs.gov or at your local IRS office. for research purposes.day in IRS Taxpayer Assis- tures for most tax forms.tance Centers. An employeeFree tax services. To find out • Services. You can walk in to • Internal Revenue Bulletins.can explain IRS letters, re-what services are available, get your local Taxpayer Assis-quest adjustments to your ac-Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free tance Center every business • Toll-free and email technicalcount, or help you set up aTax Services. It contains a list of day for personal, face-to-face support.payment plan. Call your localfree tax publications and describes tax help. An employee canTaxpayer Assistance Centerother free tax information services, explain IRS letters, request Buy the CD from National Tech-for an appointment. To findincluding tax education and assis- adjustments to your tax ac- nical Information Service (NTIS) atthe number, go totance programs and a list of count, or help you set up a www.irs.gov/cdorders for $25 (nowww.irs.gov/localcontacts orTeleTax topics. payment plan. If you need to handling fee) or calllook in the phone book under resolve a tax problem, have 1-877-CDFORMSInternet. You can access United States Government, questions about how the tax (1-877-233-6767) toll free to buythe IRS website at www. Internal Revenue Service. law applies to your individual the CD for $25 (plus a $5 handlingirs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 tax return, or you’re more fee). Price is subject to change.• TTY/TDD equipment. If youdays a week to: comfortable talking withhave access to TTY/TDD• E-file your return. Find out someone in person, visit yourequipment, callabout commercial tax prepa- local Taxpayer Assistance1-800-829-4059 to ask taxration and e-file services Center where you can spreadquestions or to order formsavailable free to eligible tax- out your records and talk withand publications.payers. an IRS representative• TeleTax topics. Call face-to-face. No appointment• Check the status of your 2006 1-800-829-4477 to listen to is necessary, but if you pre-refund. Click on Where’s My pre-recorded messages cov- fer, you can call your localRefund. Wait at least 6 weeks ering various tax topics.
■
Page 264 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 267 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Accumulation distribution of No charitable deduction Aliens ......................2 0 7
trusts: f o r ...................1 5 3 Dual-status (See Dual-status10% tax for early withdrawal
taxpayers)Tax on ....................1 9 6 Foreign child ..............2 4 4from IRA or retirement plan
Filing required ............... 7Accuracy-related Medical and dental expenses of(See Early withdrawal from
Nonresident (See Nonresidentpenalties .................. 1 9 adopted child ...........1 3 4deferred interest account,
aliens)Taxpayer identificationACRS (Accelerated Costsubheading: Tax on)
Resident (See Resident aliens)number .............. 13, 35Recovery System):10-year tax option ........... 7 3
Alimony ............ 34, 124-127Rental property: Taxpayer identification numbers401(k) plans: Death of recipient(TINs) ..................2 0 7Alternative minimumTax treatment of spouse .................1 2 6t a x .................... 6 8 Advance earned incomecontributions ............. 4 7 Decrease in amount andcredit ............... 2 ,  8 ,  2 3 8Activities not for profit ...... 8 5403(b) plans: recapture rule ...........1 2 6Filing requirements (TableAddress:Rollovers ............. 74, 118 Deduction .................1 2 61-3) ...................... 8Change of ................. 1 8457 plans (See Section 457 Difference from one year toAge:Correcting label ............ 1 6deferred compensation plans) another of more thanForeign .................... 1 7 Children’s investments (See529 plans (See Qualified tuition $15,000 ..............1 2 6Children, subheading:Label ...................... 1 6programs) Definition of ...............1 2 4Investment income of childNo label received ........... 1 7591/2 rule ....................1 2 1 Form 1040 to be used:under age 18)P.O. box ................... 1 760 day rule .................1 1 7 Deduction for amountForm 1040EZ, taxpayer underService Centers ............ 1 7701/2 rule ....................1 1 4 paid ..................1 2 665 may use ............... 8Adjusted basis ........... 90-91 Income received, reportingGross income and filingDecreases to basis ......... 9 0 o f ....................1 2 6requirements (TableA Depreciation ............... 9 0 Recapture ..............1 2 71-1) ...................... 7Easements ................ 9 1Abandonment of home .....1 0 1 Instruments executed afterIRAs:Energy conservation subsidiesAbortion: 1984 ...................1 2 5Contribution cutoff at ageexclusion ................ 9 1Deductibility as medical Alimony requirements (Table701/2 ..................1 1 4Examples (Table 13-1) ..... 9 0expense ................1 3 5 18-1) .................1 2 6
Distribution prior to ageGifts ....................... 9 2Abroad, citizens traveling or Instruments executed before
5 9....................1 2 1Home sale (See Sale of home)working (See Citizens outside 1985 ...................1 2 5
Distribution required at ageImprovements .............. 9 0U.S.;  Foreign employment) Joint return of spouses not
701/2 ............. 119, 121Increases to basis .......... 9 0 allowed .................1 2 5Absence, temporary ..... 27, 30
Pension distributions required atLocal assessments ......... 9 0 Jointly owned home .......1 2 4Academic period (See name of
age 701/2 ................. 7 5 Separate residencesSales of property ........... 9 4benefit)
Retirement plan recipients over i n ....................1 2 5Section 179 deduction ...... 9 0Accelerated Cost Recovery age 75 .................. 7 2 Taxes and insuranceAdjusted gross income (AGI):System (ACRS): premiums ............1 2 5Roth IRAs ........... 122, 124(See also Deductions) .....1 2 7Rental property: Life insuranceStandard deduction for age 65Business expenses, limit onAlternative minimum premiums ...............1 2 4or older .................1 3 0deduction ...............1 7 9t a x .................... 6 8 Mortgage payments .......1 2 5Charitable contribution Age test ..................... 2 7Accelerated death Interest deduction .......1 4 3deduction limit ..........1 5 5 Agents (See alsobenefits ............... 81, 82 Payments designated as notItemized deduction Fiduciaries) ................ 9 6Accident insurance .......... 4 4 alimony .................1 2 5limit ............... 142, 182 Income paid to ............. 1 2Cafeteria plans ............. 4 9 Payments must be inMedical and dental expenses Signing return .............. 1 4Long-term care ......... 44, 49 cash ....................1 2 5and limit of AGI (See Adjusted gross incomeAccidental death Payments not includeddeduction .......... 133, 137 (AGI))benefits ................... 4 5 a s......................1 2 4Modified (See Modified adjusted Agricultural workers (SeeAccidents, car ..............1 5 8 Payments to thirdgross income (MAGI)) Farmworkers)Value determination .......1 6 0 party .............. 124, 125Retirement savings contributionWillful negligence or intentional Agriculture (See Farming) Penalty for failure to providecredit .................... 2 2act as cause ............1 5 8 Aircraft: social security number ofAdjustments ...............1 9 6Accountable plans for Charitable gift of, deduction for recipient ................1 2 6Administrators, estate (Seeemployee fair market value ........1 5 4 Recapture rule ............1 2 6Executors and administrators)reimbursements ..........1 7 6 Recipient reporting of ......1 2 6Airline club dues:Adopted child ........ 26, 27, 30Accountants: Reporting of income ....... 8 5 ,Not entertainmentEarned income credit ......2 3 2Basis to include fees of ..... 8 9 126expenses ...............1 6 9Adoption:CPA review courses .......1 8 4 Spouse defined for purposesAirplanes, donations of ....1 5 4ATIN ................. 13, 207Preparers of tax returns ..... 1 4 o f ......................1 2 4Airport transportation:Child tax credit (See also ChildAccounting methods ........ 1 2 Spouses cannot be members ofBusiness-related traveltax credit) ...............2 1 8Accrual method (See Accrual same household ........1 2 5expense ................1 6 7Credit Employer’s assistancemethod taxpayers) Substitute payments .......1 2 6Alaska:program ................2 4 4Cash method (See Cash Taxes and insurance paid onStandard mealCredits .............. 153, 243method taxpayers) home owned as tenants inallowance ...............1 6 7Married filingChange of: common ................1 2 5Alaska Permanent Fundseparately ............. 2 2Depreciation, to deduct Termination of and recapturedividends ................. 8 5unclaimed amount ..... 6 8 Taking ..................2 4 4 rule ....................1 2 6
Child’s dividends..........1 4 7Employer assistance ....... 4 5Accounting periods ......... 1 2 Alternative filing methods:Income from .............8 ,  6 3Employer’s assistanceCalendar year ....... 10, 12, 44 Electronic (See E-file)
Investment income not toprogram .................. 1Change in, standard deduction Alternative minimum taxinclude .................1 4 7not allowed .............1 3 0 Exception for adopted (AMT) ....................1 9 6
Alcohol rehabilitation centers:Fiscal year .......... 12, 40, 42 child ....................1 3 4 Accelerated depreciation
Deductibility of medicalFringe benefits ............. 4 4 Exemption for child ........1 5 3 a n d ..................... 6 8
expense ................1 3 5Expenses not deductible:Accrual method Child’s tax, figuring of......2 0 3
Alcoholic beverages:taxpayers ................. 1 2 Foster care prior to, no Credit for prior year tax ....2 4 5
Taxes paid during tax year, charitable IRA prohibited transactions Exempt-interest
deduction of ............1 3 9 deduction .............1 5 2 i n ......................1 2 0 dividends ................ 6 3
Publication 17 (2006) Page 265

Page 268 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet for Athletic events: Bar associations:Alternative minimum tax (AMT)
computation ........... 7 2 Charitable contributions, Charitable contributions(Cont.)
amount deductible .......1 5 1 t o ......................1 5 3Survivor annuities .......... 7 5Filing requirements (Table
1-3) ...................... 8 Trade of insurance policies and ATIN (Adoption taxpayer Bar employees:
annuities ................ 9 5 identification number) ..... 1 3Incentive stock option ........ 9 Tips (See Tip income)
Payments ................... 8 Unrecovered Attachment of wages ........ 1 2 Bar review courses .........1 8 4
investment ..............1 9 1Alternative motor vehicle Attachments to return ....... 1 3 Bargain sales:
Withholding ......... 14, 38, 70credit ....................2 4 5 As charitableAttorneys:
Amount of credit ...........2 4 5 Annulled marriages: contributions ............1 5 5Bar review courses ........1 8 4
How to take ...............2 4 5 Filing status ................ 2 0 Basis of purchase .......... 9 1Attorneys’ fees........ 190, 192
Phaseout .................2 4 5 Anthrax incidents (See Terrorist Barter income:Basis to include ............ 8 9
Recapture ................2 4 5 attacks) Definition of bartering ....... 8 0Social security and railroad
Amateur sports organizations: Form 1099-B ........... 42, 80Antiques (See Collectibles) retirement benefits,
Charitable contributions deductions for ............ 7 9 Basis:Appliances:
t o ......................1 5 0 Title to property, for preparation, Adjusted basis ............. 9 0Deterioration and damage, not
Ambulance service personnel: filing, etc. ................ 8 9 Allocation between businesscasualty loss ............1 5 8
Life insurance proceeds when Audits: and personal use ......... 8 9Appraisal fees ..............1 8 9death in line of duty ...... 8 2 Travel expense Bad debts .................. 9 9Donated property ..........1 5 3
Amended returns (See also records .................1 7 4 Bargain purchases ......... 9 1Not deductible asForm 1040X) ............... 1 8 Bonds ..................... 9 3Auto insurance:interest .................1 4 6Itemized deduction, change to Cost basis ................. 8 9Medical expenses covered by,Real estate transactions, whenstandard deduction ......1 3 1 not deductible ...........1 3 5 IRAs for nondeductiblerequired by lender ........ 9 0Standard deduction, change to contributions ..... 117, 120Automatic extension of time toAppraisals:itemized deductions .....1 3 1 Definition of ................ 8 9file ........................ 1 1Casualty or theft losses ....1 6 0American citizens abroad (See Gifts ....................... 9 2Form 4868 ................. 1 1Archer MSAs ................ 8 7Citizens outside U.S.) Home sales (See Sale of home)Automatic investment services:Contributions ............... 4 5Employment (See Foreign Improvements to realHolding period, determinationFiling requirements (Tableemployment) estate ................... 9 0o f ....................... 9 81-3) ...................... 8American Indians (See Indians) Inheritance ................. 9 2Automobiles (See Cars)Medical expenses paid forAmerican Samoa: Involuntary conversion ...... 9 1Awards (See Prizes and awards)decedent from ..........1 3 5Income from ................ 7 Like-kind exchanges ........ 9 5Away-from-home travel (SeeNot deductible as medicalAmortization: Other than cost ...... 91-93, 94Travel and transportationexpense ................1 3 5Bond premiums, treatment Points not to be included .... 9 0expenses)Armed forces: (See alsoo f ......................1 4 9 Property received forVeterans’ benefits) .... 48, 150, services ................. 9 1AMT (See Alternative minimum 151, 172 Real estate ................ 8 9tax (AMT)) BCombat zone: Restricted property ......... 9 1Annuities: (See also Babysitting (See also DomesticExtension to file return .... 1 1 Stock or stock rights ........ 6 2Rollovers) .................. 7 4 help) ...................... 4 3Signing return for Tax-exempt obligations:Cost computation .......... 7 1 Back pay, award for ......... 4 3spouse ................ 2 1 Bonds ................... 9 3Credit for elderly or disabled Emotional distress damagesDependency allotments ..... 3 1persons ................. 7 0 Transfers betweenunder Title VII of Civil RightsDisability pay ............... 4 8 spouses ............. 92, 95Decedent’s unrecovered Act of 1964 .............. 8 6Disability pensions ......... 4 9investment in ............ 1 4 Beetles:Backup withholding ..... 38, 42,GI Bill benefits ............. 3 3Early distributions from ..... 7 4 Damage or destruction to trees53Military ...................1 8 9Deferred annuity and plants, when casualtyDividend income ........... 6 0Military quarterscontracts .......... 74, 75 loss ....................1 5 9Penalties .................. 3 9allotments ............... 3 1Estimated tax .............. 7 0 Beneficiaries (See EstateBad check penalty .......... 1 5Naval officers on permanentExclusion limit .............. 7 2 beneficiaries;  TrustBad debts:duty aboard ship ........1 6 5Form 1099-R ............... 4 2 beneficiaries)Bank deposit, loss due to bank’sPermanent dutyGeneral Rule: Bequests (See Estateinsolvency oroverseas ...............1 6 5Annuity starting before beneficiaries;  Gifts;bankruptcy ..............1 5 9Real estate taxes whenNovember 19, 1996 .... 7 2 Inheritance)Reporting on Schedule Dreceiving housingNonqualified plans and Bingo ................. 151, 153(Form 1040) ..........1 5 9allowance .......... 141, 143qualified plans for Birth control pills ...........1 3 5Claim for refund ........ 19, 99Rehabilitative programrecipients over 75 Birth of child ................ 2 7Nonbusiness ............... 9 9payments ................ 4 8years .................. 7 2 Head of household, qualifyingRecovery .................. 8 2Reserves ....... 179, 187, 191Purchased annuities ...... 7 1 person to file as .......... 2 4Reporting of ................ 9 9Survivor’s annuity........ 7 5 Retirees’ pay: Social security number to beShort-term capital loss ...... 9 9Guaranteed payments ...... 7 1 Taxable income .......... 4 8 obtained ................. 3 5Baggage:IRAs as ...................1 1 4 Withholding .............. 3 6 Birth of dependent .......... 3 0Business-related travelJoint return ................ 7 1 Uniforms ..................1 8 9 Blackmail:expense ................1 6 7Worksheet ............... 7 3 Wages ..................... 4 8 Losses due to .............1 5 9Balance due ................1 9 6Loans from plan ............ 7 1 Art works: Blind persons:Bankruptcy:Lump-sum distributions ..... 7 3 As capital assets ........... 9 7 Exemption fromCanceled debt not deemed toMultiple plan benefits ...... 7 0 , Capital gains or losses from withholding .............. 3 7be income ............... 8 171 sale or trade of ..........1 0 7 Guide dogs, deductible asFinancial institution’sPartly taxable payments .... 7 1 Artists, performing (See medical expense ........1 3 5bankruptcy causingPurchased annuities ........ 7 1 Performing artists) Impairment-related workdeductible loss ..........1 5 9Reporting of ................ 7 1 As capital assets ............ 9 7 expenses, deductionReporting of ............1 6 3Retirement annuities (See also Assessments, local (See Local f o r......................1 3 7Banks:Retirement plans) ........ 7 0 assessments) Standard deduction for ....1 3 0Automatic investment service,Rollovers .................. 7 4 Assistance (See Tax help) Blood banks:determination of holdingSale of ..................... 9 8 Assistance, tax (See Tax help) No charitable deduction forperiod ................... 9 8Gain as ordinary
Assumption of mortgage .... 8 9 blood donations to ...... 151,IRAs with .................1 1 4income ................ 7 1
153Fees not included in Losses on deposits, whenSimplified method to calculate
basis .................... 9 0 Blue books to determine faircasualty losses ...... 98, 159tax-free part of annuity
market value .............1 5 4At-risk rules: Reporting of ............1 6 3payment ................. 7 1
Money market accounts .... 6 2Survivor’s annuity........ 7 5 Rental property ............. 6 9 Boarding houses ............ 6 6
Page 266 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 269 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Boats: Work-related education ....1 8 4 Net capital gain ....... 96, 106, Reporting of ...............1 7 4
107 Table 26-3 showing forms toCharitable gift of, deduction for Business organizations:
be used ..............1 7 9fair market value ........1 5 4 Included as investmentCharitable contributions
income ...............1 4 7 Sale, trade-in, or otherBoats, donations of ........1 5 4 t o ......................1 5 3
disposition ..............1 7 3Net long-term capitalBona fide business purpose: Business property:
Section 179 deductions ....1 7 3loss ....................1 0 6Travel expenses ..........1 6 6 As gift, adjusted basis
Work-related education,Sale of personal items ...... 8 8Work-related education ....1 8 2 f o r....................... 9 2
transportation for ........1 8 5Sale or trade of property heldBasis for depreciation ....... 9 3Bonds:
Cash:more than 1 year .... 98, 106Adjusted basis for .......... 9 3 Property use changed to,
Dividends paid as .......... 6 0Schedule D ...............1 0 5adjusted basis for ........ 9 3Amortization of
Rebates ................... 8 5Section 1250 gains from sale ofpremium ........... 149, 190 Sales or exchanges ........ 9 3
Sales of property for ........ 9 4real property ........ 96, 107As capital assets ........... 9 7 Like-kind exchanges ..... 9 5
Cash method taxpayers ..... 1 2State or local governmentClean renewable energy Business tax credits:
bonds, tax-exempt ....... 9 7 Bad debts .................. 9 9bonds ..................2 4 6 Claim for refund ............ 1 9 Points, deduction of .......1 4 3Tax rates .................1 0 7Convertible bonds .......... 9 5 Business use of home ......1 8 8 Real estate transactions, taxMaximum capital gain ratesDiscounted:
allocation ...............1 4 0(Table 16-1) ..........1 0 7Capital gain or loss ....... 9 7
Taxes paid during tax year,Total net loss .............1 0 6Gulf tax credit bonds .......2 4 6 C deduction of ............1 3 9Issued at discount .......... 5 8 Undistributed gains ........1 0 6Cafeteria plans .............. 4 9 Worthless securities andMarket discount bonds ...... 9 8 Credit for tax on ..... 62, 247Calendar year taxpayers: negotiable promissoryOriginal issue discount ...... 5 8 Car pools ..................1 7 2Accounting periods ..... 10, 12, notes .................... 9 4Redemption of ............. 9 4 Carrybacks:44 Cash rebates ................ 8 5Retirement of .......... 74, 94 Business tax creditFiling due date ............. 1 0 Casualties ..................1 0 4Sale of ..................... 5 7 carrybacks ............... 1 9California Nonoccupational Casualty insurance:Savings ................ 54, 55 Carryovers:Disability Benefit Premiums not in propertySold at premium, computation Capital loss ...............1 0 6Fund .....................1 3 9 basis .................... 8 9of adjusted basis ......... 9 3 Worksheet ..............1 0 6Campaign contributions .... 8 5 , Reimbursements from ...... 8 5State or local government, Charitable contributions, when151, 153tax-exempt .............. 9 7 Casualty losses ....... 158-164,deduction exceedsPresidential Election Campaign 189, 190Tax-exempt ................ 5 8 adjusted-gross-incomeFund .................... 1 3 Adjusted basis inBonuses ............. 37, 43, 88 limits ...................1 5 6Campaign expenses ........1 9 1 property .... 90, 91, 160, 164Bookkeeping (See Investment interest ........1 4 7Canada: Amount of loss ............1 5 9Recordkeeping requirements) Cars: (See also Standard mileageContributions to charitable Appraisals ................1 6 0Books to determine fair market rates) ......... 46, 88, 164, 172organizations in .... 150, 153 Bank deposit, loss due to bank’svalue .....................1 6 0 Accidents resulting in casualtyCanada, resident of ..... 26, 30 insolvency orBorrowed funds (See also loss ....................1 5 8Cancellation of debt: bankruptcy ..............1 5 9Loans) ................ 71, 148 Value determination .....1 6 0Exceptions to treatment as Costs:Used for charitable Willful negligence orincome .................. 8 1 Cleaning up or makingcontributions, deduction intentional act asForm 1099-C ............... 4 2 repairs ...............1 6 0f o r......................1 5 5 cause ................1 5 8 Photographs andCandidates for public office:Bottled water ...............1 3 5 Actual expenses ..... 172, 173 appraisals ............1 6 0Contributions to, no charitableBoy Scouts: Advertising displays on ....1 7 2 Deductible losses .........1 5 8deduction for ....... 151, 153Charitable contributions Allowances from $100 rule ...............1 6 2Capital assets:t o ................. 150, 151 employers ..............1 7 6 When to take (TableCoal and iron ore ........... 8 4Breach of contract: As capital assets ........... 9 7 25-2) .................1 6 4Definition of ................ 9 7Damages as income ........ 8 6 Blue book to determine fair Deduction limits ...........1 6 2Capital expenses ............ 3 3employment ...............1 8 7 market value ............1 5 4 For personal property (TableCapital gains:Bribes ....................... 8 5 Books to determine fair market 25-1) .................1 6 3Total net gain .............1 0 6 value ...................1 6 0Bribes and illegal Definition of casualty ......1 5 8Capital gains or losses ..... 9 6 ,payments ................1 9 1 Business and personal use, Disasters (See Disaster relief)99, 105, 108 allocation between ..... 173,Brokers: Employer’s emergency disasterBad debts as short-term capital 174Form 1099-B ........... 42, 94 fund ....................1 6 0loss ..................... 9 9 Business-related travelIRAs with .................1 1 4 Fair market value ofCarryover of ..............1 0 6 expenses ...............1 6 7Commissions ...........1 1 4 property ................1 5 9Worksheet ..............1 0 6 Car pools .................1 7 2Receiving dividends, reporting Form 4684 to be filed ......1 5 8
Character of gain ........... 9 6 Charitable gift of, deduction foron Form 1099-MISC ...... 6 0 Insurance proceeds, treatment
Character of loss ........... 9 6 fair market value ........1 5 4 o f ......................1 6 0Burglary:
Child’s distributions and Charitable organization service, Net operating losses .......1 6 4Losses due to .............1 5 9
dividends, reporting use for ............. 152, 156 Nondeductible losses ......1 5 8Burial expenses (See
o f ................. 147, 199 Depreciation ..............1 7 3 Proof of loss ..............1 5 9Funerals) .................1 9 1
Collectibles ...............1 0 7 Donations of ..............1 5 4 Property used partly forBusiness associates (See also
Deductions ...............1 0 6 Electric vehicles (See Electric business and partly forEntertainment
Limit on .................1 0 6 cars) personal purposes ......1 6 2expenses) ........... 167, 169
Reimbursement ...........1 6 0Married filing Employer-provided ......... 4 5Business travel to meet ....1 7 1
separately ............. 2 2 Reporting of gain orFixed and variable rateTravel expenses of, paying
loss ............... 163, 164Distributions ............... 6 2 (FAVR) .................1 7 7f o r......................1 6 6
Single casualty on multipleForm 1040 or 1040A to be Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how toBusiness expenses: (See also
properties ...............1 6 2used .............8 ,  63, 106 fill out ..................1 7 9Entertainment
Cell phone .................1 8 7Hobbies, sales from Hauling tools orexpenses) ........... 167, 169
collections ............... 8 7 instruments .............1 7 2 Cemeteries:Job search expenses ....... 8 7
Holding period, determination Interest on loans, not Charitable contributionsMeal expenses (See Meal and
o f ....................... 9 8 deductible ..............1 4 8 t o ......................1 5 0lodging expenses)
How to report .............1 0 5 Leased vehicles ...........1 7 3 Certificate, mortgageReimbursements ....... 37, 43
Installment sales and ......1 0 5 Medical transportation .... 135, credit ....................2 4 4Returning excess for
136Lump-sum distributions frombusiness expenses .... 3 7 , Certificates of deposit (CDs)
pensions and Parking (See Parking fees)177 (See also Individual retirement
annuities ................ 7 3Travel (See Travel and Personal property taxes on, arrangements (IRAs)) ...... 5 8 ,
Mutual funds paying ........ 6 2transportation expenses) deduction of ............1 4 1 1 1 3
Publication 17 (2006) Page 267

Page 270 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chambers of commerce: Token items given by Social security number to be Convention delegates,
recipients ...............1 5 1 obtained ............... 3 5 deduction of unreimbursedCharitable contributions
expenses ...............1 5 2t o ................. 151, 153 Volunteers, deductibility of Care providers (See also Child
contributions (TableEntertainment expenses for care) .................... 4 3 Citizen or resident test ...... 2 6
24-2) ...................1 5 2attending meetings ......1 6 9 Child’s tax, figuring of......2 0 3 Citizens outside U.S.:
Written acknowledgement from Alternative minimumChange of address .......... 1 8 Business travel outside
recipient t a x ...................2 0 3 U.S. ............... 168, 169Change of name ......... 13, 42
organization ............1 5 6 Credit for (See Child and Self-employedChaplains: Written acknowledgment from dependent care credit;  Child persons ..............1 6 8Life insurance proceeds when recipient tax credit) Standard mealdeath in line of duty ...... 8 2 organization ....... 149, 156 Custody of ................. 2 7 allowance ............1 6 7Charitable Charitable deduction for living Death of child: Earned income exclusion .... 2contributions ........ 149-158 expenses ................1 5 6 Head of household, qualifying Employment ( See Foreign$250 or more, recordkeeping
Charity benefit events: person to file as ........ 2 4 employment)requirements ............1 5 6
Deduction amount for charitable Extension of time to file ..... 1 1Deductions ...............2 0 2$500 or more noncash
contributions ............1 5 1 Filing requirements .......... 7Dividends of (See this heading:contribution:
Withholding from IRACheck-writing fees .........1 9 1 Investment income of childForm 8283 to be
distributions .............1 2 0under age 18)Checklists:used .................1 5 8
Earnings of ................. 7 Civic associations:Medical and dental expenseBargain sales as ..........1 5 5
Charitable contributionsElection to use parent’s return,deductions (TableBenefit received as result of
t o ......................1 5 3effect of making .........1 9 821-1) ...................1 3 5contribution ........ 150, 153
Contributions to, no charitableInclusion of child’s income onCapital gain property as Checks:
deduction for ............1 5 1parent’s return (Figuredonation ................1 5 5 As charitable
31-A) .................1 9 9 Civil defense organizations:Limit on deduction ...... 155, contributions ............1 5 5
Filing requirements .......... 7 Charitable contributions156 Canceled checks as evidence of
t o ......................1 5 0As dependents (Tabletravel expenses .........1 7 4Carryover of excess
1-2) .................... 7deduction ...............1 5 6 Constructive receipt of ...... 1 2 Civil service retirement
Payment of tax ............. 1 5Cash, recordkeeping Gifts to ............... 53, 202 benefits ................... 7 0
requirements ............1 5 6 Penalty if not honored ...... 1 5 Income, calculation of .....1 9 9 Civil suits (See also Damages
Deductions: Capital gainsChild and dependent care from lawsuits) .............. 8 6
30% limit of adjusted gross distributions ..........1 9 9credit ...................... 8 Civil tax penalties (See
income ...............1 5 5 Due diligence .............2 0 8 Investment income of child Penalties)
50% limit of adjusted gross Earned income ............2 0 7 under age 18 ........... 6 0 , Clergy ........................ 7income ...............1 5 5 Full-time student ..........2 0 7 198-203 Contributions that can be spentExamples of (Table Married filing separately .... 2 2 Dependent filing requirements as individual wishes, not24-1) .................1 5 1 Payments to relatives ......2 0 8 (Table 1-2) ............. 7 deductible charitable
Limits on .......... 150, 155 Form 8615, use of (FigureChild born alive ............. 2 7 contribution .............1 5 3
Year to claim 31-B) .................2 0 0 Housing ................... 4 7Child care:deduction .............1 5 5 General rules ...........1 9 8 Real estate taxes whenBabysitting ................. 4 3Definition of ...............1 4 9 Interest and dividends .....7 , receiving housingCare providers ............. 4 3Dwelling unit used as 8, 60 allowance ....... 141, 143Credit (See Child andhome .................... 6 7 Investment income Life insurance proceeds whendependent care credit)Fair market value of property defined ...............2 0 2 chaplain died in line ofExpenses .................. 3 3contributions ...... 150, 154, duty ..................... 8 2Parental information,Nursing care for healthy baby,155 Pensions .................. 4 7providing of ...........2 0 0not deductible as medicalRecordkeeping Special income rules ....... 4 7expense ................1 3 5 Parents’ election to report onrequirements .........1 5 7 Form 1040 .....7 ,  147, 198 Clerical help, deductibilityChild custody ............... 2 7Gifts to reduce public Trust income ............2 0 2 of ........................1 8 9Child support ............... 8 6debt ..................... 1 6 Kidnapped ................. 2 7 Clients (See also EntertainmentAlimony, differenceItemized deductions, limit Net investment income, figuring expenses) ........... 167, 169from .......... 124, 125, 126o n......................1 4 9 o f ......................2 0 0 Business travel to meet ....1 7 1Child support under pre-1985Large quantities of Nontaxable income ........2 0 2 Travel expenses of, payingagreement ................ 3 4items ...................1 5 5 f o r......................1 6 6Property received as gift,Child tax credit ......... 7 ,  8 ,  2 6Less than $250, recordkeeping income from ............2 0 2 Closing costs:Additional credit ...........2 1 8requirements ............1 5 6 Signing return, parent for Real propertyAmount of credit ...........2 1 8Noncash contributions, child ..................... 1 4 transactions ............. 8 9Claiming, procedure for ....2 1 8recordkeeping Standard deduction for . . . 130, Sale of home ..............1 0 1Form 8812, completed .....2 1 9requirements ............1 5 7 131 Clothing:Limits ................. 22, 218Nonqualified Stillborn ................... 2 7 Military ...................1 8 9Modified adjusted grossorganizations ...........1 5 3 Support of (See Child support) Moth damage, not casualtyincome ...............2 1 8Not deductible ............1 5 3 Tax credit (See Child tax credit) loss ....................1 5 8Married filing separately .... 2 2Ordinary income property as Tentative tax figured at parent’s Uniforms:Qualifying child ............2 1 8donation ................1 5 5 tax rate .................2 0 2 Charitable organizationWithholding, checkingProperty contributions .....1 5 3 Transporting school requiring, deduction for costamount .................2 1 9Decreased in value ......1 5 5 children .................. 8 8 and upkeep of ........1 5 2Child, qualifying ............. 2 6Increased in value .......1 5 5 Used clothing, charitableChronic illness:Childcare:Publication 78, list of qualified deduction for fair marketAccelerated payment of lifeCredit ....................2 0 5organizations ...........1 4 9 value ...................1 5 4insurance proceeds (SeeProvider:Qualified organizations ....1 4 9 work ......................1 8 8Accelerated death benefits)Taxpayer identificationTypes of ................1 4 9
Club dues and membershipLong-term care (See Long-termnumber ...............2 0 8Written statement fees:care insurance contracts)Children (See alsofrom ..................1 5 1
EntertainmentChurch employees:Adoption) ............. 45, 153Recordkeeping expenses ...............1 6 9Filing requirements (TableAdditional credit on child taxrequirements ............1 5 6
Co-owners:1-3) ...................... 8credit ...................2 1 8Schedule A (Form 1040) to be
Dwelling unit used as home byChurches, temples, etc.:Adoption (See Adopted child)used for deductions .....1 5 8
co-owner, rental income andCharitable contributionsBabysitters ................. 4 3Time of making contribution,
expense allocation ....... 6 6t o ................. 150, 151how to determine ........1 5 5 Birth of child:
Coal and iron ore ............ 8 4To individuals, not Head of household, qualifying 50% limit on
deductible ......... 151, 153 person to file as ........ 2 4 deduction .............1 5 5 Coins (See Collectibles)
Page 268 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 271 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Collectibles: Period of ownership and Cost basis ................... 8 9 Education (See Education
u s e.....................1 0 3 credits)As capital assets ........... 9 7 IRAs for nondeductible
Electric vehicles (See ElectricGains or losses from sale or contributions ....... 117, 120Confidential information:
cars)trade of .................1 0 7 Cost-of-livingPrivacy Act and paperwork
Empowerment zone andIRA investment in .........1 2 0 allowances ................ 4 4reduction information ...... 3
renewal communityCollective bargaining Country clubs:Travel expenses and ......1 7 4 employment credit .......1 9 5agreements ............... 3 8 Charitable contributionsConservation: Excess withholding of socialCollege professor: t o ......................1 5 3Charitable contribution to security and railroadResearch expenses .......1 8 8 Dues:promote, recordkeeping retirement tax (See ExcessCharitable deduction notColleges and universities: requirement .............1 5 7 withholding credit)allowed ...............1 5 1Charitable contributions Constructive receipt of Federal telephone excise taxEntertainment expenset o ................. 150, 151 income ................ 12, 59 (See Federal telephonededuction not50% limit on Contributions (See also excise tax credit)allowed ...............1 6 9deduction .............1 5 5 Charitable For the disabled ...........2 1 4Athletic events, amount Coupon bonds .............. 5 9contributions) ...... 16, 67, 85, For the elderly ............2 1 4deductible ............1 5 1 Court awards and damages149-158, 151, 153 Foreign tax (See Foreign taxEducation costs (See Qualified (See Damages from lawsuits)Nontaxable combat credit)tuition programs) Cousin ...................... 3 0p a y................ 113, 114 Gulf tax credit bonds (SeeEducation costs: Coverdell ESAs:Political ...................1 9 2 Credit for clean renewableEmployer-provided Additional tax on ..........1 9 6Reservist repayments .... 113, energy bonds or Gulf taxeducational assistance Filing requirements (Table114 credit bonds)(See Educational 1-3) ...................... 8 Health coverage tax (SeeRetirement (See specific type ofassistance) CPAs (See Accountants) Health coverage tax credit)plan)Combat zone: Credit card payment of taxes: Hope scholarship ........... 2 2Controlled corporations:Extension to file return ...... 1 1 Estimated tax .............. 4 1 Lifetime learning (See LifetimeNontaxable stock purchaseSigning return for learning credit)Credit cards:o f ....................... 9 5spouse .................. 2 1 Mortgage interest (SeeAnnual fees, notRelated partyComments on publication .... 4 Mortgage interest credit)deductible ..............1 4 8transactions ............. 9 6Commission drivers: Nonrefundable credits .....2 4 3Benefits, taxability ofConventions:Deduction of expenses ....1 7 5 Other than those on Forminsurance ................ 8 6Delegates:Commissions ............... 3 7 1040A, Form 1040 to beCharitable contributionsDeduction of unreimbursedAdvance ................... 4 3 used ..................... 9charged to ..............1 5 5expenses .............1 5 2IRAs with brokers .........1 1 4 Refundable .......... 243, 246Finance charges, notTravel expenses ........1 6 9Property basis to include when Residential energy credits (Seedeductible ..............1 4 8Travel expenses ..........1 6 9buyer pays ............... 8 9 Residential energy credit)Payment of taxes ..... 3 ,  11, 15Work-related education,Sharing of (kickbacks) ...... 8 7 Retirement savings contributionConvenience fee of servicededuction of travel expensesUnearned, deduction for (See Retirement savingsproviders .............. 1 5for overseasrepayment of ............. 4 3 contribution credit)Installmentconventions .............1 8 5 Telephone excise tax paid (SeeCommodities: agreements ............ 1 6
Conversion (See specific Credit for federal telephoneDerivative financial Credit for child and dependentretirement or IRA plan) excise tax paid)instruments .............. 9 7 care expenses ...........1 9 7
Convertible stocks and Cremation:Common law marriage ...... 2 0 Credit for clean renewablebonds ..................... 9 5 Not deductible as medicalCommunist organizations: energy bonds or Gulf expense ................1 3 5Cooperative housing:Charitable contributions bonds ....................2 4 6
Criminal prosecutions:t o ......................1 5 3 Dwelling unit used as Amount of credit ...........2 4 6
Travel expenses for federalhome .................... 6 4Community property ..... 6 ,  5 6 , How to take ...............2 4 6
staff ....................1 6 692 Mortgage interest Who can claim ............2 4 6
Cruises:Alimony, difference statements ..............1 4 6 Credit for federal telephone
Travel expenses whenfrom ....................1 2 4 Real estate taxes, deduction excise tax paid ...........2 4 7
incidental businessIRAs ......................1 1 4 o f ......................1 3 9 Actual amount ............2 4 8
activities ................1 6 8Married filing separately .... 2 2 Taxes that are deductible How to request ............2 4 8 Work-related education,Medical and dental (Table 22-1) ..........1 4 1 Standard amount ..........2 4 8 deduction ofexpenses ...............1 3 3 Sale or trade of: Credit for the elderly or the expenses ...............1 8 5Commuting expenses ..... 172, Form 1099-S to disabled ..................1 9 7 Custodial fees ..............1 8 9191 report ................1 0 5 Nontaxable payments .....2 1 5
Employer-provided commuter Custody of child ............. 2 7Period of ownership and Credit reports:vehicle .................. 4 6 Customers (See alsou s e ..................1 0 2 Costs not included in property
Compensation (See also Wages Entertainmentbasis .................... 9 0Cooperatives:
and salaries) ............... 4 3 expenses) ........... 167, 169Fees for, notPatronage dividends ........ 6 3 Business travel to meet ....1 7 1Defined for IRA deductible ..............1 4 8Copyrights .................. 9 7 Travel expenses of, payingpurposes ...............1 1 3 Credits ................ 195, 197Infringement damages ...... 8 6 f o r......................1 6 6Defined for Roth IRA Alternative minimum tax, creditRoyalties .................. 8 3purposes ...............1 2 2 for prior year tax ........2 4 5Corporations (See also SEmployee .................. 4 3 Alternative motor vehicle credit Dcorporations) ............... 8 2Miscellaneous (See Alternative motor vehicle Daily allowance (See Per diem)Controlled corporations .... 9 5 ,compensation ............ 4 3 credit)96 Damage to property (SeeNonemployee .............. 8 6 Capital gains, undistributed, Casualty losses)Director fees asComputation of tax .......... 1 3 credit for tax on ..... 62, 247 Disasters (See Disaster relief)self-employmentEqual amounts ............. 1 3 Changing claim ............ 1 8income .................. 8 6 Damages ...................1 8 7Negative amounts .......... 1 3 Child and dependent care (SeeReorganizations and nontaxable Damages from lawsuits ..... 8 6Rounding off dollars ........ 1 3 Child and dependent caretrade of stock ............ 9 5 Medical expenses as part ofComputer ..................1 8 7 credit) settlement ..............1 3 7Corrections (See Errors) Child tax (See Child tax credit)Condemnation of Dating your return ........... 1 4Cosmetic surgery:property ............. 104, 158 Clean renewable energy bonds
Daycare centers (See Child andNot deductible as medical (See Credit for cleanBasis computation .......... 9 1
dependent care credit;  Childexpense ................1 3 5 renewable energy bonds orDisaster areas,
care)Cosmetics: Gulf tax credit bonds)government-ordered
De minimis benefits ......... 4 5demolition of unsafe Not deductible as medical Earned income ( See Earned
home ...................1 5 8 expense ................1 3 5 income credit) Deadlines (See Due dates)
Publication 17 (2006) Page 269

Page 272 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Death (See Decedents) Long-term care insurance Deceased dependent’s medical Impairment-related work
contracts ...............1 3 5 and dental expenses ....1 3 5 expenses of ....... 137, 180Death benefits:
Medical expenses (See Medical Disabled dependent care Work-relatedAccelerated ............ 81, 82
and dental expenses) expenses, deduction education .............1 8 6Life insurance proceeds (See
Mortgage interest (See f o r......................1 3 6Life insurance) Income .................... 4 9
Mortgages)Public safety officers who died Exemption for ........... 25-34 Insurance costs ............ 4 9
Not itemizing, use of Formor were killed in line of duty, Filing requirements .......... 7 Military and government
1040A .................... 8tax exclusion ............. 8 2 Earned income, unearned pensions ................ 4 9
Pass-through entities ......1 8 9Death of child ............... 2 7 income, and gross income Public assistance
Penalties, no deduction levels (Table 1-2) ....... 7Death of dependent ......... 3 0 benefits .................. 8 5
permitted ...............1 4 8 Married, filing jointDebt instruments (See Bonds or Reporting of disability pensionPenalty on early withdrawal of return ................... 2 6Notes) income .................. 4 9savings ................... 8 Medical and dental expenses Retirement, pensions, andDebts (See also Bad Performing artists’ o f ......................1 3 4 profit-sharing plans ....... 4 9debts) ................. 19, 82 expenses ...............1 8 0 Qualifying child ........ 26, 134Canceled (See Cancellation of Signing of return byPrepaid insurance Qualifying relative ..... 29, 134debt) court-appointedpremiums ...............1 3 5Nonrecourse ............... 8 0 Social security number .... 1 3 , representative ........... 1 4Prescription medicines .....1 3 5Paid by another ............ 1 2 35 Social security and railroadRental expenses ....... 64, 68Payoff of debt included in sales Adoption taxpayer retirement benefits,Repayments ............... 8 3transaction ............... 9 4 identification deductions for ............ 7 9Section 179 deductions:Public, gifts to reduce ....... 1 6 number ............ 13, 35 Special school or home for,Adjustment to basisRecourse .................. 8 0 Alien dependents ........ 3 5 deductibility of medicalf o r .................... 9 0Refund offset against ...... 1 0 , expense ................1 3 5Standard deduction for ....1 3 1Car expenses ...........1 7 315 Terrorist attack as cause ofTravel expenses for .......1 6 6Self-employed persons:Deceased taxpayers (See injury, disability paymentsDependents not allowed toHealth insuranceDecedents) excluded fromclaim dependents ......... 2 6premiums ............1 3 8 taxation .................. 7 0Decedents (See also Executors Depletion allowance ......... 8 4Social security and railroadand administrators) .......... 7 Workers’ compensation..... 5 0Deposits:retirement benefits ....... 7 9Capital loss of .............1 0 6 Disability:Loss on ...................1 9 0StandardDeceased spouse ........... 7 Income ...................2 1 5Losses on ............ 98, 159deduction ........... 130-131Personal exemption ...... 2 5 Disability benefits:Reporting of ............1 6 3Stop-smokingDue dates ................. 1 1 Earned income credit ......2 3 1Depreciation:programs ...............1 3 5Filing requirements .......... 7 Disability insurance payments:Adjustment to basis for ..... 9 0Student loan interest deductionFuneral expenses .........1 5 3 Earned income credit ......2 3 1Alternative minimum tax and(See Student loans)Medical and dental Disability, permanent and totalacceleratedTheft loss .................1 9 0expenses ...............1 3 5 disability .................2 1 4depreciation ............. 6 8Transportation expenses (SeeSavings bonds ............. 5 6 Disaster Assistance Act ofCars ......................1 7 3Travel and transportationSpouse’s death ............ 2 1 1988:expenses) Cell phone ................1 8 7Standard deduction ........1 3 0
Withholding ................ 3 8Union dues (See Labor unions) Change of use ofTransfer of property at
Work-related education ....1 8 4 property ................. 9 3 Disaster relief (See also Terroristdeath .................... 9 3
Computer .................1 8 7 attacks) ............ 49, 70, 161Deeds:Declaration of rights of
Correcting amountPreparation costs for ......1 4 6 Cash gifts to victims .......1 6 1taxpayers:
claimed .................. 6 8Recording fees, basis to Disaster Relief and EmergencyIRS request for
include .................. 9 0 Form 4562: Assistance Act:information ............... 3
Rental propertyDeferred annuity contracts (See Grants ................... 8 5Deduction:
depreciation ........... 6 8Annuities) UnemploymentCosts of discrimination
Home computer ...........1 8 9 assistance ............. 8 4Deferred compensation:suits ..................... 8 6
Property used in trade orLimit ....................... 4 7 Employer’s emergency disasterDeductions: (See also Standard
business, as noncapitalNonqualified plans .......... 4 4 fund ....................1 6 0deduction) ...... 22, 25, 34, 82,
assets ................... 9 7 Government-ordered demolitionDeferred compensation plans99, 106, 130, 143, 146, 167,
Real property: or relocation of home that is(See Retirement plans)169
Gain from disposition of unsafe due to ...........1 5 8Alimony, deductible by Delinquent taxes:
property .......... 68, 104 Grants or payments ........ 8 5payer .............. 124, 126 Real estate transactions, tax
Land, no depreciationBusiness expenses (See Replacement of lost orallocation ...............1 4 0
o f ..................... 6 8Business expenses) destroyed property ......1 6 1Delivery services ..........3 ,  1 0
Rental property ......... 64, 68Casualty losses (See Capital Disclosure statement ........ 2 0Business-related travel
losses) Designated Rothexpense ................1 6 7 Discount, bonds and notes
Changing claim after filing, need account ............ 70, 71, 74 issued at .................. 5 8Demutualization of lifeto amend ................ 1 8 Defined. ................... 7 0insurance companies ..... 9 5 Discounted debt instruments:Charitable contributions (See Destroyed records .........1 7 4 (See also Original issueDental expenses (See Medicalalso Charitable Diaper service ..............1 3 5 discount (OID)) ............. 4 2and dental expenses)contributions) ....... 149-158 Capital gain or loss ......... 9 7Direct deposit of refunds .... 1 4Dentures:Dental expenses (See Medical Discounts:Deductibility as medical Directors’ fees .............. 8 6and dental expenses) expense ................1 3 5 Employee discounts, effect onDisabilities, persons with: (SeeDepreciation ............... 9 0 basis .................... 9 1Dependent care: Physically or mentally not ableEstate ....................1 8 9 Benefits ............. 205, 209 to care for oneself.) ........2 0 5 Distributions: (See alsoFee-basis government Center ....................2 0 8 Dividends) ............. 42, 74Accrued leave payment ..... 4 9officials .................1 7 9 Credit for .................2 0 5 Early (See Early withdrawalArmed forces .............. 4 8Impairment-related work from deferred interestDependent taxpayer test .... 2 6 Blind (See Blind persons)expenses .......... 137, 180 account)Cafeteria plans ............. 4 9Dependent’s educationInterest (See Interest payments)
Liquidating distributions ..... 6 2expenses, claiming: Credit for (See Elderly orInvestment expenses ......1 4 7
Lump sum (See Lump-sumEducation credit ...........2 2 5 disabled, credit for)IRA contributions (See
distributions)Dependent who is disabled,Dependents (See also Child taxIndividual retirement
Nondividenddeduction for carecredit) ............... 7 ,  8 ,  1 3 4arrangements (IRAs))
distributions .............. 6 2expenses ...............1 3 6Birth of .................... 3 0Itemizing (See Itemized
Public safety employees .... 7 0Expenses for ..............1 9 1Born and died withindeductions)
year ................. 13, 35Jury duty pay you gave to your Guide dogs, deductible as Qualified charitable ....... 113,
employer ................. 8 Death of ................... 3 0 medical expense ........1 3 5 1 1 9
Page 270 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 273 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Doctors’ bills (See Medical and IRAs: Education expenses:Distributions: (Cont.)
dental expenses) Employer-provided (SeeEarly distributions,Qualified reservist ...... 70, 75,
Educational assistance)defined ...............1 2 1113 Documentary evidence:
Tuition (See Qualified tuitionRequired minimum distributions Penalties .......... 119, 121Recordkeeping
programs)(See Individual retirement Section 457 deferredrequirements ............1 7 3
arrangements (IRAs); Work-related education,compensation plans ...... 7 4Domestic help:
Pensions) deduction ofTax on ..................... 7 4Withholding ................ 3 6
Return of capital ............ 6 2 expenses ...............1 8 5Earned income .............2 3 6Domestic help, no exemption
District of Columbia: Educational assistance:Child and dependent carefor ........................ 2 6
First-time homebuyer Employer-provided ......... 4 5credit ...................2 0 7Domestic relations orders,credit ...................1 0 1 Scholarships (See ScholarshipsDefined:qualified (QDROs):
and fellowships)Dividends: (See also Form For purposes of standardRollover of retirement plan1099-DIV) .............. 60-63 Tuition (See Qualified tuitiondeduction .............1 3 1distribution ............... 7 4 programs)Alaska Permanent Fund (See Dependent filing requirementsDonations (See CharitableAlaska Permanent Fund Educational institution (See(Table 1-2) ................ 7contributions)dividends) Eligible educational institution)Employee .................2 3 1Down paymentAs stock dividends and stock Educational organizations:Self-employed ............2 3 1assistance ................ 8 6rights .................... 6 2 As related party inEarned income credit ...... 197,Droughts:Backup withholding ......... 6 0 transactions ............. 9 6229Losses of property dueBeneficiary of estate or trust Charitable contributions2006 changes ............... 1t o ......................1 5 8receiving ................ 6 0 t o ................. 150, 151Advance ..................2 ,  8Drug or alcohol rehabilitationBuying more stock with ..... 6 2 50% limit onFiling requirements (Tablecenters:Defined .................... 6 0 deduction .............1 5 51-3) .................... 8Deductibility of medicalExempt-interest EE series bonds (See U.S.Amount of earned income .... 1expense ................1 3 5dividends ................ 6 3 savings bonds)Considered unmarried ...... 2 3Drugs:Expenses related to, deduction EIC (See Earned income credit)Disability benefits ..........2 3 1As medical expenses:o f ....................... 6 3 EITC Assistant .............2 2 9Disability insuranceOver-the-counter drugs, notFees to collect ............1 8 9 Elderly or disabled, creditpayments ...............2 3 1deductible ............1 3 5Foreign income ............ 6 0 for ......................... 8Filing claim ................. 7Prescription medicines,Form 1040A, use of ......... 8 Married filing separately .... 2 2Foster child ...............2 3 2deductibility ...........1 3 5Form 1099-DIV (See Form Elderly persons (See alsoInvestment income, limitDry cleaning:1099-DIV) Pensions) .................. 7 0o n........................ 1Business-related travelHolding period, determination Credit for (See Elderly orMarried filing separately .... 2 2expense ................1 6 7o f ....................... 9 8 disabled, credit for)Military personnel .........2 3 3Dual-status taxpayers ........ 7Insurance dividends ........ 6 3 Exemption fromSocial security card ........2 3 3Money market funds ........ 6 2 Joint returns not withholding .............. 3 7Social security number ....2 3 3Nominees receiving on behalf of available ................. 2 1 Home for the aged ......... 3 1Two persons with sameanother .................. 6 0 Standard deduction ........1 3 0 Long-term care (See Long-termqualifying child ........... 2 8Nondividend Due dates ................... 1 0 care insurance contracts)Earthquakes (See also Disasterdistributions .............. 6 2 2006 dates (Table 1-5) ..... 1 0 Nutrition Program for therelief) .....................1 6 1Ordinary dividends ......... 6 0 Disaster areas, postponed Elderly ................... 8 5Casualty loss causedPatronage dividends ........ 6 3 deadlines ...............1 6 3 Standard deduction for age 65b y......................1 5 8Qualified ............... 61, 63 Extension (See Extension of or older .................1 3 0Easements:Real estate investment trusts time to file) Tax Counseling for theAdjustment to basis for ..... 9 1(REITs) paying ........... 6 2 Nonresident aliens’ Elderly ................... 1 0Education:Redemption treated as ..... 9 4 returns .................. 1 1 Election precinct officials:Savings bond program ...... 5 6Reinvestment plans ........ 6 2 Due diligence: Fees, reporting of .......... 8 6Education credits: (See HopeReporting of ................ 6 3 Child and dependent care Elective deferrals (See alsocredit; Lifetime learningAs interest ............... 6 0 credit ...................2 0 8 Retirement plans) .......... 7 0credit) ................. 8 ,  2 2 6Scrip dividends ............. 6 3 Dues: Limits ...................... 4 7Academic period ..........2 2 3Sold stock ................. 6 0 Chamber of Commerce ....1 8 7 Elective surgery:Can you claim (FigureStockholder debts when Club ......................1 9 1 Not deductible as medical35-A) ...................2 2 3canceled as .............. 8 0 Union .....................1 8 8 expense ................1 3 5Comparison chart (TableVeterans’ insurance ........ 6 3 Dwelling units: (See also Electric cars:35-1) ...................2 2 2Divorced parents ............ 2 7 Vacation homes) .... 24, 66, 68 Credit ............... 172, 245Dependent’s educationDivorced parents, special Cooperative (See Cooperative Amount of ..............2 4 5expenses, claiming ......2 2 5rule ......................2 3 4 housing) How to take .............2 4 6Eligible educationalDivorced taxpayers (See also Defined .................... 6 6 Qualified electricinstitution ...............2 2 3Alimony) ................... 8 5 vehicle ...............2 4 5Renting (See Rental income Expenses, qualifiedChild and dependent care and expenses) Recapture of ............2 4 5education ........... 223-225credit ...................2 0 7 Credits:Form 8863, completedChild custody .............. 2 7 Filing requirements (Tablesample .................2 2 7Definition of divorce instrument E 1-3) .................... 8General requirements .....2 2 2for purposes of E-file .................... 3 ,  5 ,  9 Electronic filing (See E-file)Income limits ..............2 2 5alimony .................1 2 4 Extensions of time to file .... 1 1 Electronic paymentMarried filing separately . . . 22,Estimated tax payments .... 4 2
Forms 8453 and 8453-OL for options .................3 ,  1 5222Filing status ............ 20, 21 signature requirements .... 9 Credit card ............. 15, 41Modified adjusted gross incomeIRAs ................. 115, 118
On time filing ............... 1 0 Electronic Federal Tax Payment(MAGI) .................2 2 5Medical and dental expenses of
System (EFTPS) ..... 16, 41Phaseout of credit .........2 2 5Early withdrawal from deferredchildren of ..............1 3 4
Electronic fundsinterest account: Qualified educationMortgage interest, payment as
withdrawal ........ 15, 35, 41expenses ........... 223-225Annuities .................. 7 4alimony .................1 4 3
Electronic reporting:Recapture of ................ 8Form 1099-R reporting (SeePersonal exemption ........ 2 5
Returns (See E-file)Filing requirements (TableForm 1099-R)Real estate taxes, allocation
1-3) .................... 8 Tip statement from employeesForm 5329 reporting (See Formo f ......................1 4 1
to employers ............. 5 1Timing of ...............2 2 65329)Transfers between
Refund of expenses .......2 2 3 Eligible educational institution:spouses ............. 92, 96 Higher education expenses,
Tuition deduction and ......2 2 3 Education credits ..........2 2 3exception fromUse of home after
penalty .................1 1 3divorce .................1 0 3 Who cannot claim ..... 222-223 Foreign schools ...........1 2 8
Publication 17 (2006) Page 271

Page 274 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Taxes: Estates: (See also Estate Taxable exchange,Eligible educational institution:
beneficiaries) .............. 8 6 defined .................. 9 1FICA withholding (See(Cont.)
Withholding) Income .................... 8 6 Excise taxes: (See alsoStudent loan interest
Tip income .......... 8 ,  9 ,  5 1 Investment interest ........1 4 7 Penalties) .................1 1 9deduction ...............1 2 8
Tax (See Estate tax) Basis to include ............ 8 9Employment taxes (See alsoEligible foster child ...... 27, 30
Deductibility (TableTax:Social security and MedicareEligible student:
22-1) ...................1 4 1taxes) .......... 205, 208, 210 Survivor’s annuity........ 7 6Hope credit ...............2 2 6 IRAs for failure to take minimumFICA withholding (See Estimated tax ............ 35-42Lifetime learning credit .....2 2 7 distributions .............1 1 9Withholding) Amount to pay to avoidStudent loan interest Roth IRAs ........... 123, 124Empowerment zone ........1 9 5 penalty .................. 4 0deduction ...............1 2 7 Exclusions from gross income:Avoiding ................... 3 9Endowment proceeds ....... 8 1Embezzlement: Accelerated deathChange in estimated tax .... 4 1Energy assistance .......... 8 5Losses due to .............1 5 9 benefits .................. 8 1Credit for ........... 35, 41, 42Energy conservation:Reporting embezzled Annuities .................. 7 2Definition .................. 3 5Measures andfunds .................... 8 7 Canceled debt ............. 8 1Divorced taxpayers ......... 4 2modifications ............. 8 6Emergency medical service Capital gains from home saleElectronic fundsSubsidies .................. 8 6personnel: (See Sale of home)withdrawal ........... 35, 41Exclusion as adjustment toLife insurance proceeds when Commuting benefits forFiguring amount of tax ...... 4 0basis .................. 9 1death in line of duty ...... 8 2 employees ............... 4 6First period, no income subjectUtility rebates .............. 8 8Emotional distress De minimis benefits ........ 4 5to estimated tax in ........ 4 0Entertainers anddamages .................. 8 6 Disability pensions of federalFiscal year taxpayers ....... 4 0musicians ................1 8 8Employee benefits (See specific employees andMarried taxpayers .......... 3 9Entertainmenttype of benefit (e.g., Health military .................. 4 9Name change .............. 4 2expenses ........... 167, 169insurance, Life insurance, etc.; Education Savings BondNot required ............... 3 950% limit ..................1 6 9Fringe benefits)) Program ................. 8 7Overpayment applied to .... 1 4Figure 26-A summary ofEmployee business Educational assistance fromPayment vouchers ......... 4 1rules .................1 7 0expenses ............ 164-180 employer ................ 4 5Payments .............. 16, 41Allocation of costs .... 169, 174 Elective deferrals, limit onCommuting expenses .....1 7 2 Figuring amount of eachBusiness-related gifts exclusion ................ 4 7Deductions for ............1 6 4 payment ............... 4 0v s . ................ 169, 171 Employee awards .......... 4 3Form 2106 for Schedule ................ 4 0Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to Energy conservationdeducting .............1 7 4 When to start ............ 4 0fill out ..................1 7 9 subsidies ............ 86, 88Impairment-related work Who must make .......... 3 9Meal expenses Foreign earned income ...... 2expenses, deduction Penalty forincluded ................1 6 9 Frozen deposit interest ..... 8 7f o r................. 137, 180 underpayment ....... 35, 40,Proof of expenses .........1 7 3 Group-term lifeMeals (See Meal and lodging 42, 199Table 26-2 summary ....1 7 5 insurance ................ 4 6expenses) IRS computation of, FormRecordkeeping Holocaust victimsReimbursements (See also Per 2210 .................. 4 2requirements ............1 7 3 restitution ................ 8 7diem) ....... 37, 43, 176, 177 Pension payments .......... 7 0Reporting of ...............1 7 4 Long-term care insuranceReimbursements: Safe harbor for higher incomeTable 26-3 showing forms to contracts ............ 49, 50Returning excess . . . 37, 177 individuals ............... 3 5be used ..............1 7 9 Parking fees,Travel (See Travel and Saturday, Sunday, holidayTaking turns paying for meals or employer-provided ....... 4 6transportation expenses) rule ..................... 4 0entertainment ...........1 6 9 Public safety officers who diedWork-related Separate returns ........... 4 2Tickets: or were killed in line of duty,education .......... 182, 186 Social security or railroadFace-value as deductible death benefits ............ 8 2Employee expenses: retirement benefits ....... 7 7amount ...............1 6 9 Sale of home ............... 8 8Cell phone ................1 8 7 State and local income taxes, Scholarships ............... 8 8Gift vs. entertainmentHome computer ...... 187, 189 deduction of ............1 3 9 Strike benefits .............. 8 8deduction ........ 169, 171
Miscellaneous .............1 8 7 Unemployment Terrorist attack as cause ofEquipment (See also compensation ............ 8 4Employees: (See also Fringe injury, disabilityTools) ....................1 7 2
benefits) ............... 44, 45 Estimates: payments ................ 7 0Rental for rental
Awards for service .......... 4 3 Travel expenses ..........1 7 3 Executors andproperty ................. 6 5
Business expenses (See Exceptions to 2% limit ......1 8 7 administrators ............. 7Equitable relief (See Innocent
Employee business Related partyExcess benefits tax (See Sectionspouse relief)
expenses) transactions ............. 9 672(m)(5))Errors:Discounts for, effect on Exempt-interestExcess reimbursements:Address label, correctionbasis .................... 9 1 dividends ................. 5 3Business expenseo f ....................... 1 6Form W-4 to be filled out when Alternative minimum tax .... 6 3reimbursements ..... 37, 177Depreciation, correcting amountstarting new job .......... 3 7 Dividend reporting .......... 6 3Medical expenses .........1 3 6on Form 1040X .......... 6 8
Fringe benefits (See Fringe Information-reportingExcess reimbursementDiscovery after filing, need tobenefits) requirement .............. 6 3flowchart (Figureamend return ............ 1 8
Jury duty pay .............. 8 7 Exemption amount:21-A) .................1 3 7Form 1099 showing incorrect
Overseas employment (See 2006 changes ............... 1amount .................. 6 0 Excess withholding
Foreign employment) Exemption from foreign taxForm W-2c for corrected wage credit ............... 243, 246
Employers (See also Payroll credit limit ...............2 4 4and tax statement ........ 4 2 How to take ...............2 4 7
deductions) ...............1 5 6 Refunds ................... 1 7 Joint returns ..............2 4 6 Exemptions:
E-file options ............... 1 0 Dependents ............. 25-34Escrow: Exchange students:
Educational assistance from From withholding ........... 3 7Taxes placed in, when Expenses paid for, deductible
(See Educational assistance) Personal (See Personaldeductible ..............1 4 1 when under agreement with
Form W-4, having new exemption)qualifiedEstate beneficiaries (See also
employees fill out ........ 3 7 Phaseout ........... 22, 25, 34organization ............1 5 2Inheritance) ............ 92, 98
Overseas employment (See Securities, tax-exempt (SeeDividends received by ...... 6 0 Exchanges (See also Trade of
Foreign employment) Securities)IRAs (See Individual retirement property) ............... 94, 95
State or local governmentVehicles provided by ....... 4 5 arrangements (IRAs)) Like-kind exchanges .... 91, 94
bonds, tax-exempt ....... 9 7Withholding rules ........... 3 7 Losses of estate ............ 8 6 Partially nontaxable
Expatriates .................1 0 4Employment: Receiving income from exchange ............ 91, 95
estate ................... 8 6 Expenses paid byAgency fees .......... 86, 188 Tax-free:
Rollover restrictions ........ 7 4 another ................... 8 6R´esum´e expenses ........1 8 8 Definition of .............. 9 1
Estate tax:Taxes: (See also Social security Holding period, determination Extension of time to file ..... 1 1
and Medicare taxes) ...... 4 4 Deduction .................1 4 2 o f ..................... 9 8 Automatic .................. 1 1
Page 272 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 275 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fees (See specific types of Firefighters: Foreign income taxes,Extension of time to file (Cont.)
deductions and income) deduction of ............1 4 2Life insurance proceeds whenCitizens outside U.S. ....... 1 1
Professional license .......1 9 2 death in line of duty ...... 8 2 Gambling winnings ......... 3 8E-file options ............... 1 1
Volunteer firefighters: Overpayment offset againstFees, comprehensive/Inclusion on return .......... 1 1
Charitable contributions next year’s tax ........... 4 1bundled ..................2 2 5Extortion:
t o ....................1 5 0 Reporting sale of home ....1 0 4Fellowships (See ScholarshipsLosses due to .............1 5 9 IRAs ...................1 1 6 Schedule A:and fellowships)Eye surgery: Fires: State and local income taxes,Fertility enhancementDeductibility as medical Arson, no casualty loss deduction of ..........1 4 2procedures:expense ................1 3 5 f o r......................1 5 8 State benefit funds,Deductibility as medicalEyeglasses: Casualty loss caused mandatory contributionsexpense ................1 3 5As medical expense .......1 3 5 b y................. 158, 162 t o ....................1 3 9FICA withholding (See Social
Taxes, deduction of .....1 4 2First-time homebuyersecurity and Medicare taxes;
credit ....................1 0 1 Schedule C:Withholding)F Real estate or personalFirst-year expensing (SeeFiduciaries (See alsoFailure to comply with tax laws property taxes on propertySection 179 deductions)Trustees) .............. 7 ,  1 1 4(See Penalties) used in business, deductionFiscal year ........... 12, 40, 42Fees for services ........... 8 6Fair market value (FMV): o f ....................1 4 2Prohibited transactions ....1 2 0 Fishermen:Casualty loss .............1 5 9 Schedule E:Related party Estimated tax .............. 3 9Definition of ................ 8 9 Real estate or personaltransactions ............. 9 6 Indian fishing rights ......... 8 7Sales of property ........... 9 4 property taxes on rentalFigures (See Tables and figures) Fleet operations:Stolen property ............1 5 9 property, deductionStandard mileage rate notFiguring taxes and credits (SeeFair rental price ............. 6 6 o f ....................1 4 2allowed .................1 7 3also Worksheets) ...... 76, 128,Fair rental value ............. 3 3 Schedule F:195, 246 Flexible spending account orFamily (See also Related party Real estate or personalarrangement .............1 3 5Filing requirements: (See alsotransactions) ....... 7 ,  96, 203, property taxes on propertyMarried filing Floods (See also Disaster218 used in business, deductionseparately) ............ 5-20, 22 relief) .....................1 6 1 o f ....................1 4 2Adoption credit (See Adoption) Calendar year filers ......... 1 0 Casualty loss caused Self-employment tax, deductionCare credit (See Child and Citizens outside U.S. ........ 7 b y......................1 5 8 o f ......................1 4 2dependent care credit) Dependents ................. 7 FMV (See Fair market value) Form 1040, Schedule D:Standard meal allowance not Electronic (See E-file) Food benefits:allowed if related to Reporting sale of home ....1 0 4Extensions ................. 1 1 Nutrition program for theemployer ...............1 7 6 Form 1040-ES:Gross income levels (Table elderly ................... 8 5Farming: Estimated tax .......... 40, 411-1) ...................... 7 Food stamps ................ 3 1Activity not for profit ........ 8 5 Form 1040-ES(NR):Individual taxpayers ......... 6 Foreclosure ........... 101, 146Canceled debt, treatment Estimated tax for nonresidentJoint filing (See also Joint Foreign children:o f ....................... 8 1 aliens ................... 3 9returns) .................. 2 1 Adoption credit ............2 4 4Patronage dividends ........ 6 3 Form 1040A:Late filing penalties (See Foreign employment ......7 ,  4 8Farmworkers: Penalties) Estimated tax payments .... 4 2Employment abroad ........ 4 8Most taxpayers (Table Overpayment offset againstEstimated tax .............. 3 9 Pension plan1-1) ...................... 7 next year’s tax ........... 4 1Withholding ................ 3 6 contributions ............. 7 1Other situations requiring filing Form 1099-B:Federal crime investigations or Social security and Medicare(Table 1-3) ................ 8 Barter income .............. 4 2prosecutions: taxes .................... 4 8Unmarried persons (See Single Form 1099-C:Travel expenses ..........1 6 6 U.S. citizen ................ 4 8taxpayers) Cancellation of Debt ........ 4 2Federal employees: Waiver of alien status ....... 4 8When to file ................ 1 0 Form 1099-DIV:Accrued leave payment ..... 4 4 Foreign governments,Where to file .............5 ,  1 7 Dividend incomeCost-of-living employees of ............. 4 8Who must file .......... 5 ,  6 ,  7 statement ................ 4 2allowances .............. 4 4 Foreign income:Filing status ............6 ,  20-24 Form 1099-G:Disability pensions ......... 4 9 Dividends .................. 6 0Annulled marriages ......... 2 0 Government payments ..... 4 2Based on years of Earned income exclusion .... 2Change to, after time ofservice ................ 4 9 Form 1099–G:Reporting of ................. 2filing ..................... 1 8Exclusion, conditions State tax refunds ........... 8 2Sale of foreign property ..... 9 3Divorced taxpayers ......... 2 0f o r .................... 4 9 Form 1099-INT:Foreign income taxes:Head of household ..... 20, 22Terrorist attack ........... 4 9 Interest incomeDeduction of ..............1 3 9Qualifying person to fileFECA payments ............ 5 0 statement ................ 4 2Form 1116 to claima s..................... 2 4Federal Employees’ Form 1099-MISC:credit .................1 4 2Joint returns ............... 2 1Compensation Act (FECA) Schedule A or Form 1040 Miscellaneous income ...... 4 2Married filing a jointpayments ................. 5 0 reporting .............1 4 2 Withheld state and localreturn ..................2 3 0
Federal government: Definition of ...............1 3 8 taxes ...................1 3 9Married filing separately . . . 22,
Charitable contributions Foreign nationals (See Resident Form 1099-OID:230
t o ................. 150, 151 aliens) Original issue discount, fromSurviving spouse ........... 2 0
Employees (See Federal issuer or broker .......... 4 2Foreign organizations:Unmarried persons (See also
employees) Charitable contributions Form 1099-Q:Single taxpayers) ......6 ,  2 0
Federal income tax: t o ............ 150, 151, 153 Payments from QualifiedFinal return for decedent:
Interest on, not Education Programs ...... 4 2Foreign schools ............1 2 8Capital loss deduction
deductible ..............1 4 8 Form 1099-R:o n......................1 0 6 Foreign Service ............1 0 2
Not deductible ............1 4 2 Medical expenses .........1 3 5 Retirement planForeign students ............ 2 6
Deductibility (Table distributions .............. 4 2Standard deduction ........1 3 0 Expenses paid for, deductible
22-1) .................1 4 1 Withheld state and local taxeswhen under agreement withFinance charges:
shown on ...............1 3 9Federal judges: qualifiedCredit cards, retail installment
organization ............1 5 2Employer retirement plan contracts, etc., not Form 1099-S:
coverage ...............1 1 5 deductible ..............1 4 8 Real estate transactionsForeign tax credit ..........2 4 4
proceeds ...............1 4 1Federal telephone excise tax How to take ...............2 4 4Financial institutions (See also
credit ....................8 ,  9 Banks) ................ 98, 114 Limit on ...................2 4 4 Form 1116:
Foreign tax credit ..........1 4 2Fee-basis officials ..... 187, 191 Financially disabled Forgiveness of debt  (See
persons ................... 1 8 Cancellation of debt)Business expenses of .....1 7 9 Form 2210:
Work-related education Fines (See Penalties) Form 1040: Underpayment of estimated
expenses ...............1 8 6 Deductibility ...............1 9 2 Estimated tax payments .... 4 2 t a x ...................... 4 2
Publication 17 (2006) Page 273

Page 276 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 8332: Federal employees buying 1040, Schedule F: Change of filing status .... 2 2
back sick leave ........ 5 0 Self-employed Check mailed with ........ 1 5Release of exemption to
persons ..............1 7 4noncustodial parent ...... 2 8 Gifts, deduction of .......1 7 5 Child’s return ...........2 0 0
Work-related education Completing .............. 1 8Home mortgage interestForm 8814 ..................2 0 0
expenses .............1 8 6deduction .............1 4 2 Depreciation: CorrectingForm:
1040, Schedule SE .......7 ,  4 7 amount of ............. 6 8Investment expenses1040 ................. 59, 197 1040-V: Filing .................... 1 8deduction .............1 4 7Address label ............ 1 6 Payment voucher ........ 1 5 Itemized deduction, change toInvestment interestAdoption expenses ......2 4 4 1040A ................ 59, 197 standarddeduction .............1 4 9Alaska Permanent Fund Address label ............ 1 6 deduction .............1 3 1Itemized deductiondividends .............. 6 3 Adoption expenses ......2 4 4 Standard deduction, changelimit ..................1 3 1Alien taxpayer identification Alaska Permanent Fund to itemizedLoss of deposits due tonumbers............... 3 5 dividends .............. 6 3 deductions ............1 3 1bank’s insolvency orAlternative minimum tax, Alien taxpayer identification Worthless securities, claim forbankruptcy cause .....1 5 9Credit for prior year numbers............... 3 5 refund ................. 9 4Medical and dentalt a x ...................2 4 5 Armed forces’ retirement 1065:expenses .............1 3 7Armed forces’ retirement p a y ................... 4 8 Partnership income ....... 8 2Outplacement services,p a y ................... 4 8 Attachments to return ..... 1 4 1096 .....................1 0 5deduction .............. 4 4Attachments to ........... 1 4 Capital gains ............. 6 3 1098:Travel expenses, deductionCapital gains ............. 6 3 Clergy pension ........... 4 7 More than one borrower (noto f ....................1 7 7Charitable contributions, Disability retirement spouse), reporting ofUnearned commission,deduction to be p a y ................... 4 9 mortgage interestdeduction for repaymentitemized ..............1 4 9 Dividend income deduction by attachingo f ..................... 4 3Check mailed with ........ 1 5 reporting .............. 6 3 o f ....................1 4 81040, Schedule B:Child’s capital gain Dividends ................ 6 3 Mortgage interest overpaid inDividends ................ 6 3distributions ..........1 4 7 Excess withholding earlier year ...........1 4 31040, Schedule C:Clergy pension ........... 4 7 credit .................2 4 7 Mortgage interestBarter income ............ 8 0Deduction for alimony FECA benefits ........... 5 0 statement ..... 69, 82, 146Child care providers ...... 4 3paid ..................1 2 6 Insurance Points reported on .......1 4 7Corporate directorDisability retirement distributions ........... 6 3 Prepaid interest reportedfees ................... 8 6p a y ................... 4 9 IRA distributions ........1 2 0 o n....................1 4 7Forgiveness of debts ..... 8 0Dividends ................ 6 3 Personal exemption ...... 2 5 Refund of interest reportedFoster-care providers ..... 8 7Electric vehicle credit ....2 4 6 Presidential Election o n....................1 4 7Kickbacks ............... 8 7 Campaign Fund ........ 1 3Excess withholding 1098-C:Notary fees .............. 8 6 Railroad retirement benefits,credit .................2 4 7 Contributions of motorOil, gas, or mineral interest reporting on ........... 7 7FECA benefits ........... 5 0 vehicles, boats, androyalties ............... 8 3 Rehabilitative programForeign tax credit .......2 4 4 airplanes ........ 149, 154Rental income and payments .............. 4 8Health insurance 1098-E ...................1 2 8expenses .......... 69, 83 Reporting pay ............ 4 3credit .................2 4 7 1098-T ......... 225, 226, 227Social security benefits,Statutory employees ....1 7 5Insurance 1099:reporting on ........... 7 7Work-related educationdistributions ........... 6 3 Taxable incomeSocial securityexpenses .............1 8 6IRAs .............. 120, 121 report ............. 12, 43numbers............... 3 51040, Schedule C-EZ:Mortgage interest 1099-A:Student loan interestChild care providers ...... 4 3credit .................2 4 4 Acquisition or abandonmentdeduction .............1 2 9Corporate directorPersonal exemption ...... 2 5 of securedTip income reporting ..... 5 1fees ................... 8 6Presidential Election property ..............1 0 1Use of ............. 8 ,  21, 22Foster-care providers ..... 8 7Campaign Fund ........ 1 3 1099-B ...................1 0 5Workers’Kickbacks ............... 8 7Railroad retirement benefits, Barter income ............ 8 0compensation .......... 5 0Notary fees .............. 8 6reporting on ........... 7 7 Broker to report sales of1040A, Schedule 1:Oil, gas, or mineral interestRecapture of stocks, bonds, orDividends ................ 6 3royalties ............... 8 3alimony ...............1 2 7 commodities ...... 94, 1051040EZ ...................1 9 7Rental income andReporting of alimony 1099-C:Address label ............ 1 6expenses .......... 69, 83received ..............1 2 6 Cancellation of debt ..... 8 0 ,Alaska Permanent FundStatutory employees ....1 7 5Reporting taxes on tips not 101dividends .............. 6 3Work-related educationreported to 1099-DIV:FECA benefits ........... 5 0expenses .............1 8 6employer .............. 5 2 Dividend incomeNo attachments .......... 1 41040, Schedule D:Reporting uncollected taxes statement ...... 47, 60, 63Personal exemption ...... 2 5on tips ................. 5 2 Business property Return of capital ......... 6 2Presidential Electionsales .................. 9 5Schedule A:, Mortgage 1099-INT .............. 53, 59Campaign Fund ........ 1 3interest deduction .....2 4 4 Capital gains or 1099-MISC:Reporting pay ............ 4 3Social security benefits, losses ........... 105, 106 Brokers receivingTip income reporting ..... 5 1reporting on ........... 7 7 Child’s capital gain dividends .............. 6 0Use of .................8 ,  2 1Social security distributions ..........1 4 7 NonemployeeWorkers’numbers............... 3 5 Fractional shares, sale compensation .......... 8 6compensation .......... 5 0
Student loan interest of ..................... 6 2 1099-OID .................. 5 81040EZ-T:
deduction .............1 2 9 Nonbusiness bad debts, loss 1099-R .................... 5 6Claim for Refund of Federal
Tip income reporting ..... 5 1 o f  deposits due to bank’s Early distributions of pensionTelephone Excise
insolvency orUndistributed long-term funds .............. 74, 75T a x ..................2 4 8
bankruptcy ...........1 5 9capital gains ..........2 4 7 IRA distributions ....... 120,1040NR:
Sale expenses ..........1 0 6Use of ............. 9 ,  21, 22 121Nonresident alien
Undistributed long-termWages and salary Life insurance policyreturn ................. 1 1
capital gains ..........1 0 6reporting .............. 4 3 surrendered for1040NR-EZ:
Worthless securities ...... 9 4Workers’ cash .................. 8 1Nonresident alien easy
compensation .......... 5 0 1040, Schedule E: Retirement planreturn ................. 1 1
1040, Schedule A: Income-producing property, distributions ........... 1 41040X:
deduction of interest onCharitable 1099-S ...................1 0 5Amended individual
loan for ...............1 4 9contributions ...... 16, 149, Real estate transactionsreturn ................. 1 8
158 Rental income and proceeds ........ 100, 105Annulled marriages ....... 2 0
expenses .............. 6 9 1116:Employee business expense Bad debts, claim for
deduction .............1 7 9 Royalties ................ 8 3 refund ................. 9 9 Foreign tax credit .......2 4 4
Page 274 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 277 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5329: 8815 ...................... 5 6 Election precinct officials’Form: (Cont.)
fees ................... 8 6Early distributions of 8818 ...................... 5 71120S:
sheltered funds .... 74, 75 8822: Employer retirement planS corporation income ..... 8 2
Required minimum Change of address ....... 1 8 participation2106:
distributions, failure to indicated .............1 1 58824:Business-related
take .............. 75, 121 Like-kind exchanges ..... 9 5 Employer-reported incomeexpenses ....... 174, 175,
6251 .....................1 9 6 statement ..... 12, 13, 43,178 8828:
Alternative minimum 44, 47Performing artists .......1 8 0 Recapture of federal
t a x ...................2 0 3 mortgage subsidy .....1 0 5Travel expenses ........1 7 7 Fringe benefits ....... 44, 45
6252: 8834:Work-related education Recordkeeping ........... 1 7
Installment saleexpenses .............1 8 6 Electric vehicle credit ....2 4 6 Reimbursements reported asincome ...............1 0 42106-EZ: 8836 ....................... 2 part of income ....... 164,8271:Business-related 8839: 175, 176, 178Investor report of tax shelterexpenses .............1 7 8 Qualified adoption Statutory employees ....1 7 5registration number .... 2 0Performing artists .......1 8 0 expenses ......... 45, 244 Uncollected taxes ........ 5 18275:Work-related education 8853: W-2G:Disclosure statement ..... 2 0expenses .............1 8 6 Accelerated death Gambling winnings8275-R:2119: benefits ............... 8 2 withholdingRegulation disclosurePostponement of gain from Archer MSAs and long-term statement ............. 8 7statement ............. 2 0sale of home ..........1 0 2 care insurance W-4P:8283: contracts .............. 4 52439: Rollover distributions, electionCharitable noncash 8857:Notice to shareholder on not to have taxcontribution of more thanundistributed long-term Innocent spouse relief .... 2 1 withheld ............... 7 0$500 value ...........1 5 8capital gains ...... 62, 247 8862 .....................2 2 9 W-4V:8379:2441 .....................2 1 0 8863 .....................2 2 7 Voluntary withholdingInjured spouse claim ..... 1 52555 .....................2 3 0 Completed sample ......2 2 7 request ................ 8 48396:2555-EZ ..................2 3 0 8874: W - 5 ......................2 3 8Mortgage interest2848: New markets credit, filing W-7:credit ............ 143, 244Power of attorney and requirements (Table Individual taxpayer843:declaration of 1-3) .................... 8 identification numberClaim for refund and requestrepresentative ..... 14, 21 8879: request ................ 3 5for abatement .........2 4 63115 ...................... 5 5 Authorization for E-file W-7A:8453:3800: provider to useAddress label ............ 1 6 Adoption taxpayerself-selected PIN ....... 1 0General business E-file, for signature identification numbercredit .................. 1 9 8880:requirement ............ 9 request ............ 13, 354029 .....................2 3 1 Credit for Qualified8453-OL: W-9:Retirement Savings4070: Address label ............ 1 6 TIN of home seller andContributions .........2 4 5Reporting tips to E-file, for signature purchaser ............1 4 88885:employer .............. 5 1 requirement ............ 9 Form RRB-1099:Health insurance4070A: 8582: Railroad retirementcredit .................2 4 7Daily record of tips ....... 5 1 Passive activity gains or benefits .................. 4 28901:4137: losses ............ 69, 105 Form SSA-1099:Information on QualifyingSocial security and Medicare 8606: Social security benefits ..... 4 2Children Who Are Nottaxes on tips not reported IRA contributions, Form W-2:Dependents ..........2 1 8to employer ............ 5 2 Nondeductible ....... 113, Employer-reported income8910:4361 .....................2 3 1 117, 120 statement ................ 4 1Alternative motor vehicle4506: IRA contributions, Filing with return ........... 4 1credit .................2 4 5Copy of tax return Recharacterization Separate form from each8912:request ................ 1 7 o f ....................1 1 9 employer ................ 4 1Credit for Clean Renewable4506-T: 8615 ...................... 5 3
Energy and Gulf Tax Credit Withheld state and localTax return transcript Children under age 18 with
Bonds ................2 4 6 taxes ...................1 3 9request ................ 1 7 more than $1,700 of
8913:4562: Form W-2c:investment income .... 6 0 ,
Credit for Federal TelephoneDepreciation of rental Corrected wage and tax200
Excise Tax Paid .......2 4 8property ............... 6 8 statement ................ 4 2Form 1040A may be used
9465:4684: when filing .............. 8 Form W-2G:
Installment agreementBank deposit, loss due to Net investment Gambling winnings withholding
request ................ 1 6bank’s insolvency or income ...............2 0 0 statement ............ 38, 41
bankruptcy ...........1 5 9 Requiring Form 1040 to be usedParental information .....2 0 0 Withheld state and local taxeswhen filing ................ 9Casualty or theft Sample completed shown on ...............1 3 9loss ............. 158, 164 RRB-1042S:form ..................2 0 3 Form W-4:4797: Railroad retirement benefits8801: Employee withholdingfor nonresidentSales of business Alternative minimum allowance certificate ..... 3 6 ,aliens ................. 7 6property .......... 95, 104 t a x ...................2 4 5 37, 39RRB-1099:Small business stock 8812: Filling out form andlosses ................. 9 8 Railroad retirementAdditional child tax worksheets .............. 3 6benefits ............... 7 64868 .................. 11, 35 credit .................2 1 9 Form W-4P:SS-5 .....................2 3 0Automatic extension of time 8814 ...................... 5 3 Pensions and annuitiesto file .............. 11, 35 Social security numberAdditional tax, figuring withholding certificate ..... 3 8request ............ 13, 35Filing electronic form ..... 1 1 o f ....................1 9 9 Form W-4S:SSA-1042S:Filing paper form ......... 1 1 Calculation of child’s Sick pay withholdingSocial security benefits for4952: income ...............1 9 9 request .................. 3 8nonresident aliens ..... 7 6Investment interest expense Capital gains
Form W-4V:SSA-1099:deduction .............1 4 8 distributions ..........1 9 9
Unemployment compensation,Social securityNet capital gain, election to Parents’ election to report
voluntary withholdingbenefits ............... 7 6include as investment child’s interest and
request .................. 3 8income ...............1 4 7 W-10 .....................2 0 8dividends .... 60, 147, 198
Form(s) 1099:4972: W-2: Reduced deductions or
Lump-sum credits ................1 9 8 Box 12 with code L ..... 164, Taxable income report ..... 3 8 ,
distributions ........... 7 3 Sample form ............2 0 0 177, 179 42
Publication 17 (2006) Page 275

Page 278 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Forms (See also Tax Expenses .................1 9 1 Incidental costs of Handicapped persons (See
returns) ..................... 5 business-related Disabilities, persons with)Contributions to cover, not
expenses ...............1 7 0deductible as charitableFoster care: Hawaii:
Not taxed .................. 8 7donations .............1 5 3 Standard mealAdoption as motive for, no
Proof of expenses (Table 26-2Not deductible ..........1 3 5 allowance ...............1 6 7charitable deduction .....1 5 2
summary) ...............1 7 5Future interests: Head of household .......... 2 0Care providers’
RecordkeepingDefinition of ...............1 5 4payments ................ 8 6 Cost of keeping up
requirements ............1 7 3Tangible personal property, home .................... 2 4Charitable deduction for
Reporting of expenses .....1 7 5charitable deductionnonprofit care ...........1 5 2 Worksheet ............... 2 4
Table 26-3 showing forms tof o r......................1 5 4 Filing requirements (TableChild tax credit ............2 1 8 be used ..............1 7 9 1-1) ..................... 2 2Difficulty-of-care Schedule A (Form 1040) for How to file ................. 2 3payments ................ 8 7 deduction ...............1 7 5G Qualifying person .......... 2 2Emergency foster care, To reduce the publicGains and losses (See also Qualifying person to filemaintaining space in home debt ..................... 1 6Capital losses) ......8 ,  22, 105 a s....................... 2 4f o r....................... 8 7 Girl Scouts:Casualty (See Casualty losses) Summary (Table 2-1) ..... 2 4Expenses unreimbursed and Charitable contributionsClaim for refund for loss .... 1 9not deductible as charitable Qualifying surviving spouse witht o ................. 150, 151Collectibles ...............1 0 7contributions ............1 5 2 dependent child .......... 2 4
Glasses:Financial institution’sFoster care payments and Health:As medical expense .......1 3 5bankruptcy causingexpenses ................. 3 1 Flexible spendingdeductible loss ..........1 5 9 Gold and silver: arrangement ............. 4 5Foster child .......... 27, 30, 31 Reporting of ............1 6 3 As capital assets ........... 9 7 ReimbursementEarned income credit ......2 3 2 Gambling (See Gambling Capital gains or losses from arrangement ............. 4 5Foster Grandparent winnings and losses) sale or trade of ..........1 0 7 Savings account ........... 4 5Program .................. 4 8 Hobby losses .............. 8 7 IRA investments in ........1 2 0 Health coverage taxFound property ............. 8 7 Ordinary gain and loss ...... 9 6 Golden parachute payments: credit ................. 7 ,  2 4 7Fractional shares: Bank deposit, loss due to Tax on ....................1 9 6 Health insurance: (See alsoPayment for ................ 6 2 bank’s insolvency or Golf clubs (See Country clubs) Accident insurance) ........ 4 4Fraternal societies: bankruptcy ...........1 5 9 Goodwill Industries (See Auto insurance policy covering,Charitable contributions Ordinary loss ............... 9 6 Charitable contributions) not deductible as medicalt o ......................1 5 0 Passive activity (See also Government employees: expense ................1 3 5Dues, no charitable Passive activity) ...... 22, 69, Federal (See Federal Premiums:deduction .......... 151, 153 105 employees) Credit for workers displacedFraud: Related party sale or trade of State (See State or local by foreign trade ordepreciable property ..... 9 6Losses due to .............1 5 9 governments) receiving pension fromShort-term ............ 96, 106Penalties .............. 19, 37 Graduate school (See also PBGC ................1 3 3Priority in deducting .....1 0 6Reporting anonymously to Educational Deductible as medicalSale or trade of property heldI R S ...................... 3 assistance) ...............1 2 8 expense ..............1 3 51 year or less .......... 9 8Free tax services ...........2 6 4 Grants (See Scholarships and Self-employed persons,Theft (See Theft losses)Freight: fellowships) deductibleTotal net gain .............1 0 6Basis to include ............ 8 9 expenses .............1 3 8Grants, disaster relief ....... 8 5Gambling winnings andFringe benefits: Reimbursement ...........1 3 6Gratuities (See Tip income)losses ................ 87, 190Accident and health Health insuranceGross income:Form 1040 ................. 3 8insurance ................ 4 4 premiums ................. 3 3Adjustments other than on FormWithholding ............ 38, 41Accounting period .......... 4 4 1040A, Form 1040 to be Health savings account ....1 3 5Gaming Industry Tip used ..................... 9Adoption, employer Health Spa .................1 9 2Compliance Agreementassistance ............... 4 5 Age, higher filing threshold after Hearing aids:Program .................. 5 1 6 5........................ 6Archer MSA As medical expense .......1 3 5Garbage pickup: Defined ..................... 6contributions ............. 4 5 Hedging transactions ....... 9 7Deductibility (Table Filing requirements (TableDe minimis benefits ........ 4 5 Help (See Tax help)22-1) ...................1 4 1 1-1) .................... 7Education assistance ....... 4 5 High income taxpayers:Garnishment and Dependent filing requirementsEmployer-provided Estimated tax .............. 3 9attachment ................ 1 2 (Table 1-2) ................ 7vehicles ................. 4 5 High-low rate method toGas royalties ................ 8 4 Rental income ............. 6 4Form W-2 .................. 4 4 compute per diem ........1 7 7Gems: Gross income test ........... 3 0Group-term life insurance Higher education (See CollegesAs capital assets ........... 9 7 Group-term life insurance:premiums ................ 4 5 and universities)IRA prohibited transactions Accidental deathHoliday gifts ................ 4 5 Hobbies ....................1 8 9i n ......................1 2 0 benefits .................. 4 5Retirement planning Activity not for profit ........ 8 5General business credit ....1 9 5 Definition .................. 4 5services ................. 4 6 Losses .................... 8 7General Rule (See Annuities) Exclusion from income ...... 4 6Taxable income ............ 4 4 Holding period:GI Bill benefits .............. 3 3 Limitation on ............. 4 5Transportation ............. 4 6 Determination of ........... 9 8Permanent benefits ......... 4 5Gift taxes:Withholding ................ 3 8 Holiday gifts ................ 4 5Taxable cost, calculationNot deductible ............1 4 2Frozen deposits: Holiday, deadline fallingo f ....................... 4 5Gifts:Interest on ................. 8 7 on ......................... 4 0Uncollected social$25 limit on business-relatedIRA rollover period Holocaust victimssecurity/Medicare taxes .... 9expenses ...............1 7 0extension ...............1 1 8 restitution ................. 8 7Reporting of (Table$4 or less for business-relatedFull-time student: 1-3) .................... 8 Home: (See alsoexpenses ...............1 7 1Child and dependent care Refinancing) ...... 66, 68, 142,Uncollected tax ............1 9 6Adjusted basis for .......... 9 2credit ...................2 0 7 146, 158Guam:Business-relatedFund-raising events: Abandonment of ..........1 0 1Income from ................ 7expenses ...... 169, 170-171
Charitable contributions, Acquisition debt (See alsoGuide dogs:Children, income from property
amount deductible .......1 5 1 Mortgages) .............1 4 2given to .................2 0 2 Deductibility as medical
Rental of dwelling unit used as Aged, home for ............. 3 1expense ................1 3 5Disaster victims receiving cash
home .................... 6 7 As capital asset ............ 9 7gifts ....................1 6 1
Funeral expenses ........... 3 3 Basis (See Sale of home)Holding period, determination
HFunerals: o f ....................... 9 8 Business use of ...........1 8 8
Holiday gifts ................ 4 5Clergy, payment for ........ 4 7 H.R. 10 plans ................ 7 1 Closing costs .............1 0 1
Page 276 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 279 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Services fees, deductibility of Partnership ................ 8 2 Deduction for .......... 8 ,  1 1 4Home: (Cont.)
medical expense ........1 3 5 Prepaid .................... 1 3 Participant covered byCost of keeping up ......... 2 4
employer retirement planRecovery .................. 8 2Worksheet ............... 2 4 Host or hostess ............. 8 1
(Table 17-1) ..........1 1 6Rental (See Rental income andDamage to (See Casualty Hotels:
Participant not covered byexpenses)losses) Club dues:
employer retirement planRoyalties .................. 8 3Foreclosure ...............1 0 1 Not entertainment
(Table 17-2) ..........1 1 6S corporation .............. 8 2Improvements: expenses .............1 6 9
Phaseout ............ 1 ,  1 1 6Tax exempt ................ 3 1Not considered dwellingFor medical care,
Definition of ...............1 1 3Taxable income in excess ofunits ..................... 6 6deductibility ...........1 3 5
Distributions:$100,000 ................. 9Loans for ...............1 4 6 Household employees ......2 1 0 At age 591/2 .............1 2 1Taxable income less thanJointly owned: Household furnishings: Required minimum$100,000 ................. 8Mortgage payments as Antiques (See Collectibles) distributions (See thisTips (See Tip income)alimony ...............1 2 4 As capital assets ........... 9 7 heading: RequiredUnderreported ............. 1 8Separate residences in and Household items, charitable distributions)Income aid payment ........1 8 8alimony payments .....1 2 5 deduction for ............1 5 3 Divorced taxpayers ........1 1 8Income from nonqualifiedTaxes and insurance Household members (See also Early distributions (See Earlydeferred compensation plans:premiums as Head of household) ........ 2 0 withdrawal from deferredAdditional tax on ..........1 9 6alimony ...............1 2 5 Alimony payments, spouses interest account)Income taxes (See FederalMain home, defined .......1 0 0 cannot be members of same Employer retirement planincome tax)Office .....................1 8 8 household ..............1 2 5 participants ......2 ,  115, 116Federal (See Federal incomePoints ..................... 9 0 Household services ....... 207, Establishing account .......1 1 3tax)Possession before final 208 Time of .................1 1 4Foreign (See Foreign incomesettlement, rent not Household workers (See Where to set uptaxes)deductible as Domestic help) account ..............1 1 4State or local (See State or localinterest .................1 4 3 Household workers, no Excess contributions .......1 2 0income taxes)Repossession .............1 0 1 exemption for ............. 2 6 Figuring modified AGIIncome-producingSecurity system ...........1 9 2 Housing (See also Vacation (Worksheet 17-1) .......1 1 7expenses ................1 8 9Settlement fees ...........1 0 1 homes) ............. 24, 66, 68 Forms to use:Income-producing property:Tax home, determination for Alimony payments made to Form 1099-R for reportingDeduction of interest on loantravel-related business cover ...................1 2 4 distributions ...... 42, 120f o r......................1 4 9expenses ...............1 6 5 Clergy ..................... 4 7 Form 8606 for nondeductibleTenants in common, taxes and Indefinite absence from job:Cooperative (See Cooperative contributions ..........1 1 3insurance premiums as Work-related educationhousing) Inherited IRAs .... 87, 117, 118alimony .................1 2 5 during ..................1 8 3Rental property (See Rental Conversion to Roth
Home equity loans: Independent contractors:income and expenses) IRAs .................1 1 8
Homeworkers, deduction ofCar purchased by .........1 7 3 RequiredHurricane Katrina ...... 25, 233 expenses ...............1 7 5Interest deduction .... 142, 143 distributions ..........1 1 9Hurricane Rita .......... 33, 233Proceeds invested in Indians: Interest on, treatmentHurricane Wilma ....... 33, 233tax-exempt securities, interest Employment credit, recapture o f ......................1 1 3Hurricanes (See also Disasternot deductible ...........1 4 3 o f : Married couples (See thisrelief) .....................1 6 1 Filing requirements (TableHome improvement heading: Spousal IRAs)Casualty loss due to .......1 5 8 1-3) .................... 8loans .....................1 4 6 Modified adjusted gross income
Fishing rights .............. 8 7 (MAGI):Home office:
Taxes collected by tribal Computation of .........1 1 6Capital gains exclusion ....1 0 3 I governments, deduction Effect on deduction if coveredTravel to another work Icons, use of ................. 4 o f ......................1 3 8 by employer retirementlocation .................1 7 2 Identification number, Individual retirement plan (Table 17-1) ......1 1 6Homeowners’ associations: qualifying person ........2 0 7 arrangements (IRAs) (See also Effect on deduction if notCharges ..................1 4 1 Illegal income: Roth IRAs) ....... 74, 113-124, covered by employerDeductibility (Table Reporting of ................ 8 7 117, 121 retirement plan (Table22-1) .................1 4 1 Impairment (See Disabilities, Administrative fees ....... 114, 17-2) .................1 1 6Charitable contributions persons with) 190 Worksheet 17-1 .........1 1 7t o ................. 151, 153 Impairment-related work Age 591/2 for NondeductibleHomeworkers: expenses ...... 186, 187, 191 distribution ..............1 2 1 contributions ............1 1 7Deduction of expenses ....1 7 5 Improvements: Exception to rule ........1 2 1 Early withdrawal ........1 2 1Hope credit: Real estate, adjustments to Age 701/2: Tax on earnings on ......1 1 7Can you claim (Figure basis for ................. 9 0 Contributions cut off Ordinary income, distributions35-A) ...................2 2 3 Rental property (See Rental a t ....................1 1 4 a s......................1 2 0Claiming the credit ........2 2 7 income and expenses) Distributions required Penalties .................1 2 0Comparison with lifetime Incidental expenses: a t ............... 119, 121 Early distributions ( See Earlylearning chart (Table Business-related gifts ......1 7 0 Compensation, defined ....1 1 3 withdrawal from deferred35-1) ...................2 2 2 Travel-related .............1 6 7 Contribution limits .........1 1 4 interest account)Eligible student ............2 2 6 Income: (See also Wages and Age 50 or older, .........1 1 4 Excess contributions ....1 2 0
Figuring the credit .........2 2 6 salaries) ............ 43-50, 85 Under age 50, ..........1 1 4 Form 8606 not filed for
Married filing separately . . . 22, Bartering ................... 8 0 Contributions .............8 ,  2 2 nondeductible
222 Canceled debts ............ 8 0 Designating year for which contributions ..... 113, 117
Modified adjusted gross income Constructive receipt of ..... 1 2 , contribution is Overstatement of
(MAGI) .................2 2 5 59 made .................1 1 4 nondeductible
Tuition deduction and ......2 2 3 Excess reimbursement of Excess .................1 2 0 contributions ..........1 1 7
Hospitals: medical expenses .......1 3 6 Filing before contribution is Prohibited
Charitable contributions to Gross ..................... 3 0 made .................1 1 4 transactions ..........1 2 0
nonprofits .......... 150, 151 Illegal income .............. 8 8 Nondeductible ..........1 1 7 Required distributions, failure
50% limit on Interest .................... 5 2 Not required to take .......... 119, 121
deduction .............1 5 5 Investment income ........2 0 2 annually ..............1 1 4 Prohibited transactions ....1 2 0
Meals and lodging provided for Jury duty pay .............. 8 7 Roth IRA contribution for Recharacterization of
patients, deductibility ....1 3 5 Life insurance proceeds .... 8 1 same year ............1 2 2 contribution .............1 1 9
Payments for services for Nonemployee Time of .................1 1 4 Reporting of:
specific patient, not compensation ............ 8 6 Withdrawal before filing due Distributions ............1 2 0
deductible as charitable Paid to agent ............... 1 2 date ..................1 1 9 Filing requirements (Table
contributions ............1 5 3 Paid to third party .......... 1 2 Cost basis ........... 117, 120 1-3) .................... 8
Publication 17 (2006) Page 277

Page 280 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alimony deduction for, when Recovery of income, on ..... 8 2 Changing from standard toIndividual retirement
home owned as tenants in itemized deduction (or viceReporting on Forms 1040,arrangements (IRAs)
common ................1 2 5 versa) ..................1 3 11040A, or 1040EZ ......... 8Reporting of: (Cont.)
Choosing to itemize .......1 3 1Casualty or theft loss, Form 1040EZ filingRecharacterization of
Form 1040 to be used ....9 ,  8 2reimbursement to adjust threshold ............... 8contributions ..........1 1 9
IE written on Formloss ....................1 6 0 Savings bonds (See also U.S.Required distributions .... 118, 1040 ...................1 3 1Distributions from, reporting savings bonds) ........... 8 7119 Limits on .............. 22, 193o f ....................... 6 3 Securities, Form 1040 to beExcess Charitable donations,Dividends: used ..................... 9accumulations ........1 2 1 deduction for .........1 4 9Interest on ............... 6 3 Tax refunds, from .......... 1 7Retirement savings contribution Married filing separately . . . 22,Form 1099-R to reportcredit ............... 22, 244 Interest payments (See also 131benefits .................. 4 2 Mortgages) . . . 69, 82, 142-149Self-employed persons ....1 1 4 One spouse hasLife (See Group-term lifeSpousal IRAs ....... 113, 114, Allocation of interest according itemized ..............1 3 0insurance;  Life insurance)115, 116 to use of loan ...........1 4 8 Recovery .................. 8 2Living expenses paid by,Taxability .................1 2 1 Canceled debt including .... 8 0 Standard deduction to bepossible incomeDistributions ............1 1 9 Car loans .................1 7 3 compared with ..........1 3 1from ....................1 6 1Time of taxation ...........1 1 3 Deductions: State tax, for ..............1 3 1Reimbursements:Transfers permitted ........1 1 7 Forms to use (Table Itinerant workers:From casualty 23-1) ............ 148, 149To Roth IRAs ...... 117, 118 Deduction of expenses ....1 7 5insurance .............. 8 5 Not allowed .............1 4 8Trustee administrative Tax home, determinationState insurer delinquencyfees ....................1 9 0 Reporting of ............1 4 8 o f ......................1 6 5proceedings preventingTrustee-to-trustee Investment interest ........1 4 7 ITINs (See Individual taxpayerminimum pensiontransfers ................1 1 7 Limit on deduction .......1 4 7 identification numbersdistributions .............. 7 5
IRA to Roth IRA .........1 2 3 (ITINs)) ...................2 0 7Personal interest notTrade of policies and
Types of ..................1 1 4 deductible ......... 142, 148annuities ................ 9 5
Withdrawals .......... 119, 120 Reporting ofWithholding against
Jdeductions ..............1 4 8Early (See Early withdrawal benefits .................. 1 4
Jewelry:from deferred interest Student loan interestInsurance agents:
As capital assets ........... 9 7account) deduction ...............1 2 7Deduction of expenses ....1 7 5
Required (See this heading: Job (See headings starting withStudent loans deduction .....8 ,Insurance companies:
Required distributions) ‘‘Employee’’ or ‘‘Employer’’)22, 142, 148State delinquency proceedings, Search:Withholding ........ 14, 38, 120 Unstated interest ....... 89, 94IRA distributions not made Expenses ...............1 8 8Individual taxpayer Interference with businessdue to ..................1 2 1
Job search:identification numbers operations:Insurance premiums: Deduction of expenses for(ITINs) ................. 13, 35 Damages as income ........ 8 6Alimony when spouse owns life Interviews ............... 8 7Individual taxpayers (See Single Internal Revenue Service (IRS):insurance policy .........1 2 4
Joint accounts .............. 5 3taxpayers) Fraud or misconduct ofCasualty insurance ......... 8 9
Dividends, reporting of ...... 6 0Information returns: (See also employee, reportingFHA mortgage insurance
Joint return test ............. 2 6Form W-2) ...... 12, 13, 38, 41, anonymously ............. 3premiums, not
43, 44, 47 Joint returns:deductible ..............1 4 8 Mission of ................... 4
Accounting period .......... 2 1Partnerships to provide ..... 8 2 Health insurance: Underpayment penalties,
After separate return ........ 2 2Inheritance (See also Estate Credit for workers displaced computation by .......... 4 2
Carryover of capitalbeneficiaries) .............. 8 6 by foreign trade or International employment (See
loss ....................1 0 6receiving pension fromAdjusted basis for .......... 9 2 Foreign employment)
Deceased spouse .......... 2 1PBGC ................1 3 3Holding period, determination International organizations, Dependents on ............. 3 0Deductible as medicalo f ....................... 9 8 employees of ............. 4 8 Divorced taxpayers ......... 2 1expense ..............1 3 5IRAs (See Individual retirement Internet: Estimated tax .............. 3 9Self-employed persons,arrangements (IRAs)) Electronic filing over (See E-file) Excess social security/railroaddeductible ............1 3 8Not taxed .................. 8 7 Standard meal allowance retirement tax withholdingHome ....................1 9 2Inheritance tax: rates ...................1 6 7 credit ...................2 4 6Homeowners’.............1 9 2Deductibility of ............1 4 2 Inventory, retail ............. 9 7 Extension for citizens outsideLiability ...................1 8 7Deduction .................1 4 2 Investment property: U.S. ..................... 1 1Life ................... 33, 192Injured spouse .............. 1 5 Rental property (See Rental Filing status ................ 2 1Life insurance .............1 3 5Claim for refund ............ 1 5 income and expenses) Form 1040EZ, use of ........ 8Alimony ................1 2 4Innocent spouse relief: Investments: Fraud penalty .............. 2 0Medical .................... 3 3Form 8857 ................. 2 1 Guardian of spouse, signingClasses as travelMortgage ............ 146, 192 a s....................... 2 1Joint returns ............... 2 1 expenses ...............1 6 9Paid in advance ............ 5 4 Injured spouse ............. 1 5Expenses .................1 4 7Insider stock compensation Rental expenses, deduction of Innocent spouse ........... 2 1from expatriated corporation: Fees .....................1 8 9premiums paid in Investment income of childTax on ....................1 9 6 Property:advance ................. 6 5 under age 18 ...........1 9 8Insolvency: As capital asset .......... 9 7Insurance proceeds: Nonresident or dual-status alienCanceled debt not deemed to Definition ...............1 4 7Dividends, interest on ....... 5 4 spouse .................. 2 1be income ............... 8 1 Like-kind exchanges ..... 9 5Installment payments ....... 5 8 Pensions or annuities ....... 7 1Financial institution’s insolvency Seminars .................1 9 2Life ........................ 5 8 Worksheet ............... 7 3causing deductible Involuntary conversion (SeeInterest: Personal exemption ........ 2 5loss ..................... 9 8 also Condemnation ofFees to collect ............1 8 9 Responsibility for .........2 ,  2 1Reporting of ............1 6 3 property) ..................1 5 8Frozen deposits ............ 5 4 Separate return afterInstallment agreements ..... 1 6 Basis computation .......... 9 1Usurious ................... 5 4 joint ..................... 2 2
Installment sales ............ 9 3 Basis for depreciation ....... 9 1 Signing ................ 14, 21Interest income ............. 5 2
Capital gains and ..........1 0 5 IRAs (See Individual retirement Social security and railroadChildren:
Home sale ................1 0 4 arrangements (IRAs)) retirement benefits ....... 7 9Gifts to children .........2 0 2
Insulin: Israel: State and local income taxes,Dividends as ............... 6 0
deduction of ............1 3 9Deductibility as medical Contributions to charitableForm 1099-INT ......... 12, 42
expense ................1 3 5 organizations in .... 150, 153 Judges, federal:Frozen deposits, from ...... 8 7
Employer retirement planInsurance: Itemized deductions: Property purchase financed
coverage ...............1 1 5Accident (See Accident without adequate stated Adjusted gross income
insurance) interest, treatment of ..... 9 4 limiting ............ 142, 182 Jury duty pay ............... 8 7
Page 278 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 281 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Demutualization of Long-term care insurance Married filing separately .... 2 2 ,K
companies ............... 9 5 contracts .................. 4 9 2 3 0Keogh plans (See also
Carryover of capitalForm 1099-R for surrender of Chronically ill individual .... 5 0 ,Retirement plans) ...... 70, 71
loss ....................1 0 6policy for cash ........... 8 1 82Kickbacks ................... 8 7 Community propertyPremiums .................1 9 2 Deductibility of medicalKiddie tax (See Children, states ................... 2 2Not deductible ..........1 3 5 expense ................1 3 5subheading: Investment income Credits, treatment of ........ 2 2Proceeds .................. 5 8 Exclusion, limit of ........... 5 0of child under age 18) Deductions:As income ............... 8 1Kidnapped children ........2 3 3 Qualified services Changing method from or toPublic safety officers who died defined .................. 5 0Losses due to ransom .....1 5 9 itemizedor were killed in line of duty,Qualifying child ............. 2 7 Long-term debt deductions ............1 3 1tax exclusion ............. 8 2 instruments ............... 9 7Qualifying relative .......... 2 9 Treatment of ............. 2 2Surrender of policy for Long-term gains and losses Earned income credit ....... 2 2cash ..................... 8 1 (See Capital gains or losses) Gross income filingWithholding ................ 3 8L Losses (See Gains and requirements (TableLife insurance premiums .... 3 3Labels ....................... 1 6 losses) .................... 6 9 1-1) ..................... 2 2Life-care fees:Address correction ......... 1 6 Capital (See Capital gains or How to file ................. 2 2Paid to retirement home andSocial security number to be losses) Itemized deductions ....... 2 2 ,designated for medical care,written on ................. 2 Casualty (See Casualty losses) 131deductibility .............1 3 5Labor unions: One spouse has itemized soGambling (See GamblingLifetime learning credit:Collective bargaining other must as well .....1 3 0winnings and losses)Can you claim (Figureagreements .............. 3 8 Joint state and local incomeTheft (See Theft losses)35-A) ...................2 2 3Contributions to, no charitable taxes filed, but separateLost property ...............1 9 2Claiming the credit ........2 2 7deduction for ............1 5 1 federal returns ..........1 3 9When deemed casualtyComparison with Hope creditDues and fees ........ 88, 153 Medical and dentalloss ....................1 5 9chart (Table 35-1) .......2 2 2 expenses ...............1 3 3Sick pay withholding under Lotteries and raffles (See alsoEligible student ............2 2 7union agreements ........ 3 8 Rollovers .................. 2 2Gambling winnings andFiguring the credit .........2 2 7 Social security and railroadStrike and lockout losses) .................... 8 7Married filing separately . . . 22, retirement benefits ....... 7 7benefits .................. 8 8 No charitable deduction for222 State and local incomeTrips from union hall to place of tickets ............. 151, 153Modified adjusted gross income taxes ...................1 3 9work ....................1 7 2 Lump-sum distributions ..... 7 3(MAGI) .................2 2 5 Student loan interest deductionUnemployment compensation
10-year tax option .......... 7 3Tuition deduction and ......2 2 3 a n d ....................1 2 8payments from ........... 8 4
Capital gain treatment ...... 7 3 Tenants by the entirety,Like-kind exchange ........1 0 4Land (See also Real
allocation of real estateCost calculation ............ 7 3Like-kind exchanges ........ 9 4estate) ..................... 8 9
taxes ...................1 4 1Basis for depreciation ....... 9 2Depreciation not allowed Election of ................. 7 3
Married taxpayers: (See alsoQualifications .............. 9 1f o r....................... 6 8 Form 4972 ................. 7 3 Joint returns) (See also MarriedLimit on credit. .............2 1 7Landlords (See Rental income Net unrealized appreciation filing separately) (See alsoand expenses) Limit on itemized deduction: (NUA) ................... 7 3 Tenants by the entirety) ......2 ,Landscaping: 2006 changes ............... 1 Rollovers of ................ 7 3 8, 21, 22, 23, 60, 71Cost of, when casualty or theft Limits: Taxable and tax-free Age 65 or older spouse:loss involved ....... 159, 160 Itemized deductions .......1 9 3 parts .................... 7 3 Standard deduction .....1 3 0Larceny: Miscellaneous Luxury travel: Blind spouse:Losses due to .............1 5 9 deductions ..............1 8 7 Travel expenses when Standard deduction .....1 3 0Late filing .................3 ,  1 8 Line of credit for home: incidental business Child and dependent carePenalties .............. 11, 19 Interest ...................1 4 2 activities ................1 6 8 credit ...................2 0 8Late payment: Liquidating distributions .... 6 2 Work-related education, Deceased spouse (See also
Penalties on tax Living expenses: deduction of Surviving spouse) ..... 7 ,  2 0 ,
payments ................ 1 9 Insurance paying, possible expenses ...............1 8 5 21
Public utility charges, not income from ............1 6 1 Definition of spouse for
deductible ..............1 4 8 Loans (See also Student purposes of alimony .....1 2 4
Laundry: Mloans) ......... 8 ,  19, 127, 148 Dual-status alien spouse .... 2 1
Business-related travel Fees for, not M&IE (Meals and incidental Estimated tax .......... 39, 40
expense ................1 6 7 deductible ..............1 4 8 expenses) (See Incidental Filing status ........... 6 ,  7 ,  2 0
expenses;  Meal and lodgingLaw enforcement officers: Home improvement Form 1040EZ, use of ........ 8
expenses)loans ...................1 4 6Life insurance proceeds when Gross income filing
death in line of duty ...... 8 2 requirements (TableMachinery (See alsoHome mortgages (See
1-1) ..................... 2 2Tools) ....................1 7 2Mortgages)Lead-based paint removal:
IRAs ................. 114, 115Origination fees (See Points)Deductibility as medical Rental for rental
Spouse covered by employerexpense ................1 3 5 Retirement plans, from ..... 7 1 property ................. 6 5
plan ............. 114, 116Leased property: Lobbying: MACRS (Modified Accelerated
Living apart ................ 2 1Cost Recovery System):Casualty or theft loss ......1 5 9 Contributions for, not charitable
Medical and dentaldeductions ......... 151, 153 Rental property:Leased vehicles: expenses ...............1 3 3Lobbying expenses ........1 9 2Car expenses .............1 7 3 Alternative minimum Deceased spouse’sLocal assessments: t a x .................... 6 8Leases (See Rental income and expenses .............1 3 5expenses) Adjusted basis for .......... 9 0 MAGI (See Modified adjusted Nonresident alienDeductibility of ............1 4 1 gross income (MAGI))Legal expenses ....... 190, 192 spouse .............. 13, 21Rental property, deductions Mailing returns (See Tax returns)Liability insurance: Performing artists .........1 8 0f o r....................... 6 5Reimbursements from ...... 8 5 Maintenance of rental property Roth IRAs ................1 2 2Local government employees: (See Rental income andLicense and similar Signatures when spouse unableSection 457 plans for expenses)fees ......................1 9 1 to sign ................... 1 4employees (See Section 457 Mandatory retirementLicense fees: Social security or railroaddeferred compensation plans) age .......................2 1 5Deductibility of ............1 4 2 retirement benefits,Local law violated ........... 3 0 Market discount bonds ...... 9 8Life insurance: (See also taxability ................. 7 6
Lockout benefits ............ 8 8 Married dependents, filing jointGroup-term life Transfer of home to
Lodges (See Social clubs) return ..................... 2 6insurance) ........... 9 ,  45, 81 spouse .................1 0 1
Alimony, premiums when Lodging (See Meal and lodging Married filing a joint Transfers between
spouse owns policy .....1 2 4 expenses) ................. 3 3 return ....................2 3 0 spouses ............. 92, 95
Publication 17 (2006) Page 279

Page 282 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Work-related ..............2 0 9 Modified adjusted gross income Late payment charges,Married taxpayers: (Cont.)
(MAGI): deduction of ............1 4 3Travel expenses for Medical devices:
Lender’s charges forChild tax credit limits .......2 1 8spouse .................1 6 6 Deductibility of ............1 3 5
services ................1 4 6Education credits ..........2 2 5Mass transit passes, Medical insurance (See Accident More than one borrower (notHope credit ...............2 2 5employer-provided ........ 4 6 insurance) spouse), reporting of interestIRAs, computation for:Maternity clothes: Medical insurance deduction ...............1 4 8Effect on deduction if coveredNot deductible as medical premiums ................. 3 3 Preparation costs for notes orby employer retirementexpense ................1 3 5 Medical research organizations: deeds of trust ...........1 4 6plan (Table 17-1) ..... 116,MCC (Mortgage credit Charitable contributions Prepayment:117certificate) ...............2 4 4 t o ......................1 5 0 Allocation ofEffect on deduction if notMeal and lodging Medical savings accounts deduction .............1 4 3covered by employerexpenses ............ 167-170 (MSAs) (See also Archer Penalty for, deductionretirement plan (Table50% deduction for MSAs) ..................... 4 5 o f ....................1 4 317-2) .................1 1 6business-related Additional tax on ..........1 9 6 Points ..................1 4 3Worksheet 17-1 .........1 1 7meals ............. 167, 169 Medicare Advantage Reported on FormLifetime learning credit .....2 2 5Figure 26-A summary of M S A .................... 8 7 1098 .................1 4 7Roth IRAs, computationrules .................1 7 0 Medical expenses paid for Proceeds used for business orf o r......................1 2 2Work-related decedent from ........1 3 5 investment, deductionPhaseout (Tableeducation .............1 8 5 o f ......................1 4 8Medicare (See also Social 1 7–3 ) ................1 2 3Business-related entertainment Refinancing ...............1 4 6security and Medicare Worksheet 17-2 .........1 2 2including ........... 167, 169 Refund of interest:taxes) ............... 9 ,  44, 48 Money marketBusiness-related travel expense Reported on FormBenefits ................... 8 5 certificates ................ 5 4including ................1 6 7 1098 .................1 4 7Medicare A, when deductible as Money market funds ........ 6 2Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to Treatment of ............1 4 3medical expense ........1 3 5 Money orders:fill out ..................1 7 9 Seller-financed ............1 0 4Medicare Advantage MSA (See Payment of tax ............. 1 5Lodging ...................1 6 7 Mosques (See Churches,Medical savings accounts Penalty if not honored ...... 1 5Proof of expenses .........1 7 3 temples, etc.)(MSAs)) More information (See Tax help)Table 26-2 summary ....1 7 5 Motels (See Hotels)Medicare B, when deductible asRecordkeeping Mortgage: Moth damage:medical expense ........1 3 5requirements ....... 167, 173 Relief ...................... 8 0 Not casualty losses ........1 5 8Medicare D, when deductible asReporting of ...............1 7 4 Mortgage credit certificate Moving expenses:medical expense ........1 3 5Table 26-3 showing forms to (MCC) ....................2 4 4 Standard mileage rates ...... 1be used ..............1 7 9 Medicare tax ...............1 9 6 Mortgage insurance MSAs (See Medical savingsRestaurant receipts ........1 7 4 Medicare taxes, not premiums ................1 4 6 accounts (MSAs))Standard meal support ................... 3 3 Basis in property not to
Multiple supportallowance ..... 167, 176, 177 include .................. 9 0Medications:
agreement ................ 3 3Amount of ..............1 6 7 Deductibility as medical Mortgage interest credit ....2 4 4
Areas outside continental Municipal bonds ............ 5 8expense ................1 3 5 Carryforward ..............2 4 4
U.S. ..................1 6 7 Museums:Form 8396 ................1 4 3Member of household orProrating on partial days of Charitable contributionsHow to take ...............2 4 4relationship test ........... 3 0travel .................1 7 7 t o ......................1 5 0Recapture ................2 4 4Members of the uniformedTaking turns paying for meals or Reduced deduction ........2 4 4 Musicians andservices or Foreignentertainment ...........1 6 9 entertainers ..............1 8 8Mortgages: (See alsoService ...................1 0 2Transportation workers ....1 6 7 Points) ............... 143, 148 Mutual funds ...............1 8 9Membership fees (See specificDeduction limits .........1 7 0 Alimony, payments as .....1 2 5 Adjusted basis of shares .... 9 3type of organization)Medical and dental Assistance payments ...... 8 5 , Allocated expenses ........1 8 9Mentally incompetent persons:expenses ............ 133-138 143 Capital gains ............... 6 2(See also Disabilities, personsAdjusted gross income and limit Assumption of .............. 8 9 Dividends from ............. 6 2with) ................. 8 ,  49, 70of deduction ............1 3 3 Fees not included in Exempt-interestSigning of return byAdopted child .............1 3 4 basis .................. 9 0 dividends ................ 6 3court-appointedAlimony payments made to Credit certificate (MCC) from Nonpublicly offered ........1 8 9representative ........... 1 4cover ...................1 2 4 state or local Publicly offered ............1 8 9Metals, precious (See Gold andContributions to cover, not government .............1 4 3 Undistributed capitalsilver)deductible as charitable Discounted mortgage gains ...................1 0 6Mexico:donations ...............1 5 3 loan ..................... 8 0 Credit for tax on .........2 4 7Contributions to charitableDamages including ........1 3 7 Ending early, treatment oforganizations in .... 150, 153Decedent’s expenses......1 3 5 points ..................1 4 6
Mexico, resident of ...... 26, 30Deduction .................1 3 3 NFederally subsidized mortgage,
Mileage deduction forChecklist for deductible Name change ........... 13, 42recapture of tax paid on home
work-relatedexpenses (Table purchased with ..........2 4 4 Nanny tax (See Domestic help)
education ................1 8 221-1) .................1 3 5 FHA mortgage insurance National Housing Act:Dependent’s expenses ....1 3 4 Mileage rates (See Standard premiums and VA funding Mortgage assistance ...... 8 5 ,
Determination of date mileage rates) fees, not deductible .....1 4 8 143
paid ....................1 3 3 Insurance premiums (SeeMilitary (See Armed National of the UnitedForm 1040, Schedule A, for Mortgage insuranceforces) ....................1 0 2 States ..................... 2 6reporting ................1 3 7 premiums)Military personnel: Native Americans (See Indians)Future expenses, settlement Interest:Earned income credit ......2 3 3 Negligence penalties ........ 1 9including ................1 3 7 Definition ...............1 4 2Mineral royalties ............ 8 4 Net investment income .....1 4 7Health insurance credit ....2 4 7 Form 1098 (interestMinisters (See Clergy) Net operating losses:Health insurance premiums statement) ........ 69, 146Miscellaneous Casualty or theft losses ....1 6 4(See Health insurance) Refund of ................ 8 2deductions ...............1 8 6 Refund of carryback ........ 1 9Included expenses: Interest credit (See MortgageFederal employees buying back New Jersey NonoccupationalIndividuals covered ......1 3 3 interest credit)sick leave ................ 5 0 Disability BenefitMeals and lodging related to Interest deduction:Outplacement agency Fund .....................1 3 9receiving medical Computation for amountfees ..................... 4 4 New Jersey Unemploymentcare ............... 136, 167 deductible (Figure
Missing children: Compensation Fund .....1 3 9Medical care, defined ......1 3 3 23-A) .................1 4 3
Photographs of, included in IRSPurpose of expenses ......1 3 3 Sale of home ...........1 4 3 New job, trade, or business:
publications ............... 3Reimbursements, treatment Schedule A (Form 1040) to Employment agency
o f .................. 50, 136 Mistakes (See Errors) deduct ...............1 4 8 fees ....................1 8 8
Page 280 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 283 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employer-provided fringe Estimated tax ( See thisNew job, trade, or business: O
benefit: heading: Underpayment of(Cont.) OASDI ....................... 8 5 estimated tax)Exclusion fromJob search expenses ......1 8 8 Occupational taxes .........1 8 8 income ................ 4 6 Failure to furnish tax shelterTravel expenses ..........1 8 8 Deduction of: registration number ....... 2 0Medical-related travel ......1 3 6Work-related education Taxes that are deductible Failure to include social securitySports arena, business-relatedexpenses ...............1 8 4 (Table 22-1) ..........1 4 1 number .............. 13, 20entertainment subject to 50%New York Nonoccupational Office rent, deductibility limit ....................1 7 0 Failure to pay tax ........... 1 9Disability Benefit of ........................1 8 9 Failure to provide social securityParks and recreation facilities:Fund .....................1 3 9 Office, use of home as .....1 8 8 number or TIN:Charitable contributionsNightclubs: Officials: Alimony deduction .......1 2 6t o ................. 150, 151Cover charges, 50% limit on Local government .........1 8 7 Home seller andParochial school tuition:deduction ...............1 7 0 State .....................1 8 7 purchaser ............1 4 8No charitableNobel Prize .................. 8 8 Offset against debts ..... 10, 15 To dividend payers ....... 6 0deduction ...............1 5 3Nominees ............... 53, 58 OID (See Original issue discount Form 8606 not filed forPartners andDividends that belong to (OID)) nondeductible IRApartnerships .............1 8 9someone else ........ 60, 63 Oil, gas, and minerals: contributions ....... 113, 117Capital gains or lossesNonaccountable plans for Future production sold ...... 8 4 Fraud .................. 19, 20from ....................1 0 6employee Royalties from ............. 8 4 Frivolous return ............ 2 0Income .................... 8 2reimbursements ..... 176, 178 Schedule C or C-EZ ...... 8 3 Interest on ................. 1 6Investment interest ........1 4 7Noncapital assets ........... 9 7 Sale of property interest .... 8 4 IRAs ......................1 2 0Related party
Early distributions .......1 2 1Nonemployee Older taxpayers: transactions ............. 9 6
compensation ............. 8 6 Excess contributions ....1 2 0Credit for the elderly .......2 1 4 Pass-through entities ......1 8 9 Form 8606 not filed forNonrefundable credits ......2 4 3 Online help: Passive activity ............. 9 3 nondeductibleEITC Assistant ............2 2 9Nonresident alien ..........2 3 0 Losses ............... 22, 147 contributions ..... 113, 117Online Payment AgreementNonresident aliens ........... 7 Exception for real estate Overstatement ofapplication ................ 1 6Due dates ................. 1 1 professionals .......... 6 9 nondeductibleOptions ................. 47, 62 Investment interestEstimated tax .............. 3 9 contributions ..........1 1 7Charitable contributions, date a n d ..................1 4 7Form 1040EZ, use of ........ 8 Required distributions, failureo f ......................1 5 5 Rental property .......... 6 9Individual taxpayer identification to take ...............1 1 9Ordinary dividends (See Reporting of gains ornumber (ITIN) ............ 1 3 Late filing .............. 11, 19Dividends) losses ..................1 0 5Spouse .................... 1 3 Exception ................ 1 9Ordinary gain ............... 9 6 Patents:Joint returns not Late payment .............. 1 9Infringement damages ...... 8 6Ordinary gain and loss (Seeavailable .............. 2 1 Negligence ................ 1 9Royalties .................. 8 4Gains and losses)Separated ............... 2 3 Reportable transactionPatronage dividends ........ 6 3Organ donors:Transfers between spouses understatements ......... 1 9Deductibility of medical Payment of tax ....3 ,  10, 15, 16,when one spouse is Roth IRAs:expense ................1 3 5 18nonresident alien ....... 9 5 Conversion contributionsBy check or money order ....3 ,Original issue discount withdrawn in 5-yearStandard deduction ........1 3 0 15, 41(OID) ...................... 5 8 period ................1 2 4Waiver of alien status ....... 4 8 By credit card ........ 3 ,  11, 15Adjusted basis and ......... 9 3 Excess contributions ....1 2 3Nontaxable payments: By electronic means ........ 1 5Discounted debt Substantial understatement ofCredit for the elderly or the Credit card ........... 15, 41instruments .............. 9 7 income tax ............... 1 9disabled ................2 1 5 Electronic Federal TaxForm 1099-OID ............ 4 2 Tax evasion ................ 2 0Nontaxable trades (See Tax-free Payment SystemOrigination fees (See Points) Tips, failure to report ........ 5 1exchanges) (EFTPS) ........... 16, 41Other taxes .................1 9 5 Underpayment of estimatedNorthern Mariana Islands: Funds withdrawal .... 15, 35,Out of work ................2 1 4 t a x .......... 35, 40, 42, 199Income from ................ 7 41 Willful failure to file ......... 2 0Outplacement services ...... 4 4Not-for-profit activities ...... 8 5 Delivery services .........3 ,  1 0 Withholding ............ 37, 39Deduction of agency Estimated tax .......... 16, 41Notary fees .................. 8 6 fees ..................... 4 4 Pensions (See alsoInstallment agreements (SeeNot deductible as Rollovers) ........ 70-76, 74, 76Over-the-counter drugs: Installment agreements)interest .................1 4 6 457 plans (See Section 457Not deductible as medical Late payment penalties ..... 1 9Notes: deferred compensation plans)expense ................1 3 5 Payable to ’’United StatesAs obligations of Clergy ..................... 4 7Overpayment of tax (See also Treasury‘‘................. 3individuals ............... 9 8 Contributions:Tax refunds) ............... 1 4 Vouchers .................. 4 1Discounted ............ 44, 58 Elective deferralOverseas work (See Foreign Payments ..................1 9 6 amounts ..............1 ,  2Received for services ....... 4 4 employment) Disaster relief .............. 8 5 Retirement savingsNursery schools (See Child and Overtime pay ................ 3 7 Payroll deductions (See Payroll contribution credit ..... 2 2 ,dependent care credit) Oxygen equipment and oxygen: deductions) 244Nursing care: Deductibility as medical Charitable contributions via: Taxation of .............. 4 7Employment taxes for worker expense ................1 3 5 Recordkeeping Cost computation .......... 7 1providing medical care, requirements .........1 5 7 Decedent’s unrecovereddeductibility of ..........1 3 5 Withholding (See Withholding) investment in ............ 1 4For healthy baby, not deductible P Payroll taxes (See Social security Definition of ............ 74, 75as medical expense .....1 3 5 Paper vs. electronic return (See and Medicare taxes; Disability pensions ......... 4 9Wages for, deductibility as E-file) Withholding) Credit for ................ 7 0medical expense ........1 3 5 Paperwork Reduction Act of Peace Corps allowances .... 4 8 Early distributions:Nursing homes: 1980 ....................... 3 Penalties: Exceptions to tax on ...... 7 5Insurance for care in (See Parental responsibility (See Accuracy-related ........... 1 9 Qualified retirement plans,Long-term care insurance Children) Alimony deduction, failure to exceptions for .......... 7 5contracts) Parents who never provide social security Tax on ................... 7 4
Meals and lodging, deductible married ................... 2 8 number of recipient ......1 2 6 Elderly persons, credit
as medical expense .....1 3 6 Parents, divorced or Backup withholding ......... 3 9 f o r....................... 7 0
Nutrition Program for the separated ............ 27, 234 Check not honored ......... 1 5 Elective deferral
Elderly .................... 8 5 Divorced parents ..........2 3 5 Civil penalties .............. 1 9 limitation ................. 4 7
Nutritional supplements: Parking fees: Criminal ................... 2 0 Employer plans:
Business-related travel ....1 7 3 Deductibility .......... 148, 192Not deductible as medical Benefits from previous
expense ................1 3 5 Commuting expense .......1 7 2 Defenses .................. 1 9 employer’s plan.......1 1 6
Publication 17 (2006) Page 281

Page 284 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Personal property (See also Prepayment: Public transportation passes,Pensions
Casualty losses) ..........1 6 2 employer-provided ........ 4 6Insurance premiums:Employer plans: (Cont.)
Rental income from ......... 8 3 Deductibility as medical Public utilities (See Utilities)Rollover to IRA ..........1 1 8
Taxes (See Personal property expense ..............1 3 5 Publication 1244:Situations in which no
taxes) Mortgage interest (See Daily record of tips (Formcoverage .............1 1 5
Theft of (See Theft losses) Mortgages) 1244) .................... 5 1Estimated tax .............. 7 0
Rent paid in advance ....... 6 4Personal property taxes: Reporting tips toExcess accumulation, tax on
Car taxes .................1 7 3 Prescription medicines: employer ................ 5 1(See also this heading:
Deduction of ..............1 4 1 Deductibility as medical Publication 584:Required
expense ................1 3 5Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form Casualty and theft losses,distributions) ......... 74, 75
1040) ................1 4 2 workbook for ............1 5 8Presidential Election CampaignForeign employment
Taxes: (See Personal property Fund ...................... 1 3 Publication 78:contributions ............. 7 1
taxes) List of qualified organizations forPresidentially declaredForm 1099-R ............... 4 2
Personal representatives (See charitabledisasters (See Disaster relief)General Rule for nonqualified Fiduciaries) contributions ............1 4 9Prevention of cruelty to childrenplans and qualified plans for
Persons with disabilities (See Publications (See Tax help)or animals organizations:recipients over 75
Disabilities, persons with) Charitable Puerto Rico:years .................... 7 2
contributions ............1 5 0Photographs: Residents of ................ 7Inherited pensions .......... 8 7
Casualty or theft loss Price reduced after Pulitzer Prize ................ 8 8Joint returns ............... 7 1 claims ..................1 6 0 purchase .................. 8 1 Punitive damages:Loans from plan ............ 7 1
Physician certification ......2 1 4 Principal residence (See Home) As income ................. 8 6Lump-sum distributions (See
Physician’s statement......2 1 4 Privacy Act and paperworkalso Lump-sum
Veterans ..................2 1 5 reduction information ...... 3distributions) ............. 7 3 QPlace for filing .............5 ,  1 7 Private delivery services .....3 ,Military (See Armed forces) Qualified dividends ...... 61, 6310Planes: (See Aircraft)Multiple pension plan
Qualified domestic relationsPrivate schools:Plants and trees:benefits .............. 70, 71
orders (QDROs):Charitable deduction forCost of, when casualty or theftPartly taxable payments .... 7 1 Rollover of retirement plantuition ..................1 5 3loss involved ....... 159, 160Reporting of ................ 7 1 distribution ............... 7 4Prizes and awards (See alsoPlastic surgery:Required distributions: Qualified education expenses:Bonuses) ........... 37, 43, 88Not deductible as medicalAt age 701/2 .............. 7 5 Education credits ...... 223-225Exclusion from income ...... 4 3expense whenExcise tax for failure to take Work-related education,Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarcosmetic ................1 3 5minimum businessprizes ................... 8 8Points ......................1 4 3distributions ........... 7 5 deduction ........... 184-186Scholarship prizes .......... 8 8Basis in property not toForm 5329 for failure to Qualified Education Programs,Probationary work periods:include .................. 9 0receive required Payments from:Travel expenses during ....1 6 6Definition .................1 4 3minimum, .............. 7 5 Form 1099-Q .............. 4 2Excess points .............1 4 6 Professional licenseState insurer delinquency Qualified individuals:fees ......................1 9 2Form 1098 reporting .......1 4 7proceedings preventing Under age 65 and retired onGuide to determine if points Professionalminimum permanent and totaldeductible in year paid Reputation ...............1 9 2distributions ........... 7 5 disability ................2 1 4(Figure 23-B) ...........1 4 3 Professionals:State and local government Qualified plans: (See RetirementLimits on deduction ........1 4 6 Entertainment expenses foremployees (See Section 457 plans) ................ 74, 117Main home purchase, special attending associationdeferred compensation plans) Qualified student loan (Seetreatment of .............. 9 0 meetings ...............1 6 9Unrecovered investment Student loan interest deduction)Mortgage ending early .....1 4 6 Profit-sharing plans:i n ......................1 9 1 Paid by seller .............1 4 6 Qualified tuitionForm 1099-R ............... 4 2Withholding ..... 14, 38, 70, 74 programs ................. 8 8Refinancing ...............1 4 6 Lump sums (See Lump-sumPentagon attacks (See Terrorist Additional tax on ..........1 9 6Schedule A (Form 1040) to distributions)attacks) Filing requirements (Tablededuct ..................1 4 8 Withholding ............ 14, 38Per capita taxes: 1-3) ...................... 8Second home .............1 4 6 Promissory notes:Deductibility of ............1 4 2 Settlement statement shows as Qualifying child ............. 2 6Charitable contributions, datePer diem: charged for Qualifying person:o f ......................1 5 5Allowance or mortgage ...............1 4 3 Child and dependent careProof of businessreimbursement ..... 176, 177 Political campaign credit ...................2 0 5expense ..................1 7 3Charitable organization service, expenses ........... 191, 192 Qualifying relative ........... 2 9Table 26-2 summary .......1 7 5f o r......................1 5 2 Political contributions (See Proof of loss ...............1 5 9Federal rate ...............1 7 6 Campaign contributions) Property (See RealHigh-low rate method to RPolitical conventions: estate) ..................... 8 9compute ................1 7 7 Raffles ...................... 8 7Travel expenses ..........1 6 9 Found ..................... 8 7Standard meal No charitable deduction forPost office employees: Stolen ..................... 8 8allowance ...............1 6 7 tickets ............. 151, 153Rural mail carriers .........1 7 2 Prostheses:Performing artists: Railroad retirement benefitsPostponed tax deadlines: Deductibility of medicalArtists, performing .........1 8 7 (See also Excess withholdingDisaster areas ............1 6 3 expense ................1 3 5 credit) ................ 70, 243Business expenses ........1 8 0 Postponement of gain: Protective clothing .........1 8 8 Deductions related to ....... 7 9Work-related education Sale of home ..............1 0 2 Psychiatric care: Employer retirement plansexpenses ...............1 8 6 Adjusted basis ........... 9 1 Specially equipped medical different from ...........1 1 6Permanent and total Power of attorney ....... 14, 21 centers, deductibility of Equivalent tier 1 (social securitydisability .................2 1 4 Preferred stock: expense ................1 3 5 equivalent benefitPersonal exemption ..... 25-35, Redeemable at a Public assistance (SSEB)) ............. 76, 8825 premium ................. 6 2 benefits ................... 8 4 Estimated tax .............. 7 7Joint return ................ 2 5 Premature distributions (See Public debt: Form RRB-1099 ........ 42, 76Limits ...................... 2 2 Early withdrawal from deferred Gifts to reduce ............. 1 6 Income ..................... 8Phaseout ........... 22, 25, 34 interest account) Public parks and recreation Joint returns ............... 7 9Spouse’s exemption........ 2 5 Prepaid: facilities: Lump-sum election ......... 7 7
Personal injury suits: Insurance .................. 5 4 Charitable contributions Married filing separately . . . 22,
Damages from ............. 8 6 Preparer’s fee: t o ................. 150, 151 77
Deductible amount ........1 8 9Personal interest: Public safety officers insurance Repayment of benefits ...... 7 7
Not deductible ....... 142, 148 Preparers of tax returns ..... 1 4 premiums ................. 7 0 Reporting of ................ 7 7
Page 282 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 285 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recording fees: Health insurance, Figuring days of personalRailroad retirement benefits
reimbursement in later use ................... 6 6Basis to include ............ 8 9(Cont.)
year ....................1 3 7 Limit for rental losses ..... 6 9Taxability of ............ 76, 77 Recordkeeping:
Medical and dental Main homeWithholding ................ 3 8 Gambling .................1 9 0
expenses ...............1 3 6 determination .......... 6 6Not tax deductible .......1 4 2 General requirements .....1 8 7
Rented for 15 days orExcess reimbursementWithholding for ............. 7 7 Sale of home ..............1 0 2
more .................. 6 8flowchart (FigureRailroad retirement tax (RRTA) Savings bonds used for Rented for fewer than 1521-A) .................1 3 7(See also Excess withholding education ................ 5 7 days ........... 64, 66, 68Mileage (See Standard mileagecredit) ....................2 4 3 Recordkeeping Shared equity financingrates)Railroad Unemployment requirements .............. 1 7 agreement ............. 6 6Personal expenses ........1 7 5Insurance Act ............. 5 0 Business travel Equipment rental for rentalReceived after deductingReal estate: (See also expenses .......... 166, 173 property ................. 6 5loss ....................1 6 1Mortgages) ........ 66, 68, 142 Charitable Expenses paid by tenant .... 6 4Returning excess for businessAs noncapital assets ........ 9 7 contributions ....... 149, 156 Fair rental price ............ 6 6expenses ........... 37, 177Basis ...................... 8 9 Copies of returns ........... 1 7 Home possession before finalTax year of inclusion forCanceled business debt, Destroyed records .........1 7 4 settlement, rent notinsurancetreatment of .............. 8 1 Documentary evidence ....1 7 3 deductible asreimbursement ..........1 6 1Casualty loss .............1 6 2 Electronic records of tips .... 5 1 interest .................1 4 3Theft losses ...............1 6 0Closing costs .............. 8 9 Form W-2 .................. 1 7 Improvements .............. 6 4Travel advances ..........1 7 7Definition of ................ 8 9 Gambling .................. 8 7 Defined .................. 6 5Types of ..................1 6 0Division of real estate Incomplete records ........1 7 4 Increase due to higher realUnclaimed ................1 8 6taxes ...................1 4 0 Meal expenses: estate taxes ............1 4 1Work-related educationFair market value (FMV) .... 8 9 Actual cost ..............1 6 7 Deductibility (Tableexpenses ...............1 8 6Form 1099-S to report sale Standard meal 22-1) .................1 4 1proceeds .......... 105, 141 Reinvestment plans:allowance ............1 6 7 Insurance premiums paid inHolding period, determination Dividends used for ......... 6 2Period of retention ..... 17, 174 advance ................. 6 5o f ....................... 9 8 Related partyTip income ................. 5 0 Local assessments ......... 6 5Itemized charges for services transactions .............. 9 6Travel expenses ..... 166, 173 Losses from rental real estatenot deductible ...........1 4 1 Indirect transactions ........ 9 6Work-related education activities ............. 22, 69Points ....................1 4 3 Like-kind exchanges .... 95, 96expenses ...............1 8 6 Not-rented-for-profitProgressive deterioration, not Multiple property sales or property ................. 6 5Recovery of amountscasualty loss ............1 5 8 trades ................... 9 6 Part interest ................ 6 4previously deducted:Real estate-related items not Relationship test ........ 27, 30 Part of property rented ...... 6 5Itemized deductions ........ 8 2deductible ..............1 4 1 Relative, qualifying .......... 2 9 Personal property rental .... 8 3Mortgage interest refund .... 8 2Rental (See Rental income and Relief fund Personal use of propertyOver multiple years ......... 8 2expenses) contributions ............1 9 2 including vacationStolen property, adjustment ofSettlement fees ............ 8 9 Relief funds (See also Disaster home .................... 6 6theft loss ...............1 5 9Taxes (See Real estate taxes) relief) .....................1 6 1 Allocation ofTax refunds ................ 8 2Transfer taxes ............1 4 1
Religious organizations (See expenses .............. 6 4Red Cross:Real estate investment trusts also Clergy) ........ 7 ,  47, 150, Pre-rental expenses ........ 6 4(REITs): Blood donations not 151, 152 Property or services receivedDividends from ............. 6 2 deductible ......... 151, 153 instead of money ......... 6 4Charitable contributionsUndistributed capital Charitable contributions t o ................. 150, 151 Purchaser’s payment of rent,gains ...................1 0 6 t o ................. 150, 151 not included in property50% limit onCredit for tax on ..... 62, 247 Redeemable ground rent: basis .................... 8 9deduction .............1 5 5Real estate taxes: Deduction as mortgage Repairs .................... 6 4Written statement notAlimony deduction for, when interest .................1 4 3 Reporting of ................ 6 9needed ...............1 5 2home owned as tenants in Redemption of bonds ....... 9 4 Sale of rental property ...... 6 4Remainder interest, salecommon ................1 2 5 State and local bonds, before Schedule E for reportingof ........................1 0 4Assessments (See Local maturity ................. 9 7 o f ....................... 6 9Rental income:assessments) Redemption of stock ........ 9 4 Security deposits ........... 6 4Uncollected rent ............ 6 4Basis of property and ....... 8 9 Refinancing: Self-employment tax, whenRental income andWhen not reimbursed by Fees for, not part of property applicable ............... 6 9expenses .............. 64-69property seller ......... 9 0 basis .................... 9 0 Tax return preparation ...... 6 5Advance rent ............... 6 4Cooperative housing (See Points ....................1 4 6 Tax shelters and at-riskCooperative housing) Canceling lease, paymentsRefund of expenses (See name rules .................... 6 9deduction of ...............1 3 9 f o r....................... 6 4of benefit) Time to report .............. 6 4List of deductible taxes (Table Capitalized costs ........... 6 5Refundable credits .... 243, 246 Travel expenses associated22-1) .................1 4 1 Change of property to rental with management andRefunds ....................1 9 6Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form u s e.................. 65, 93 maintenance ............. 6 5Mortgage interest, treatment1040) ................1 4 2 Deductions ............ 64, 68 Vacant rental property ...... 6 4o f ......................1 4 3Refund, treatment of .......1 4 1 Losses that exceed passive Reorganizations, corporate:State tax ................... 8 2Taxes (See Real estate taxes) income ................ 6 9 Nontaxable trade ofTaxes (See Tax refunds)Rebates (See Refunds) Depreciation (See also stock .................... 9 5Regulated investment Depreciation) ........ 64, 68Recapture: Repairs:companies: Dwelling unit not used asAlimony ...................1 2 6
Basis, effect on ......... 89, 90Undistributed capital gains, home .................... 6 8Reporting on Form
Cost of, when casualty or theftcredit for tax on .........2 4 7 Dwelling unit used as1040 .................1 2 7
loss involved ............1 6 0Reimbursement (See also home .................... 6 6Alternative motor vehicle
Rental expenses ........... 6 4Recovery of amounts previously Capital gainscredit ...................2 4 5
Repayment:deducted) ........ 82, 175, 176, exclusion .............1 0 3Credits ..................... 8
Amount previously included in177, 179Filing requirements (Table Computation of income and
income .................1 9 1Accountable plans, definition1-3) .................... 8 expenses .............. 6 8
o f ......................1 7 6 Repayments:Electric vehicle credit ......2 4 5 Days used for repairs and
Social security benefits .... 7 7 ,New markets credit, filing Allocation of ...............1 7 9 maintenance ........... 6 8
83requirements (Table Casualty losses ...........1 6 0 Determining if used as
Unemployment1-3) ...................... 8 home .................. 6 6Employee business
compensation ............ 8 4Taxes ....................1 9 5 expenses ........ 37, 43, 170 Division of expenses ..... 6 8
Reporting:Recharacterization: Gain from casualty or theft Donation of use of
IRA contributions ..........1 1 9 loss ....................1 6 0 property ............... 6 7 Rollovers .................1 1 8
Publication 17 (2006) Page 283

Page 286 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Repossession of home .....1 0 1 Elderly persons, credit Eligible distributions ........ 7 4 Penalties .................1 2 4
f o r....................... 7 0 Conversion contributionsExcess due to incorrect rolloverRequests for information from
withdrawn in 5-yearElective deferral information .............1 2 1IRS ........................ 1 7
period ................1 2 4limitation ................. 4 7 From 403 plan to IRA ......1 1 7Required minimum
Excess contributions ....1 2 3Employer plans: From employer’s plan todistributions (See Individual
Spousal contributions ......1 2 2Benefits from previous I R A ............... 117, 118retirement arrangements (IRAs);
Taxability .................1 2 4employer’s plan.......1 1 6 From IRA to IRA ..... 117, 118Pensions)
Withdrawals ...............1 2 4Rollover to IRA ..........1 1 8 From IRA to Roth IRA .....1 2 3Rescue squad members:
Excess contributions ....1 2 3Situations in which no From Roth IRA to RothLife insurance proceeds when
Not taxable .............1 2 4coverage .............1 1 5 I R A ....................1 2 4death in line of duty ...... 8 2
Rounding off dollars ........ 1 3Estimated tax .............. 7 0 From section 457 plan toResearch expenses:
Excess accumulation, tax on Royalties .................... 8 3I R A ....................1 1 7College professor .........1 8 8
(See also this heading: From SIMPLE IRA to Roth RRTA tax (See also ExcessReservists: Required I R A ....................1 2 3 withholding credit) .........2 4 3Deduction for transportation distributions) ......... 74, 75 Gain from publicly traded Rural mail carriers .........1 7 2expense ................1 7 2 Foreign employment securities ................ 9 9IRAs ......................1 1 6 contributions ............. 7 1 Inherited IRAs .............1 1 8Qualified reservist Form 1099-R ............... 4 2 Lump-sum distributions ..... 7 3 Sdistributions .............1 1 3 General Rule for nonqualified Married filing separately .... 2 2 S corporations .............1 8 9Repayments ......... 113, 114 and qualified plans for Nonspouse beneficiary .... 7 0 , Capital gains or lossesResidency: recipients over 75 74 from ....................1 0 6Home outside U.S. (See years .................... 7 2 Related partyNontaxable amounts ........ 7 4Citizens outside U.S.) Inherited pensions .......... 8 7 transactions ............. 9 6Partial rollovers ...........1 1 8Main home, defined .......1 0 0 IRAs (See Individual retirement Shareholders .............. 8 2Qualified domestic relationsResidency test .............. 2 7 arrangements (IRAs)) Investment interest ......1 4 7orders for distribution ofResident aliens: Joint return ................ 7 1 Safe deposit box ...........1 9 0retirement plan funds ..... 7 4Earned income credit ......2 3 0 Keogh plans ............... 7 1 Reporting: Salaries (See Wages andEstimated tax .............. 3 9 Loans from plan ............ 7 1 From employer’s plan to salaries)IRA distributions, withholding Lump-sum distributions (See I R A ..................1 1 8 Sale of home (See also Realfrom ....................1 2 0 also Lump-sum IRA to IRA ..............1 1 8 estate) .......... 69, 88, 99-105Social security number distributions) ............. 7 3 Retirement bond Abandonment .............1 0 1(SSN) ................... 1 3 Military (See Armed forces) redemption .............. 7 4 Adjusted basis ....... 100, 101Spouse treated as .......... 2 4 Multiple pension plan Surviving spouse ........... 7 4 Amount realized ...........1 0 0Residential energy benefits .............. 70, 71 Basis .....................1 0 1Taxability ............ 117, 121credits ...................2 4 6 Partly taxable payments .... 7 1 Capital gains exclusion ....1 0 2Time limits (60-dayResorts: Reporting of ................ 7 1 Division of real estaterule) ............... 117, 118Travel expenses when Required distributions ...... 7 5 taxes ...................1 4 0Treatment of ..............1 1 7incidental business At age 701/2 .............. 7 5 Employer, payment by .....1 0 0Waiting periodactivities ................1 6 8 Excise tax for failure to take Federal subsidy, recapturebetween ................1 1 8Restaurant employees: minimum o f ......................1 0 4Withholding tax ............. 7 4Tips (See Tip income) distributions ........... 7 5 Foreclosure orRoth IRAs: (See alsoRetail installment contracts: Form 5329 for failure to repossession ...........1 0 1Rollovers) ........ 121-124, 124Finance charges, not receive required minimum Form 1099-S ..............1 0 0Age:deductible ..............1 4 8 retirement plan Gain or loss, figuring of ....1 0 0Distributions after agedistributions ........... 7 5Retail inventory ............. 9 7 Interest deduction for5 9....................1 2 4State insurer delinquency mortgage ...............1 4 3Retention of records (See No limit forproceedings preventing Interest paid to seller, reportingRecordkeeping requirements) contributions ..........1 2 2minimum o f ......................1 4 8Retired Senior Volunteer No required distributiondistributions ........... 7 5 Jointly owned home .......1 0 0Program .................. 4 8 a g e ..................1 2 4Section 457 plans (See Section Land .....................1 0 0Retirees (See also Retirement Compensation, defined ....1 2 2457 deferred compensation Main home, defined .......1 0 0plans) ..................... 7 0 Contribution limits .........1 2 2plans) More than one home ......1 0 0Armed forces: Age 50 or older, .........1 2 3State and local government Sold in 2-year period ....1 0 3Taxable income .......... 4 8 Under age 50, ..........1 2 3employees (See Section 457 Option to buy .............1 0 0Withholding .............. 3 6 Contributions ..............1 2 2deferred compensation plans) Period of ownership andRetirement of bonds .... 94, 98 No deduction for ........1 2 2 u s e.....................1 0 2Withholding ..... 14, 38, 70, 74Rollover of amount Roth IRA only ...........1 2 2 Points paid by seller .......1 4 6Retirement savings contributionredeemed ............... 7 4 Time to make ...........1 2 3 Postponed gain from ....... 9 1credit ....................2 4 4Retirement planning To traditional IRA for same Recordkeeping ............1 0 2Adjusted gross incomeservices ................... 4 6 year ..................1 2 2 Reporting of gain ..........1 0 4limit ..................... 2 2Retirement plans (See also Roth Conversion ...............1 2 3 Seller-financedReturns, tax (See Tax returns)IRAs) ........... 22, 70, 74, 76 Definition of ...............1 2 1 mortgage ...............1 0 4Revenue stamps:457 plans (See Section 457 Distributions: Selling price ...............1 0 0Basis to include ............ 8 9deferred compensation plans) Qualified Settlement fees or closingRevolving charge accounts:Clergy ..................... 4 7 distributions ..........1 2 4 costs ...................1 0 1Finance charges, notContributions ............... 4 7 Effect of modified AGI on Trading homes ............1 0 1deductible ..............1 4 8Credit for (See Retirement contributions (Table Transfer to spouse ....... 101,Rewards .................... 8 8savings contribution credit) 17-3) ...................1 2 2 103
Rhode Island TemporaryElective deferral Establishing account .......1 2 2 Undeducted points ........1 0 0
Disability Benefitamounts ..............1 ,  2 Excess contributions .......1 2 3 Sale of property .......... 93-99Fund .....................1 3 9Taxation of .............. 4 7 Failed conversions and Adjusted basis ............. 9 4
Robbery:Cost computation .......... 7 1 recharacterizations ..... 119, Amount realized ............ 9 4
Losses due to .............1 5 9Decedent’s unrecovered 123 Basis other than cost ....... 9 4
investment in ............ 1 4 Rollovers ............... 74, 117 IRA transfer to ....... 117, 118 Business property that has
Definition of ............ 74, 75 Beneficiaries, Modified adjusted gross income undergone change of
Disability pensions ......... 4 9 restrictions ............... 7 4 (MAGI) .................1 2 2 u s e...................... 9 3
Credit for ................ 7 0 Definition of ...............1 1 7 Computation (Worksheet Cash payment ............. 9 4
Early distributions: 17-2) .................1 2 2Designated Roth Debt payoff included in ..... 9 4
Exceptions to tax on ...... 7 5 account .................. 7 4 Phaseout (Table Definition of ................ 9 4
Tax on ................... 7 4 Direct rollovers ............. 7 4 1 7–3 ) ................1 2 3 Fair market value (FMV) .... 9 4
Page 284 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 287 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Section 179 deductions: Meal allowance not permitted Short tax year:Sale of property (Cont.)
when more than 10%Adjustment to basis for ..... 9 0 Change in annual accountingFiguring gain or loss ........ 9 4
ownership ofCar expenses .............1 7 3 period ..................1 3 0Form 1099-B ............... 9 4
corporation .............1 7 6Like-kind exchanges ........ 9 4 Section 457 deferred Short-term debt instruments:
Personal items ............. 8 8 Ministers .................... 7compensation plans ...... 7 1 Government obligations ..... 9 7
Redemption of stock ........ 9 4 Early distributions from ..... 7 4 Ordinary gain .............. 9 7Nonemployee
Rental property that has Required distributions ...... 7 5 compensation ............ 8 6 Short-term gains and
undergone change of Rollovers: losses ................ 96, 106Qualified retirement plans
u s e...................... 9 3 To IRAs ................1 1 8 Priority in deducting .......1 0 6f o r....................... 7 1
Transfers between Section 72(m)(5) ............1 9 6 Sale or trade of property held 1Travel outside U.S. ........1 6 8spouses ................. 9 5 year or less .............. 9 8Securities: (See also Work-related educationSales and exchanges: Dividends) ............ 60, 105 Sick leave:expenses ...............1 8 6Bonds ..................... 5 7 Adjusted basis for .......... 9 3 Cash payments for unusedSelf-employment tax .......1 9 5Sales tax: As capital assets ........... 9 7 leave ...................1 3 6Deduction of ..............1 4 2Basis to include ............ 8 9 Bought at various times, how to Federal employees buyingList of deductible taxes (TableCar purchase .............1 7 3 indicate .................1 0 6 back ..................... 5 022-1) .................1 4 1Deductibility of (Table Claim for refund ............ 1 9 Sick pay:Rental income ............. 6 922-1) ...................1 4 1 Constructive ownership of FECA payments ............ 5 0Seller-financedstock, determinationSales to related persons, Income .................... 4 4mortgages ...............1 0 4o f ....................... 9 6exception ................1 0 4 Railroad UnemploymentSeminars:Convertible stocks and Insurance Act ............ 5 0Salvation Army (See Charitable Investment-related ........1 9 2bonds ................... 9 5 Withholding ............ 37, 38contributions)
Senior CompanionFractional shares ........... 6 2 Signatures .................. 1 4Saturday, deadline falling Program .................. 4 8Holding period, determination Agent, use of ............... 1 4on ......................... 4 0
Separate returns (See Marriedo f ....................... 9 8 E-file Forms 8453 and 8453-OLSavings: filing separately)Joint owners, reporting of for signatureBonds ................. 54, 59 dividends ................ 6 0 Separated parents ...... 27, 235 requirements .............. 9Bonds used for Nontaxable trades .......... 9 5 Separated parents, special Joint returns ............... 2 1education ................ 5 6 Options ................ 47, 62 rule ......................2 3 4 Mentally incompetent ....... 1 4Certificate .............. 54, 58 Preferred stock, redeemable at Parent for child ............. 1 4Separated taxpayers ........ 2 1Schedule (See Form 1040) a premium ............... 6 2 Physically disabled ......... 1 4Filing status ............ 22, 231 (Form 1040A), Part I ...... 5 9 Redemption of stock ........ 9 4 Self-Select PIN acting as2 of Form 1040A ..........2 1 0 IRAs ......................1 1 5Reinvestment plan, dividends electronic signature ....... 93 of Form 1040A ..........2 1 5 Medical and dental expenses ofused for ................. 6 2 Silver (See Gold and silver)Form 1040, A-F, R, SE (See children of ..............1 3 4Rollover of gain from publicly SIMPLE plans:Form 1040) Mortgage interest .........1 4 3traded securities ......... 9 9 Contribution limits .........1 ,  2K-1: Nonresident alienSale expenses, how to adjust Rollover to Roth IRA .......1 2 3Beneficiaries receiving spouse .................. 2 3f o r......................1 0 6income from estate or Simplified employee pensionsPersonal exemption ........ 2 5Short-term gains andtrust ................... 6 0 (SEPs):Separation agreements:losses ..................1 0 6Partnership income ....... 8 2 IRAs as ...................1 1 4Defined for purposes ofStock appreciation rights .... 4 4S corporation income ..... 8 2 Simplified Method:alimony .................1 2 4Stock rights:K-1, Form 1041 ............ 5 3 Computation of taxableAs capital assets ......... 9 7 SEPs (See Simplified employeeR of Form 1040 ...........2 1 5 annuity .................. 7 2Dividends as ............. 6 2 pensions (SEPs))X: Worksheet ............... 7 2Holding period, determination Series EE and E savings bondsTax rates for single Single taxpayers:o f ..................... 9 8 (See U.S. savingspersons ............... 2 1 Charitable contributions to, noWorthless ................ 9 4 bonds) ..................... 5 5Y-1: deduction for ....... 151, 153Surrender of stock .......... 9 4 Series HH and H savingsTax rates for married filing Filing requirements .......... 6Tax-exempt: bonds ..................... 5 5jointly ................. 2 1 Filing status .......... 6 ,  20, 21Home equity loan proceeds Series I savings bonds ...... 5 5Y-2: Form 1040EZ, use of .....8 ,  2 1invested in ............1 4 3Tax rates for married filing Service Center Gross income filingInterest incurred to produceseparately ............. 2 2 addresses ................. 1 7 requirements (Tableincome from ..........1 4 7Schedules A–F, R, SE (Form Service charges ............1 9 0 1-1) ...................... 7Interest to purchase or carry,1040) (See Form 1040) Credit card payment of Small businesses:not deductible .........1 4 8Scholarships ......... 28, 30, 33 taxes .................... 1 5 Capital gains or losses fromTenants by the entirety owning,Scholarships and Deductibility of ............1 4 8 stock of .................1 0 7reporting of dividends ..... 6 0fellowships ................. 8 Employer treating as wages for Keogh plans ............... 7 1Tenants in common owning,Earned income tip income ............... 5 1 Losses on stock of ......... 9 8reporting of dividends ..... 6 0including ................1 3 1 Service Corps of Retired Smoking cessation programs:Worthless securities ........ 9 4Exclusion from gross Executives (SCORE) ...... 4 8 Deductibility as medicalSecurity deposits:income .................. 8 8 expense ................1 3 5Services:Rental property, for ......... 6 4Teaching or research Social clubs:No charitable deduction forSelf-employed persons: (Seefellowships ............... 8 8 Contributions to, no charitablevalue of .................1 5 1also Self-employmentScientific organizations: deduction for ............1 5 1Property received for ....... 9 1tax) .......................1 4 2Charitable contributions Dues:Corporate directors as ...... 8 6 Settlement date of securitiest o ......................1 5 0 Not entertainmentDefinition ................... 7 transaction ................ 9 8Scrip dividends ............. 6 3 expenses .............1 6 9Filing requirements (Table Settlement fees:Second homes (See Vacation Social security and Medicare1-3) ...................... 8 Real propertyhomes) taxes (See also ExcessForeign government or transactions ............. 8 9Second mortgages: withholding credit) ........ 196,international organizations, Sale of home ..............1 0 1Interest ...................1 4 2 210, 243U.S. citizens employed Severance pay .............. 4 4Section 1202 exclusion: 2006 changes ............... 1b y........................ 7 Accrued leave payment ..... 4 4Capital gains or losses Reporting of (Table 1-3) ..... 8Gross income ............... 6 Outplacement services ..... 4 4under ...................1 0 7 Support, not included in ..... 3 3Health insurance costs, Shipping:Section 1244 stock: Social security benefits ..... 3 1deductible as medical
Business-related travelLosses on ................. 9 8 Deductions related to ....... 7 9expense ................1 3 8
expense ................1 6 7 Employer retirement plansSection 1250 gains: Homeworkers, deduction of
Shipwrecks: different from ...........1 1 6Sale of real property subject expenses ...............1 7 5
t o ......................1 0 7 IRAs ......................1 1 4 Casualty loss due to .......1 5 8 Estimated tax .............. 7 7
Publication 17 (2006) Page 285

Page 288 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Defined ...................1 3 0 Statutory employees .......1 7 5 Supplies:Social security benefits (Cont.)
Dependents ...............1 3 1Foreign employer ........... 4 8 Regularly used or consumed inStillborn child ............... 2 7
Final return of ordinary course of trade orForm SSA-1042S for Stock appreciation
decedent ...............1 3 0 business ................. 9 7nonresident aliens ........ 7 6 rights ..................... 4 4
Increase in ................1 3 0Form SSA-1099 ........ 42, 76 Support test:Stock bonus plans .......... 3 8
Married filing separately:Group-term life insurance, taxes Qualifying child ............. 2 8Stock certificates:One spouse hasowed on .................. 9 Qualifying relative .......... 3 1Charitable contributions, dateitemized ..............1 3 0Income ..................... 8 Surveys:o f ......................1 5 5Not allowed in certainIRAs for recipients of Property basis to include .... 8 9Stock options ........... 47, 62situations ...............1 3 0benefits .................1 1 6 Surviving spouse:Stockholders (See alsoPurpose of ................1 3 0Joint returns ............... 7 9 Annuity .................... 7 5Securities) ................. 1 9Lump-sum election ......... 7 7 Standard meal Filing status ................ 2 0Debts ...................... 8 0Married filing separately . . . 22, allowance ...... 167, 176, 177 With dependent child ..... 2 4Stockholders’ meeting77 Amount of ................1 6 7 expenses ................1 9 2 Gross income filingPaid by employer ........... 4 4 Areas outside continental requirements (TableStocks (See Dividends;Repayment of benefits ..... 7 7 , U.S. ....................1 6 7 1-1) ...................... 7Securities)83 Prorating on partial days of Life insurance proceeds paidStolen funds:Repayments ..............1 9 0 travel ...................1 7 7 t o ....................... 8 1Reporting of ................ 7 7 Reporting of ................ 8 8Standard mileage rate: Rollovers by ............... 7 4Taxability of ............ 76, 77 Stolen property (See TheftWork-related
Single filing status .......... 2 1Tips, taxes owed on ......... 9 losses) .................... 8 8education .......... 182, 185
Withholding for ......... 38, 77 Tax (See Estate tax)Stop-smoking programs:Standard mileage rates .....1 7 2Not deductible ..........1 4 2 Synagogues (See Churches,Deductibility as medical2006 rates .................. 1
Social security number temples, etc.)expense ................1 3 5Business-related miles .... 164,
(SSN) ..................... 1 3 172 Storms (See also DisasterCorrespondence with IRS, Car expenses .............1 7 2 relief) .....................1 6 1include SSN ............. 1 3 TCharitable organization service, Casualty loss due to .......1 5 8Dependents ................ 1 3 Tables and figures:auto use for .............1 5 2 Straddles:Exception ................ 1 3 Medical reasons for use of Adjusted basis, examples ofInterest from ..............1 4 7Failure to include c a r ................ 133, 136 (Table 13-1) ............. 9 0Strike benefits ............... 8 8penalty .................. 1 3 Not allowed ...............1 7 3 Alimony requirementsStudent loan interest deduction:Form SS-5 to request (instruments executed afterState: Loan repaymentnumber .................. 1 3 1984) (Table 18-1) ......1 2 6Obligations, interest on ..... 5 8 assistance ..............1 2 8Nonresident alien Officials .............. 187, 191 Capital gain rates (TableStudent loans:spouse .................. 1 3 16-1) ...................1 0 7State bar associations: Cancellation of debt ........ 8 1Resident aliens ............. 1 3 Bar review courses ........1 8 4 Car expenses, reporting ofInterest deduction ......8 ,  127,Social security numbers Charitable contributions (Table 26-3) ............1 7 9142, 148(SSNs) ...................2 0 7 t o ......................1 5 3 Casualty and theft losses:Academic period ........1 2 7Alimony recipient’s number State or local governments: Deduction limits for personalrequired ................1 2 6 Amount of deduction ....1 2 8Bonds, tax-exempt ......... 9 7 property (TableChild’s...................... 2 Claiming ........... 128, 129Charitable contributions 25-1) .................1 6 3Number to be obtained at Double deduction nott o ................. 150, 151 Deduction of loss, when tobirth ................... 3 5 allowed ...............1 2 8Employees: take (Table 25-2) ......1 6 4Dependents ................. 2 Eligible educationalSection 457 plans for (See Charitable contributions,Dividend payers to use ..... 6 0 institution .............1 2 8Section 457 deferred deductibility of (TableEarned income credit ..... 230, Eligible student .........1 2 7compensation plans) 24-1) ...................1 5 1233 Features of (TableUnemployment Children’s income:Label, number need to be 19-1) .................1 2 7compensation .......... 8 4 Inclusion on parent’s returnwritten in ................. 2 Married filingFee-basis officials: (Figure 31-A) .........1 9 9Penalty for failure to provide: separately ............. 2 2Business expenses Investment income more thanTo dividend payers ....... 6 0 o f ....................1 7 9 Qualified student $1,700, reporting of (FigureSocial security card ........2 3 0 Work-related education loan ..................1 2 7 31-B) .................2 0 0Sonic booms: expenses .............1 8 6 Worksheet ..............1 2 8 Education credits:Casualty loss due to .......1 5 8 State or local income taxes: Interest, defined ...........1 2 7 Can you claim (FigureSpecial needs children: Deduction of ......... 138, 139 Student claimed as exemption 35-A) .................2 2 3Adoption credit ............2 4 4 List of deductible taxes (Table on tax return of another Comparison chart (TableSpouse (See also Surviving 22-1) .................1 4 1 person ..................1 2 8 35-1) .................2 2 2spouse) (See also Married Schedule A (Form Students ...................1 5 6 Entertainment expenses:taxpayers) ............. 20, 21 1040) ................1 4 2 Credit (See Education credits) 50% limit (FigureDisabled, qualifying for Electronic returns filed with Defined .................... 2 7 26-A) ............ 169, 170dependent care federal ................... 1 0 Exemption from Proof of (Table 26-2) ....1 7 5credit ...................2 0 7 Exception to deduction ....1 3 9 withholding .............. 3 7 Reporting of (TableStudent ...................2 0 7 Federal changes, effect Foreign .................... 2 6 26-3) .................1 7 9SSN (See Social security number o n....................... 1 9 Foreign students ..........1 5 2 Estimated tax, who must make(SSN)) Form W-2 to show withheld Loans (See Student loans) payments (FigureStamp taxes: taxes ...................1 3 9 Scholarships (See Scholarships 4–A ) .................... 3 9Real estate transactions Interest on, not and fellowships) Filing requirements:a n d ....................1 4 1 deductible ..............1 4 8 Tuition programs, qualified (See Dependents (TableItemized deductions .......1 3 1Stamps (See Collectibles) Qualified tuition programs) 1-2) .................... 7Joint state and local returns butStandard deduction ....... 130, Work-related education (See Gross income levels (Tablefederal returns filed131 Work-related education) 1-1) .................... 7separately ..............1 3 92006 changes ............... 1 Substantial gainful Other situations requiringMarried filingAge 65 or older ............1 3 0 activity ...................2 1 4 filing (Table 1-3) ........ 8separately ..............1 3 9Amount ...................1 3 0 Substitute forms ............ 1 2Refunds, treatment of ......1 3 9 Gift expenses:Blind persons .............1 3 0
Suggestions for Proof of (Table 26-2) ....1 7 5State or local taxes:Changing from itemized to
publication ................. 4Refunds ................... 8 2 Reporting of (Tablestandard deduction (or vice
Sunday, deadline falling 26-3) .................1 7 9versa) ..................1 3 1 Statute of limitations:
on ......................... 4 0 Head of household, qualifyingComparison with itemized Claim for refund ............ 1 5
person (Table 2-1) ....... 2 4deduction amount .......1 3 1 Claim for refunds ........... 1 8 Supplemental wages ........ 3 7
Page 286 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 289 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Married filing separately Third party designee ......2 ,  1 4 Taxpayer identification numberTables and figures: (Cont.)
(Schedule Y–2) .......... 2 2 (TIN):Individual retirement Transcript of ............... 1 7
Single person filing (Schedule Adoption (ATIN) ............ 1 3arrangements (IRAs): Who must file .......... 5 ,  6 ,  7
X ) ....................... 2 1Figuring modified AGI Individual (ITIN) ............ 1 3Tax shelters:
(Worksheet 17-1) .....1 1 7 Tax refunds: Social security number (SeePenalty for failure to furnish
Modified AGI, effect on Agreement with IRS extending Social security numberregistration number ....... 2 0
deduction if covered by assessment period, claim (SSN))Rental property and at-riskretirement plan at work based on ................ 1 9 Taxpayer identificationrules .................... 6 9(Table 17-1) ..........1 1 6 Bad debts .................. 1 9 numbers (TINs) ..... 205, 207Tax table ............... 249-260Modified AGI, effect on Business tax credit Child and dependent careTax year (See also Accountingdeduction if not covered by carrybacks ............... 1 9 credit ...................2 0 8periods) ............... 10, 12retirement plan at work Cashing check ............. 1 4 Childcare provider .........2 0 8Tax-exempt:(Table 17-2) ..........1 1 6 Check’s expiration date..... 1 4 Individual (ITIN) ............ 3 5Bonds and otherRoth IRAs, effect of modified Claim for ............ 17, 18, 19 Social security numbers (Seeobligations ............... 5 8AGI on contributions (Table Limitations period ........ 1 8 Social security numbersIncome ...................1 9 217-3) .................1 2 2 Litigation ................ 1 9 (SSNs))Interest .................... 5 8Roth IRAs, modified AGI Direct deposit .............. 1 4 Teachers:Obligations:(Worksheet 17-2) .....1 2 2 Erroneous refunds .......... 1 7 Work-relatedAdjusted basis ........... 9 3Interest deductions, forms to Federal income tax education .......... 183, 184Organizations:use (Table 23-1) ....... 148, refunds .................. 8 2 Telephone excise tax149 Related partyFinancially disabled ........ 1 8 paid ......................2 4 7Meal expenses and 50% limit transactions ........... 9 6Foreign tax paid or Telephones ................1 9 2(Figure 26-A) ...... 169, 170 Section 457 deferredaccrued ................. 1 9 Business-related travelMedical and dental expenses: compensation plans .... 7 1General rules .............. 1 0 expense ................1 6 7Checklist for deductible Tax-exempt income ......... 3 1Inquiries ................... 1 0 Fraud or misconduct of IRSexpense (Table Interest on .......... 17, 19, 54 Tax-exempt obligations: employee, number for21-1) .................1 3 5 Late filed returns .........3 ,  1 8 Adjusted basis for .......... 9 3 reporting anonymously .... 3Reimbursement, excess Less than $1 ............... 1 4 Tax-free exchanges: Tax return to include phonealgorithm (Figure Limits ...................... 1 8 Definition of ................ 9 1 number ................... 221-A) .................1 3 7 Exceptions ............... 1 9 Holding period, determination Temples (See Churches, temples,Mortgage deduction (Figure More or less than o f ....................... 9 8 etc.)23-A) ...................1 4 3 expected ................ 1 4 Taxable exchanges:Points, to determine if Temporary absence from job:Net operating loss Definition of ................ 9 1deductible in year paid Work-related educationcarryback ................ 1 9 Taxes: (See also Sales(Figure 23-B) ...........1 4 3 during ..................1 8 2Offset: tax) .... 138-142, 138, 173, 195Roth IRA and modified adjusted Temporary absences .... 27, 30Against debts ........ 10, 15 Alternative minimum .......1 9 6gross income (MAGI) Temporary job assignments:Against next year’sphaseout (Table Business taxes, deduction Travel expenses ..........1 6 5t a x ................ 14, 411 7–3 ) ..................1 2 3 o f ......................1 3 8Past-due ............... 10, 17 Tenants (See Rental income andStudent loan interest deduction Deduction of ..............1 3 9Real estate taxes, treatment expenses)(Table 19-1) ............1 2 7 Schedules to use ........1 4 2o f ......................1 4 1 By the entirety ............. 5 3Tax returns: Types of taxes deductibleReduced ................... 1 9 In common ................. 5 3Due dates (Table 1-5) .... 1 0 (Table 22-1) ..........1 4 1State and local income tax Tenants by the entirety:Steps to prepare (Table Estate (See Estate tax)refunds .................1 3 9 Alimony, no deduction for taxes1-6) ................... 1 2 Estimated (See Estimated tax)State liability, effect on ...... 1 9 and insurance paid on homeTaxes that are deductible (Table Excise (See Excise taxes)Withholding ................. 7 owned as ...............1 2 522-1) ...................1 4 1 Worthless securities ........ 1 9 Federal income taxes, not Dividends, reporting of ...... 6 0Travel and transportation Claim for refund .......... 9 4 deductible ..............1 4 2 Real estate taxes, allocationexpenses: Foreign taxes .............1 3 8Tax return preparation: when filingExamples of deductible Rental expenses ........... 6 5 Income tax. deduction separately ..............1 4 1expenses (Table o f ....................1 3 9Tax returns (See also Tenants in common:2 6–1 ) ................1 6 7 Gift taxes .................1 4 2Signatures) ......... 10, 14, 21 Alimony deduction for taxes andLocal transportation (Figure Aliens ...................... 7 How to figure ..............1 9 5 insurance paid on home26-B) .................1 7 1 Amended (See also Form Income taxes, deduction owned as ...............1 2 5Proof of (Table 26-2) ....1 7 5 1040X) ............. 18, 131 o f ......................1 3 9 Dividends, reporting of ...... 6 0Reporting of (Table Attachments to returns ...... 1 3 Indian tribal government taxes,26-3) .................1 7 9 Terminal illness:Child ...................... 1 4 deduction of ............1 3 8Volunteers, deductibility of Accelerated payment of lifeCopies of .................. 1 7 Inheritance tax ............1 4 2contributions (Table insurance proceeds (SeeDating of ................... 1 4 Kiddie tax (See Children,24-2) ...................1 5 2 Accelerated death benefits)Filing of (See also Filing subheading: InvestmentWork-related education (Figure Viatical settlements ......... 8 1requirements) ............. 5 income of child under age 18)27-A) ...................1 8 3 Termite damage:Forms to use ................ 8 Nanny tax (See Domestic help)Tax computation Not casualty losses ........1 5 8Free preparation help ....... 1 0 Not deductible ............1 4 2worksheet ................2 6 1 Terrorist attacks:How to file ................. 1 2 Personal property taxes:Tax counsel fees ...........1 8 9 Casualty loss due to .......1 5 8Joint returns (See Joint Car taxes ...............1 7 3Tax Counseling for the Disability payments for injuriesReturns) Deduction of ............1 4 1Elderly .................... 1 0 from, tax exclusion ....... 7 0Mailing of ................1 ,  1 7 Real estate taxes (See RealTax credits (See Credits) Disability pensions for federalPaid preparer .............. 1 4 estate taxes)Tax evasion ................. 2 0 employees ............... 4 9Payment with .............. 1 5 Sales tax .................. 8 9Tax figured by IRS .........1 9 6 Theft losses ...... 158-164, 189,Phone number to be Withholding ................ 3 5 190Tax help ........... 3 ,  4 ,  10, 264 included .................. 2 Taxes, not support .......... 3 3 $100 Rule ................1 6 2Tax Counseling for the Preparation fees ..........1 8 9
Taxis:Elderly ................... 1 0 Adjusted basis inPrivate delivery services .....3 ,
Business-related travelVolunteer counseling (Volunteer property ......... 90, 91, 16010
expense ................1 6 7Income Tax Assistance Amount of loss ............1 5 9Request copy of, Form
program) ............ 10, 48 Standard mileage rate not Appraisals ................1 6 04506 .................... 1 7
allowed .................1 7 3Tax preference items .......1 9 6 Cost of cleaning up or makingRequest transcript of, Form
Taxpayer Advocate .........2 6 4 repairs ..................1 6 04506-T .................. 1 7Tax rates:
Married filing jointly (Schedule Steps to prepare (Table Taxpayer Assistance Costs of photographs and
Y–1 ) .................... 2 1 1-6) ..................... 1 2 Center ..................... 3 appraisals ..............1 6 0
Publication 17 (2006) Page 287

Page 290 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tools .......................1 8 8 Trip primarily for Temporary workTheft losses (Cont.)
business .............1 6 8 location .................1 7 1Hauling to and fromDeduction of loss:
Trip primarily for personal Tips ......................1 6 7work ....................1 7 2When to take (Table
reasons ..............1 6 8 Transit pass ................ 4 6Rental for use on rental25-2) .................1 6 4
U.S. travel ..............1 6 8 Work-relatedproperty ................. 6 5Definition of theft ..........1 5 9
Unproved amounts ......1 7 8 education .......... 184, 185Fair market value of stolen Tornadoes (See also Disaster
Visiting clients orproperty ................1 5 9 Traveling salespersons:relief) .....................1 6 1
customers ............1 7 1Form 4684 to be filed ......1 5 8 Deduction of expenses ....1 7 5Casualty loss due to .......1 5 8
Charitable organization service,Insurance proceeds, treatment Tax home, determinationTotal support ................ 3 1
deduction for ............1 5 2o f ......................1 6 0 o f ......................1 6 5Tour guides: Commuting expenses .....1 7 2Net operating losses .......1 6 4 Treasury bills, notes, andFree tour for organizing Employer-provided commuterProof of loss ..............1 5 9 bonds ..................... 5 7tour ..................... 8 7 vehicle ................ 4 6Property used partly for Treasury Inspector General:Trade Act of 1974: Conventions ..............1 6 9business and partly for Telephone number to reportTrade readjustment allowances Delegates, deduction ofpersonal purposes ......1 6 2 anonymously fraud orunder .................... 8 4 unreimbursedRecovered stolen misconduct of IRSTrade associations: amount ...............1 5 2property ................1 5 9 employee ................. 3Meetings and entertainment Deductible expenses ......1 6 6Reimbursement ...........1 6 0 Treasury notes .............. 5 4expenses ...............1 6 9 Examples of (TableReporting of gain or Treaties:Trade of property (See also Sale 26-1) .................1 6 7loss ............... 163, 164 Foreign charitableof property) ................ 9 3 Definition of ...............1 6 4Third parties: organizations, contributionsDefinition of ................ 9 4 Employer-providedAlimony payments made t o ......................1 5 0Form 8824 for reporting ..... 9 5 vehicles ................. 4 5t o ................. 124, 125 Trees and plants:Like property and money Estimates of ..............1 7 3Designee for IRS to discuss Cost of, when casualty or thefttransferred ........... 91, 95 Expenses paid forreturn with .............2 ,  1 4 loss involved ....... 159, 160Like-kind exchanges .... 91, 94 others ..................1 9 3Income from taxpayer’s property Trust beneficiaries:Nontaxable exchanges .... 9 1 , Federal crime investigators orpaid to ................... 1 2 Dividends received by ...... 6 094 prosecutors .............1 6 6Threats: Losses of trust ............. 8 6Holding period, determination Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how toLosses due to .............1 5 9 Receiving income fromo f ..................... 9 8 fill out ..................1 7 9Tickets (See Entertainment trust ................. 86, 87Partially nontaxable Fringe benefits ............. 4 6expenses) Rollover restrictions ........ 7 4exchange ............ 91, 95 Getting from home to temporaryTip expense: Reporting of ................ 9 5 Trustees:workplace when multipleBusiness meal or entertainment Administrative fees ........1 9 0Taxable exchange, regular workplaces ......1 7 1activity, 50% deduction I R A.......................1 9 0defined .................. 9 1 Going home on days off fromlimit ....................1 6 9 IRAs:Trade-in of car .............1 7 3 temporaryBusiness travel Fees ...................1 1 4assignment .............1 6 6Trading date of securitiesexpense ................1 6 7 Notification ofGoing to business meetingtransaction ................ 9 8Tip income ............... 50-52 recharacterization .....1 1 9away from regularTraditional IRAs (See IndividualAllocated tips .......... 38, 52 Transfer from trustee toworkplace ..............1 7 1retirement arrangementsDaily record of tips ......... 5 0 trustee .......... 117, 123Going to family home ......1 6 5(IRAs))Electronic tip record ........ 5 1 Trusts (See also TrustIndefinite assignment ......1 6 5Traffic violations:Form 4070A for daily beneficiaries) ...... 60, 86, 196Job search expenses ....... 8 7Fines not deductible .......1 7 3records .................. 5 1 Grantor trusts .............. 8 6Medical purposes, for ..... 135,Transfer taxes:Noncash tips ........ 50, 51, 52 Income .................... 8 6136Property basis to include .... 8 9Penalty for failure to Child beneficiary ........2 0 2Mileage rates (See StandardReal estate transactionsreport ................... 5 1 Investment interest ........1 4 7mileage rates)a n d ....................1 4 1Reporting on tax return ..... 5 1 Related party transactions withNew employment ..........1 8 8Transit passes .............. 4 6Reporting tips to fiduciaries ............... 9 6No main place of business orTransportation expenses (Seeemployer ............ 50, 51 work ....................1 6 5 TTY/TDD information .......2 6 4Travel and transportationFailure to report to Nonaccountable plans, Tubal ligation:expenses)employer ............9 ,  5 1 definition of .............1 7 8 Deductibility as medicalForm 4070 for ............ 5 1 Transportation workers: Parking fees: expense ................1 3 5Service charges paid by Meal expenses ............1 6 7 Business-related Tuition (See also Hopeemployer as wages ....... 5 1 Deduction limits .... 164, 170 travel .................1 7 3 credit) ....................2 2 6Social security and Medicare Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how Commuting expense ....1 7 2 Alimony payments made totax: to complete ...........1 7 9 Employer-provided fringe cover ...................1 2 4Employer reporting for Travel and transportation benefit ................ 4 7 Charitable deduction notpurposes of ............ 5 1 expenses ........... 164-169, Medical-related allowed for paying ...... 151,Filing requirements (Table 171-173 travel .................1 3 6 1531-3) .................... 8 Advances ............ 176, 177 Probationary work Credit (See Education credits)Uncollected ............... 9 Allocation of types of periods .................1 6 6 Qualified programs (SeeTip Rate Determination and costs .............. 166, 174 Proof of expenses .........1 7 3 Qualified tuition programs)Education Program ....... 5 1 Bona fide business Summary (Table Tuition programs, qualified (SeeTip-splitting or tip-pooling purpose ................1 6 6 26-2) .................1 7 5 Qualified tuition programs)arrangements ........ 50, 51 Business associates .......1 6 6 Recordkeeping Tuition, benefits under GIUncollected taxes ...... 51, 52 Business travel ............1 6 7 requirements ....... 166, 173 Bill ........................ 3 3Withholding ............ 37, 51 $75 or less ..............1 7 4 Rental property maintenanceEmployee contributing Confidential information and management, for ..... 6 5t o ..................... 5 1 a n d ..................1 7 4 Reporting of ...............1 7 4 UUnderwithholding .... 37, 51 Employees’ Table 26-3 showing forms to U.S. citizen:Title insurance: expenses .............1 6 6 be used ..............1 7 9 Earned income credit ......2 3 0Property basis to include .... 8 9 Incidental expenses .....1 6 7 Resorts or cruise ships ....1 6 8 U.S. citizen or resident ...... 2 6Title to property: Proof of business School children, transporting
U.S. national ................ 2 6Abstract fees, property basis to purpose ..............1 7 4 o f ....................... 8 8
include .................. 8 9 U.S. obligations, interest .... 5 4Receipt not readily available Summary of rules (Figure
Attorneys’ fees: to prove ..............1 7 4 26-B) ...................1 7 1 U.S. possessions:
Property basis to Spouse or Tax home, determination Charitable contributions
include ................ 8 9 dependents ...........1 6 6 o f ......................1 6 5 t o ......................1 5 0
Tolls: Trip outside U.S. ....... 168, Temporary assignment or Deduction of income tax paid
Business-related travel ....1 7 3 1 6 9 j o b .....................1 6 5 t o ......................1 3 9
Page 288 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 291 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Used clothing and household Wages and salaries  (See also Hope credit ............ 1 ,  2 2 2U.S. possessions: (Cont.)
items: Form W-2) ....... 12, 43-50, 47 Individual retirementIncome from ................ 7
Charitable deduction for fair Accident and health arrangements (IRAs) ...... 1U.S. Postal Service (See Post
market value ............1 5 4 insurance ................ 4 4 Lifetime learning credit .......1 ,office employees)
Accrued leave payment ..... 4 4 222Usurious interest ............ 5 4U.S. savings bonds:
Adoption, employer Limit on itemizedUtilities:Education, used for ......... 2 2
assistance ............... 4 5 deduction ................. 1Charges for installing includedInterest on ................. 8 7
Advance commissions ...... 4 3 Medical and dental expenses:in property basis ......... 8 9Transfer between
Allowances and Standard mileage ......... 1Emergency energy programs,spouses ................. 9 2
reimbursements ...... 37, 43charitable contributions Moving expenses:U.S. Treasury bills or notes: Archer MSAt o ......................1 5 0 Standard mileage ......... 1Trade of ................... 9 5 contributions ............. 4 5Energy conservation Social security and MedicareU.S. Treasury bills, notes, and Awards and prizes .......... 4 3subsidies ............ 86, 88 taxes ..................... 1bonds ..................... 5 7 Babysitting ................. 4 3Late payment charges, not Standard deduction .......... 1U.S. Virgin Islands: Back pay awards ........... 4 3deductible ..............1 4 8 Standard mileage rates ...... 1Income from ................ 7 Bonuses ................... 4 3Rebates ................... 8 8 Tax computationUnclaimed Child care providers ........ 4 3 worksheet ................ 2reimbursement ...........1 8 4 Children’s earnings.......... 7 Tax credits for energyUncollected rent: V Clergy ..................... 4 7 efficiency ................. 1Income .................... 6 4 Vacation homes: De minimis benefits ........ 4 5 Wheelchairs:Underpayment penalties ... 3 5 , Determining if used as Disability income ........... 4 9 As medical expense .......1 3 540, 42 home .................... 6 6 Elective deferrals ........... 4 7 Widow/widower (See SurvivingIRS computation ........... 4 2 Points ....................1 4 6 Employee achievement spouse)Undistributed capital Rental expenses ....... 66, 68 award ................... 4 3 Winter energy payments .... 8 6gains ............ 62, 106, 247 Valuations (See Fair market Employee compensation .... 4 3 Withholding (See also FormUnearned income of child (See value (FMV); Farmworkers ............... 3 6 W-2) ................ 12, 35-42Children, subheading: Appraisals) ................ 8 9 Foreign employer ........... 4 8 Agricultural Act of 1949Investment income of child Value of time or services: Form W-2 (See Form W-2) payments ................ 3 8under age 18) No charitable deduction Fringe benefits ............. 4 4 Changing amountUnemployment f o r............ 151, 152, 153 Garnisheed ................ 1 2 withheld ................. 3 6compensation .............. 8 Vandalism: Government cost-of-living For 2008 ................ 3 6Credit card insurance Casualty loss due to .......1 5 8 allowances .............. 4 4 Checking amount of ....... 3 6 ,paying ................... 8 6 Household workers ......... 3 6Vasectomy: 219Mandatory contributions to state Income ..................... 8Deductibility as medical Claim for refund ............. 7funds, deduction of ......1 3 9 expense ................1 3 5 Foreign .................. 4 3 Commodity credit loans ..... 3 8Private fund, from .......... 8 4 Long-term careVehicles (See Cars) Credit for .............. 35, 41Repayment of benefits ...... 8 4 coverage ................ 4 4Veterans Affairs (VA): Cumulative wageReporting on Forms 1040, Military retirees ......... 36, 48Funding fees, not deductible as method .................. 3 71040A, or 1040EZ ........ 8 4 Military service ............. 4 8interest ............ 146, 148 Definition .................. 3 5Supplemental benefits ...... 8 4 MiscellaneousVeterans’ benefits........... 4 8 Determining amount toVoluntary benefit fund compensation ............ 4 3Educational assistance ..... 8 8 withhold ................. 3 6contributions ............1 9 3 Note for services ........... 4 4Retroactive Disaster Assistance Act of 1988Withholding ............ 38, 84 Outplacement services ..... 4 4determination ............ 4 9 payments ................ 3 8Unemployment tax: Religious orders ............ 4 7Veterans’ insurance: Dividend income ........... 6 0State employment Restricted property ......... 4 7Dividends on ............... 6 3 Employers, rules for ........ 3 7taxes ...................2 1 0 Dividends on restricted Exemption from ............ 3 7Veterans’ organizations:Uniform Settlement Statement stock .................. 4 7 Federal income taxes, notCharitable contributions(Form HUD-1): Retirement plan contributions by deductible ..............1 4 2t o ................. 150, 151Points shown on ..........1 4 3 employer ................ 4 7 Fiscal years ................ 4 230% limit ...............1 5 6Uniformed services ........1 0 2 Severance pay ............. 4 4 Form W-4:Viatical settlements ..... 81, 82Uniforms ...................1 8 8 Sick pay ............... 44, 50 Provided by employer .... 3 7Victims of terrorism (SeeCharitable organization Social security and Medicare Fringe benefits ............. 3 8Terrorist attacks)requiring, deduction for cost taxes paid by Gambling winnings ..... 38, 41VISTA volunteers ............ 4 8and upkeep of ..........1 5 2 employer ................ 4 4 General rules .............. 3 5Vitamins:Unions (See Labor unions) Stock appreciation rights .... 4 4 Highest rate, employer mustNot deductible as medicalAssessments .............1 8 8 Stock options .............. 4 7 withhold at if no W-4 ...... 3 7expense ................1 3 5Dues .....................1 8 8 Supplemental .............. 3 7 Incorrect form .............. 4 2Volunteer firefighters:United States (See headings Volunteer work ............. 4 8 IRA distributions ...........1 2 0Charitable contributionsstarting with “Federal” or “U.S.”) Withholding (See Withholding) New job ................... 3 6t o ......................1 5 0United Way (See Charitable Waiters and waitresses: Penalties ........... 35, 37, 39IRAs ......................1 1 6contributions) Tips (See Tip income) Pensions and annuities .... 1 4 ,Volunteer work ......... 48, 207Universities (See Colleges and War veterans’ organizations 38, 70, 74Deductibility of contributionsuniversities) (See Veterans’ organizations) Railroad retirement(Table 24-2) ............1 5 2Unlawful discrimination suits: War zone (See Combat zone) benefits .............. 38, 77Out-of-pocket expenses,Deduction for costs ......... 8 6 Wash sales ........... 93, 96, 99 Repaying withheld tax ...... 3 7deductible when serving forUnmarried persons (See Single Washington State Supplemental Rollovers .................. 7 4qualifiedtaxpayers) Workmen’s Compensation Salaries and wages ........ 3 5organization ....... 151, 152
Unrecaptured Section 1250 Fund .....................1 3 9 Separate returns ........... 4 2Tax counseling (Volunteer
gain .................. 96, 107 Welfare benefits ......... 31, 84 Sick pay ................... 3 8Income Tax Assistance
Unstated interest ........ 89, 94 Social security benefits .... 3 8 ,program) ............ 10, 48 West Virginia Unemployment
Unused sick leave: 77Compensation Fund .....1 3 9Value of income lost by, not
Cash payments for ........1 3 6 deductible ..............1 5 3 State and local income taxes,What’s new.................1 ,  2
deduction for ............1 3 9Use of home in Vouchers for payment of Adoption benefits ............ 1
Supplemental wages ....... 3 7business .................1 8 8 tax ........................ 4 1 Alternative technology vehicle
Tips (See Tip income)credit ..................... 1Used clothing and household
UnemploymentEarned income credit ........ 1goods:
W compensation ........ 38, 84Elective deferral amounts .... 1Charitable deduction
W-2 form (See Form W-2)f o r......................1 5 3 Exemption amount .......... 1 Work clothes ...............1 8 8
Publication 17 (2006) Page 289

Page 292 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Work-related education ....1 8 2 Recordkeeping Head of household status and Support test ................ 3 2
Business deduction: requirements ............1 8 6 cost of keeping up Withholding (Form W-4) .... 3 6
Qualified Reimbursement for ........1 8 6 home .................... 2 4 World Trade Center attacks
expenses ......... 184-186 Teachers ............ 183, 184 Individual retirement (See Terrorist attacks)
Reimbursements ........1 8 6 Temporary absence from arrangements (IRAs), Worthless securities ........ 9 4
Tax benefit of ...........1 8 2 work ....................1 8 2 modified AGI computation Wristwatch .................1 9 3Education required by employer Travel expenses for .......1 8 5 (Worksheet 17-1) .......1 1 7 Write-offs (See Cancellation ofo r  b y  l a w ...............1 8 2 Unclaimed Pensions or annuities, joint debt)Education that qualifies for new reimbursement ..........1 8 4 returns .................. 7 3
trade or business ........1 8 4 Roth IRA modified adjustedWorkers’ compensation..... 5 0
YEducation to maintain or gross income (MAGI),Mandatory contributions to state
improve skills ...........1 8 2 computation (Worksheet Yard-care workers (Seefunds, deduction of ......1 3 9
Education to meet minimum 17-2) ...................1 2 2 Domestic help)Return to work ............. 5 0
requirements ............1 8 3 Simplified Method computation Youth groups:Worksheets:
Indefinite absence from of taxable annuity ........ 7 2 Troop leader’s travelCapital loss carryover ......1 0 6
work ....................1 8 3 Social security or railroad expenses ...............1 5 2Casualty and theft
Meal expenses ............1 8 5 retirement benefits, to figurelosses ..................1 5 8 ■Qualifying education (Figure taxability ............. 76, 77Excess withholding
27-A) ...................1 8 3 Student loan interestcredit ...................2 4 6
deduction ...............1 2 8
Page 290 Publication 17 (2006)

Page 293 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where To File
Note. Use this table only if you are an individual taxpayer filing your own return.
AND use the zip code below according to the form you are filing and whether you
are enclosing payment
Form 1040 Form 1040A Form 1040EZ
THEN send your return No payment Payment No payment Payment No payment Payment
IF you live in... to... enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed
Alabama, Delaware, Florida, Internal RevenueGeorgia, North Carolina, Service Center 39901–0002 39901–0102 39901–0015 39901–0115 39901–0014 39901–0114Rhode Island, South Carolina, Atlanta, GAVirginia
Alaska, Arizona, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho,
Minnesota, Montana, Internal Revenue
Nebraska, Nevada, New Service Center 93888–0002 93888–0102 93888–0015 93888–0115 93888–0014 93888–0114
Mexico, North Dakota, Fresno, CA
Oregon, South Dakota, Utah,
Washington, Wyoming
Kansas, Louisiana, Internal RevenueMississippi, Oklahoma, Service Center 73301–0002 73301–0102 73301–0015 73301–0115 73301–0014 73301–0114Tennessee, Texas, West Austin, TXVirginia, APO, FPO
Internal Revenue
Kentucky*, Pennsylvania* Service Center 19255–0002 19255–0102 19255–0015 19255–0115 19255–0014 19255–0114
Philadelphia, PA
Arkansas, Connecticut, Internal RevenueIllinois, Indiana, Iowa, Service Center 64999–0002 64999–0102 64999–0015 64999–0115 64999–0014 64999–0114Michigan, Missouri, New Kansas City, MOJersey, Ohio, Wisconsin
District of Columbia, Maine, Internal RevenueMaryland, Massachusetts, Service Center 05501–0002 05501–0102 05501–0015 05501–0115 05501–0014 05501–0114New Hampshire, New York, Andover, MAVermont
American Samoa,
nonpermanent residents of
Guam** or the Virgin
Islands***, Puerto Rico (or if Internal Revenue
excluding income under Service Center 73301–0215 73301–0215
Internal Revenue Code Austin, TX, USA
section 933), dual status
aliens, non-resident aliens,
and anyone filing Form 4563
U.S. citizens or tax residents Internal Revenuein a foreign country, and Service Center 73301–0215 73301–0215anyone filing Form 2555 or Austin, TX, USA2555EZ
* If you live in Kentucky or Pennsylvania and file your return after June 30, 2007, use the appropriate address above for the Internal Revenue Service Center, Kansas
City, MO.
** Permanent residents of Guam should use:
Department of Revenue and Taxation
Government of Guam, P.O. Box 23607
GMF, GU 96921
**Permanent residents of the Virgin Islands should use:
V.I. Bureau of Internal Revenue
9601 Estate Thomas
Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas VI 00802

Page 294 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2007
Highlights of 2006 Tax Change s
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expen ses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expen ses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and E stimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individual s
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Di sabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Fir st-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Di spositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expen ses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S
. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Lo ss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Provider s)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IR S
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and E quivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefit s
How Do I Adju st My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Ri sk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IR S and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to E state and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS – How to Get Help With
Unresolved Tax Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
ServiceU.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IR S
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibido s en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Intere st and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Bu siness
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Lo ss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Di sabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependent s
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividend s for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filer s
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filer s
Estimated Tax for Individual s
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Tru sts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expen ses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Exten sion of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plan s (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Account s
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individual s
Noncash Charitable Contribution s
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Lo ss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Bu
siness Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmer s and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of way s to get publication s, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Re quest9465

Page 295 of 295 of Publication 17 9:11 -  9-FEB-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Order Blank
for Forms and
Publications
The most freq uently ordered forms and p ublications are listed on the order blank below.
You will receive two copies of each form, one copy of the instr uctions, and one copy of
each publication you order. To help red uce waste, please order only the items yo u need
to prepare yo ur return.
For f aster ways of getting t he ite ms you need, s uch as b y i nternet, see
How to Get T ax Help.
How To Use the Order
Blank
Circle the items you need on the order blank
below. Use the blank spaces to order items
not listed. If yo u need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
Print or type yo ur name and address
accurately in the space provided below to
ensure delivery of your order. Cut the order
blank on the dotted line. Enclose the order
blank in an envelope and mail it to the IRS
address shown on this pa ge. Yo u sho uld
receive yo ur order within 10 days after
receipt of yo ur request.
Do not send your tax return to the address
listed below. Instead, see Where To File.
N
TIP
Mail Your Order Blank To:
Internal Reven ue Service 
National Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
Circle the forms and
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be incl uded.
Cut here
Name
Postal mailing address
City
Order Blank
Please print
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime phone n umber
State ZI P code
International postal code
()
/H17073/H17073
Schedule R
(1040)
2441
1040
1040EZ
Schedule SE
(1040) Pub. 590
8829
Schedules
A&B
(1040)
1040-ES
(2007)
Pub. 1
1040A
Pub. 523
Pub. 910
Schedule C
(1040) 1040X
4562
Pub. 17
Pub. 526
Schedule D
(1040)
Schedule 1
(1040A)
2106
Pub. 334
Pub. 527
4868
Schedule E
(1040)
Schedule 2
(1040A)
6251
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule 3
(1040A)
Schedule F
(1040)
Pub. 505
Schedule
EIC (1040A
or 1040)
Pub. 596
8822
Schedule
C-EZ (1040)
8283
8606
Pub. 501
Pub. 502 Pub. 550
Pub. 575
Pub. 554
2106-EZ
Schedule H
(1040)
Pub. 915
1040-VSchedule J
(1040)
8812
8863
Pub. 970
Schedule D-1
(1040)
9465
Pub. 972
4506 Pub. 535
4684
Pub. 525
Pub. 547
The items in bold are also
available at many IRS
offices, U.S. Post Offices,
and various libraries.
Use the blank s paces to
order items not listed.
Save Money and Time b y Going Online!
Download or order t hese and other tax products at www.irs.gov
4506-T
5695
8913
Pub. 587