Userid: SD_NY3HB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: T:\Pub 535_2010\P535_flat-03-25 5.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 ContentsCat. No. 15065Z
Introduction .................... . 1Department
of the What's New for 2010 .............. . 2Treasury Business
What's New for 2011 .............. . 2Internal
Revenue Reminders ..................... . 2ExpensesService
1. Deducting Business
Expenses .................. . 2
2. Employees' Pay .............. . 6For use in preparing
3. Rent Expense ................ . 8
4. Interest .................... . 112010 Returns
5. Taxes ..................... . 15
6. Insurance .................. . 17
7. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize .................. . 21
8. Amortization ................ . 26
9. Depletion ................... . 33
10. Business Bad Debts ........... . 38
11. Other Expenses .............. . 40
12. How To Get Tax Help .......... . 46
Index ......................... . 49
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
ject line. You can also send us comments from
www.irs.gov/formspubs/, select ªComment on
Tax Forms and Publications ºunder ªInformation
about.º
Although we cannot respond individually to
each comment received, we do appreciate yourGet forms and other information feedback and will consider your comments as
we revise our tax products.faster and easier by:
Ordering forms and publications. Visit
Internet IRS.gov www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
Mar 24, 2011

Page 2 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
address below and receive a response within 10 You can file your tax returns electronically using Useful Items
days after your request is received. an IRS e-file option. The benefits of IRS e-file You may want to see:
include faster refunds, increased accuracy, andInternal Revenue Service Publicationacknowledgment of IRS receipt of your return.1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
You can use one of the following IRS e-fileBloomington, IL 61705-6613 ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Businessoptions.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car• Use an authorized IRS e-file provider.Tax questions. If you have a tax question, Expenses
check the information available on IRS.gov or • Use a personal computer. ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomecall 1-800-829-4933. We cannot answer tax
• Visit a Volunteer Income Tax Assistancequestions sent to either of the above addresses. ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions(VITA) or Tax Counseling for the Elderly
❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for(TCE) site.
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
For details on these fast filing methods, see your
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and MethodsWhat's New for 2010 income tax package.
❏ 542 CorporationsThe following items highlight some changes in Form 1099 MISC. File Form 1099-MISC, Mis-
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Theftsthe tax law for 2010. cellaneous Income, for each person to whom
you have paid during the year in the course of ❏ 587 Business Use of Your HomeStandard mileage rate. For 2010, the stan- your trade or business at least $600 in rents, (Including Use by Daycaredard mileage rate for the cost of operating your services (including parts and materials), prizes Providers)car, van, pickup, or panel truck for each mile of and awards, other income payments, medicalbusiness use is 50 cents per mile. ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
and health care payments, and crop insurance
❏ 936 Home Mortgage InterestSelf-employed health insurance deduction. proceeds. See the Instructions for Form
DeductionEffective March 30, 2010, if you were 1099-MISC for more information and additional
self-employed and paid for health insurance, reporting requirements. ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
you may be able to include in your deduction any
Photographs of missing children. The Inter-premiums you paid to cover your child who was Form (and Instructions)
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theunder age 27 at the end of 2010, even if the child
❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized DeductionsNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-was not your dependent. For 2010, the
self-employed health insurance deduction is dren. Photographs of missing children selected ❏ 5213 Election To Postpone
also allowed on Schedule SE. See chapter 6. by the Center may appear in this publication on Determination as To Whether the
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can Presumption Applies That anBusiness start-up costs. For tax years be- help bring these children home by looking at the Activity Is Engaged in for Profitginning in 2010, you can elect to deduct up to photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST$10,000 of business start-up costs paid or in- See chapter 12 for information about getting(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.curred after 2009. See chapter 7. publications and forms.
Environmental cleanup costs. The election
to deduct qualified environmental cleanup costs
was extended to cover costs paid or incurred in
What Can I Deduct?2010 and 2011. See chapter 7.
Marginal production of oil and gas.  For tax To be deductible, a business expense must be1.
years beginning in 2010 and 2011, the 100% both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-
taxable income limit does not apply to percent- pense is one that is common and accepted in
your industry. A necessary expense is one thatage depletion on the marginal production of oil
is helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi-and natural gas. See chapter 9.
Deducting ness. An expense does not have to be indispen-
sable to be considered necessary.
It is important to distinguish business ex-Business penses from:What's New for 2011
• The expenses used to figure cost of goods
The following items highlight some changes in Expenses sold,
the tax law for 2011.
• Capital expenses, and
Standard mileage rate. For 2011, the stan- • Personal expenses.dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your Introduction
car, van, pickup, or panel truck for each mile of
This chapter covers the general rules for deduct-business use is 51 cents per mile Cost of Goods Solding business expenses. Business expenses are
the costs of carrying on a trade or business, and If your business manufactures products or
they are usually deductible if the business is purchases them for resale, you generally must
value inventory at the beginning and end of eachoperated to make a profit.Reminders tax year to determine your cost of goods sold.
Some of your business expenses may be in-TopicsThe following reminders and other items may
cluded in figuring cost of goods sold. Cost ofhelp you file your tax return. This chapter discusses: goods sold is deducted from your gross receipts
to figure your gross profit for the year. If youIRS e-file (Electronic Filing) • What you can deduct include an expense in the cost of goods sold,
you cannot deduct it again as a business ex-• How much you can deduct
pense.• When you can deduct The following are types of expenses that go
• Not-for-profit activities into figuring cost of goods sold.
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The cost of products or raw materials, in- If you go into business. When you go into it suitable for your business. This applies even if
cluding freight. business, treat all costs you had to get your some of the work would by itself be classified as
business started as capital expenses. repairs.• Storage. Usually you recover costs for a particular
• Direct labor (including contributions to asset through depreciation. Generally, you can- Capital versus Deductible
pension or annuity plans) for workers who not recover other costs until you sell the busi- Expensesproduce the products. ness or otherwise go out of business. However,
you can choose to amortize certain costs for To help you distinguish between capital and• Factory overhead. setting up your business. See Starting a Busi- deductible expenses, different examples areness in chapter 8 for more information on busi- given below.Under the uniform capitalization rules, you ness start-up costs.must capitalize the direct costs and part of the
Motor vehicles. You usually capitalize theindirect costs for certain production or resale
cost of a motor vehicle you use in your business.If you do not go into business. If you are anactivities. Indirect costs include rent, interest,
You can recover its cost through annual deduc-individual and your attempt to go into business istaxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack-
tions for depreciation.not successful, the expenses you had in trying toaging, handling, and administrative costs.
There are dollar limits on the depreciationestablish yourself in business fall into two cate-This rule does not apply to personal property you can claim each year on passenger automo-gories.you acquire for resale if your average annual biles used in your business. See Publicationgross receipts (or those of your predecessor) for 1. The costs you had before making a deci- 463.the preceding 3 tax years are not more than $10 sion to acquire or begin a specific busi- Generally, repairs you make to your busi-million. ness. These costs are personal and ness vehicle are currently deductible. However,
nondeductible. They include any costs in- amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul aFor more information, see the following
curred during a general search for, or pre- business vehicle are capital expenses and aresources.
liminary investigation of, a business or recovered through depreciation.• Cost of goods soldÐchapter 6 of Publica- investment possibility.tion 334. Roads and driveways.  The cost of building a2. The costs you had in your attempt to ac- private road on your business property and the• InventoriesÐPublication 538. quire or begin a specific business. These cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-costs are capital expenses and you can• Uniform capitalization rulesÐPublication crete one are capital expenses you may be ablededuct them as a capital loss.538 and section 263A of the Internal Rev- to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a privateenue Code and the related regulations. road on your business property is a deductibleIf you are a corporation and your attempt to
expense.go into a new trade or business is not success-
ful, you may be able to deduct all investigatoryCapital Expenses Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rulescosts as a loss.
apply, amounts spent for tools used in yourThe costs of any assets acquired during yourYou must capitalize, rather than deduct, some
business are deductible expenses if the toolsunsuccessful attempt to go into business are acosts. These costs are a part of your investment
have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or theirpart of your basis in the assets. You cannot takein your business and are called ªcapital ex-
cost is minor.a deduction for these costs. You will recover thepenses.º Capital expenses are considered as-
costs of these assets when you dispose of them.sets in your business. There are, in general, Machinery parts. Unless the uniform capitali-three types of costs you capitalize. zation rules apply, the cost of replacing
• Business start-up costs (See Tip below). short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in goodBusiness Assets
working condition, but not add to its life, is a• Business assets. There are many different kinds of business as- deductible expense.
• Improvements. sets; for example, land, buildings, machinery,
Heating equipment. The cost of changingfurniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights.
from one heating system to another is a capitalYou must fully capitalize the cost of these as-You can elect to deduct or amortize expense.sets, including freight and installation charges.certain business start-up costs. See Certain property you produce for use in yourchapters 7 and 8.
TIP trade or business must be capitalized under the Personal versus Business
uniform capitalization rules. See Regulations Expensessection 1.263A-2 for information on these rules.Cost recovery. Although you generally can-
Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, ornot take a current deduction for a capital ex-
family expenses. However, if you have an ex-pense, you may be able to recover the amount Improvements pense for something that is used partly for busi-you spend through depreciation, amortization,
ness and partly for personal purposes, divideor depletion. These recovery methods allow you The costs of making improvements to a busi- the total cost between the business and per-to deduct part of your cost each year. In this ness asset are capital expenses if the improve- sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.way, you are able to recover your capital ex- ments add to the value of the asset, appreciably For example, if you borrow money and usepense. See Amortization (chapter 8) and Deple- lengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to a 70% of it for business and the other 30% for ation (chapter 9) in this publication. A taxpayer different use. Improvements are generally major family vacation, you generally can deduct 70%can elect to deduct a portion of the costs of expenditures. Some examples are: new electric of the interest as a business expense. The re-certain depreciable property as a section 179 wiring, a new roof, a new floor, new plumbing, maining 30% is personal interest and generallydeduction. A greater portion of these costs can bricking up windows to strengthen a wall, and is not deductible. See chapter 4 for informationbe deducted if the property is qualified disaster lighting improvements. on deducting interest and the allocation rules.assistance property. See Publication 946 for de- However, you can currently deduct repairs
tails. that keep your property in a normal efficient Business use of your home. If you use partoperating condition as a business expense. of your home for business, you may be able toTreat as repairs amounts paid to replace parts of deduct expenses for the business use of yourGoing Into Business a machine that only keep it in a normal operating home. These expenses may include mortgagecondition.The costs of getting started in business, before interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-
you actually begin business operations, are cap- ciation.
ital expenses. These costs may include ex- Restoration plan. Capitalize the cost of re- To qualify to claim expenses for the business
penses for advertising, travel, or wages for conditioning, improving, or altering your prop- use of your home, you must meet both of the
training employees. erty as part of a general restoration plan to make following tests.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. The business part of your home must be have a ªnet operating loss.º You can use a net
operating loss to lower your taxes in other years.used exclusively and regularly for your How Much Can I
See Publication 536 for more information.trade or business.
See Publication 542 for information aboutDeduct?2. The business part of your home must be: net operating losses of corporations.
You can deduct the cost of a business expensea. Your principal place of business, or
if it meets the criteria of ordinary and necessary
b. A place where you meet or deal with and it is not a capital expense.
patients, clients, or customers in the When Can IRecovery of amount deducted (tax benefitnormal course of your trade or busi- rule). If you recover part of an expense in the Deduct an Expense?ness, or same tax year in which you would have claimed
a deduction, reduce your current year expensec. A separate structure (not attached to When you can deduct an expense depends onby the amount of the recovery. If you have ayour home) used in connection with your accounting method. An accounting methodrecovery in a later year, include the recoveredyour trade or business. is a set of rules used to determine when and howamount in income in that year. However, if part income and expenses are reported. The twoof the deduction for the expense did not reduceYou generally do not have to meet the exclu- basic methods are the cash method and theyour tax, you do not have to include that part ofsive use test for the part of your home that you accrual method. Whichever method you choosethe recovered amount in income. must clearly reflect income.regularly use either for the storage of inventory For more information on recoveries and the For more information on accounting meth-or product samples, or as a daycare facility. tax benefit rule, see Publication 525. ods, see Publication 538.Your home office qualifies as your principal Payments in kind. If you provide services toplace of business if you meet the following re- Cash method. Under the cash method of ac-pay a business expense, the amount you canquirements. counting, you generally deduct business ex-deduct is limited to your out-of-pocket costs. penses in the tax year you pay them.You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor.• You use the office exclusively and regu-
Similarly, if you pay a business expense inlarly for administrative or management ac- Accrual method. Under an accrual method ofgoods or other property, you can deduct onlytivities of your trade or business. accounting, you generally deduct business ex-what the property costs you. If these costs are penses when both of the following apply.• You have no other fixed location where included in the cost of goods sold, do not deduct
you conduct substantial administrative or them as a business expense. 1. The all-events test has been met. The test
management activities of your trade or is met when:Limits on losses. If your deductions for anbusiness. investment or business activity are more than a. All events have occurred that fix the factthe income it brings in, you have a loss. There of liability, andIf you have more than one business location, may be limits on how much of the loss you candetermine your principal place of business b. The liability can be determined with rea-deduct.
based on the following factors. sonable accuracy.Not-for-profit limits. If you carry on your
• The relative importance of the activities business activity without the intention of making 2. Economic performance has occurred.performed at each location. a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offset
other income. See Not-for-Profit Activities later.• If the relative importance factor does not Economic performance. You generally
cannot deduct or capitalize a business expensedetermine your principal place of busi- At-risk limits. Generally, a deductible loss
until economic performance occurs. If your ex-ness, consider the time spent at each lo- from a trade or business or other in-
pense is for property or services provided to you,come-producing activity is limited to the invest-cation.
or for your use of property, economic perform-ment you have ªat riskº in the activity. You are at
ance occurs as the property or services arerisk in any activity for the following.For more information, see Publication 587.
provided, or the property is used. If your ex-
1. The money and adjusted basis of property pense is for property or services you provide to
Business use of your car. If you use your car you contribute to the activity. others, economic performance occurs as you
exclusively in your business, you can deduct car provide the property or services.2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activityexpenses. If you use your car for both business if: Example. Your tax year is the calendarand personal purposes, you must divide your
year. In December 2010, the Field Plumbingexpenses based on actual mileage. Generally, a. You are personally liable for repayment,
Company did some repair work at your place oforcommuting expenses between your home and
business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid ityour business location, within the area of your b. You pledge property (other than prop- by check in January 2011. If you use the accrualtax home, are not deductible. erty used in the activity) as security for method of accounting, deduct the $600 on your
the loan.You can deduct actual car expenses, which tax return for 2010 because all events have
include depreciation (or lease payments), gas occurred to ªfixº the fact of liability (in this case
For more information, see Publication 925.and oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and the work was completed), the liability can be
determined, and economic performance oc-registration fees. Or, instead of figuring the busi- Passive activities. Generally, you are in a
curred in that year.ness part of these actual expenses, you may be passive activity if you have a trade or business
If you use the cash method of accounting,activity in which you do not materially partici-able to use the standard mileage rate to figure
deduct the expense on your 2011 return.pate, or a rental activity. In general, deductionsyour deduction. For 2010, the standard mileage
for losses from passive activities only offset in-rate is 50 cents a mile for all business miles Prepayment. You generally cannot deductcome from passive activities. You cannot usedriven before January 1, 2011. expenses in advance, even if you pay them inany excess deductions to offset other income. In advance. This rule applies to both the cash andIf you are self-employed, you can also de- addition, passive activity credits can only offset accrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,duct the business part of interest on your car the tax on net passive income. Any excess loss prepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-loan, state and local personal property tax on the or credits are carried over to later years. Sus- pense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,car, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not you pended passive losses are fully deductible in the create an asset with a useful life extending sub-claim the standard mileage rate. year you completely dispose of the activity. For stantially beyond the end of the current tax year.more information, see Publication 925.For more information on car expenses and
the rules for using the standard mileage rate, Net operating loss. If your deductions are Example. In 2010, you sign a 10-year lease
see Publication 463. more than your income for the year, you may and immediately pay your rent for the first 3
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
years. Even though you paid the rent for 2010, Presumption of profit. An activity is pre- lines of Schedule A (Form 1040). For taxable
sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profit2011, and 2012, you can only deduct the rent for years beginning after Dec. 31, 2008, you can
in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the2010 on your 2010 tax return. You can deduct deduct a casualty loss on property you own for
current year. Activities that consist primarily ofthe rent for 2011 and 2012 on your tax returns personal use only to the extent it is more than
breeding, training, showing, or racing horses arefor those years. $500 and exceeds 10% of your adjusted gross
presumed carried on for profit if they produced a income. The 10% AGI limitation does not apply
profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ-Contested liability. Under the cash method, to net disaster losses resulting from federally
ing the current year. The activity must be sub-you can deduct a contested liability only in the declared disasters in 2008 and 2009 and individ-
stantially the same for each year within thisyear you pay the liability. Under the accrual uals are allowed to claim the net disaster lossesperiod. You have a profit when the gross incomemethod, you can deduct contested liabilities even if they do not itemize their deductions. Thefrom an activity exceeds the deductions.such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses- reduction amount returns to $100 for taxableIf a taxpayer dies before the end of thesion income, war profits, and excess profits years beginning after Dec. 31, 2009. See Publi-5-year (or 7-year) period, the ªtestº period endstaxes) either in the tax year you pay the liability cation 547 for more information on casualtyon the date of the taxpayer's death.(or transfer money or other property to satisfy losses. For the limits that apply to home mort-If your business or investment activitythe obligation) or in the tax year you settle the gage interest, see Publication 936.passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, the IRScontest. However, to take the deduction in the will presume it is carried on for profit. Thisyear of payment or transfer, you must meet means the limits discussed here will not apply. Category 2. Deductions that do not result incertain conditions. See section 1.461-2 of the You can take all your business deductions from an adjustment to the basis of property are al-regulations. the activity, even for the years that you have a lowed next, but only to the extent your gross
loss. You can rely on this presumption unless income from the activity is more than your de-Related person. Under an accrual method of the IRS later shows it to be invalid. ductions under the first category. Most businessaccounting, you generally deduct expenses
deductions, such as those for advertising, insur-when you incur them, even if you have not yet Using the presumption later. If you are start-
ance premiums, interest, utilities, and wages,paid them. However, if you and the person you ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) years
belong in this category.showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-owe are related and that person uses the cash
sumption made after you have the 5 (or 7) yearsmethod of accounting, you must pay the ex-
of experience allowed by the test.pense before you can deduct it. Your deduction Category 3. Business deductions that de-
You can elect to do this by filing Form 5213.is allowed when the amount is includible in in- crease the basis of property are allowed last, but
Filing this form postpones any determinationcome by the related cash method payee. See only to the extent the gross income from the
that your activity is not carried on for profit until 5Related Persons in Publication 538. activity exceeds the deductions you take under(or 7) years have passed since you started the the first two categories. Deductions for deprecia-activity. tion, amortization, and the part of a casualty lossThe benefit gained by making this election is an individual could not deduct in category (1)that the IRS will not immediately questionNot-for-Profit Activities belong in this category. Where more than onewhether your activity is engaged in for profit. asset is involved, allocate depreciation andAccordingly, it will not restrict your deductions.If you do not carry on your business or invest- these other deductions proportionally.Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in thement activity to make a profit, you cannot use a required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2) Individuals must claim the amounts inloss from the activity to offset other income. years of profit at the end of this period, your categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-Activities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport deductions are not limited under these rules. If ous deductions on Schedule A (Form
TIPor recreation, are often not entered into for profit. you do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limit 1040). They are subject to theThe limit on not-for-profit losses applies to can be applied retroactively to any year with a 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S loss in the 5-year (or 7-year) period. cation 529 for information on this limit.corporations. It does not apply to corporations Filing Form 5213 automatically extends theother than S corporations. period of limitations on any year in the 5-year (or Example. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profitIn determining whether you are carrying on 7-year) period to 2 years after the due date of activity. The income and expenses of the activityan activity for profit, several factors are taken the return for the last year of the period. The are as follows.into account. No one factor alone is decisive. period is extended only for deductions of the
Among the factors to consider are whether: activity and any related deductions that might be Gross income ................ . $3,200
affected.• You carry on the activity in a businesslike Subtract:manner, You must file Form 5213 within 3 years Real estate taxes ....... . $700
after the due date of your return (deter- Home mortgage interest ... . 900• The time and effort you put into the activity mined without extensions) for the year Insurance ............ . 400
TIPindicate you intend to make it profitable, in which you first carried on the activity, or, if Utilities .............. . 700
• You depend on the income for your liveli- Maintenance .......... . 200earlier, within 60 days after receiving written
hood, Depreciation on an automobile 600notice from the Internal Revenue Service pro-
Depreciation on a machine . . 200 3,700posing to disallow deductions attributable to the• Your losses are due to circumstances be- activity.yond your control (or are normal in the Loss ...................... . $(500)start-up phase of your type of business),
Limit on Deductions Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, the• You change your methods of operation in
gross income she earned from the activity. Thean attempt to improve profitability, If your activity is not carried on for profit, take limit is reached in category (3), as follows.deductions in the following order and only to the• You (or your advisors) have the knowl-
extent stated in the three categories. If you areedge needed to carry on the activity as a Limit on deduction ............ . $3,200an individual, these deductions may be takensuccessful business,
Category 1: Taxes andonly if you itemize. These deductions may be• You were successful in making a profit in interest .............. . $1,600taken on Schedule A (Form 1040).similar activities in the past, Category 2: Insurance,
Category 1. Deductions you can take for per- utilities, and maintenance .. . 1,300 2,900• The activity makes a profit in some years, sonal as well as for business activities are al-and Available for Category 3 ....... . $ 300lowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness
• You can expect to make a future profit deductions, such as those for home mortgage The $800 of depreciation is allocated be-from the appreciation of the assets used in interest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong in tween the automobile and machine as follows.the activity. this category. Deduct them on the appropriate
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can claim employment credits like enterprises pay for the same or similar serv-$600 depreciation for thex $300 = $225 such as the following if you hire individ- ices.$800 automobile uals who meet certain requirements.
TIP To determine if pay is reasonable, also con-
sider the following items and any other pertinent• Empowerment zone and renewal commu-$200 depreciation for thex  $300 = $75 facts.nity employment credit (Form 8844).$800 machine
• The duties performed by the employee.• Indian employment credit (Form 8845).
The basis of each asset is reduced accord- • The volume of business handled.• Work opportunity credit (Form 5884).ingly.
• The character and amount of responsibil-Ida includes the $3,200 of gross income on • Credit for employer differential wage pay-
ity.line 22 (total income) of Form 1040. The $1,600 ments (Form 8932).
for category (1) is deductible in full on the appro- • The complexities of your business.
priate lines for taxes and interest on Schedule A Reduce your deduction for employee wages
• The amount of time required.(Form 1040). Ida deducts the remaining $1,600 by the amount of any employment credits you
($1,300 for category (2) and $300 for category claim. For more information about these credits, • The cost of living in the locality.
(3)) as other miscellaneous deductions on see the form on which the credit is claimed. • The ability and achievements of the indi-Schedule A (Form 1040) subject to the
vidual employee performing the service.2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. Topics • The pay compared with the gross and netThis chapter discusses:Partnerships and S corporations. If a part- income of the business, as well as with
nership or S corporation carries on a distributions to shareholders if the busi-• Tests for deducting paynot-for-profit activity, these limits apply at the ness is a corporation.
partnership or S corporation level. They are re- • Kinds of pay • Your policy regarding pay for all your em-flected in the individual shareholder's or part-
ployees.ner's distributive shares.
Useful Items • The history of pay for each employee.You may want to see:More than one activity. If you have several
undertakings, each may be a separate activity or
Publicationseveral undertakings may be combined. The Test 2ÐFor Services
following are the most significant facts and cir- Performed❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax Guidecumstances in making this determination.
You must be able to prove the payment was❏ 15-A Employer's Supplemental Tax• The degree of organizational and eco- made for services actually performed.Guidenomic interrelationship of various under-
takings. ❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe Employee-shareholder salaries. If a corpo-Benefits• The business purpose that is (or might be) ration pays an employee who is also a share-
served by carrying on the various under- holder a salary that is unreasonably highSee chapter 12 for information about gettingtakings separately or together in a busi- considering the services actually performed, thepublications and forms.ness or investment setting. excessive part of the salary may be treated as a
constructive distribution to the em-• The similarity of the undertakings. ployee-shareholder. For more information on
corporate distributions to shareholders, seeThe IRS will generally accept your characteri- Tests for Publication 542, Corporations.zation if it is supported by facts and circum-
stances. Deducting Pay
If you are carrying on two or more dif-
To be deductible, your employees' pay must beferent activities, keep the deductions Kinds of Payan ordinary and necessary expense and youand income from each one separate.
TIP
must pay or incur it. These and other require-Figure separately whether each is a Some of the ways you may provide pay to yourments that apply to all business expenses arenot-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on employees in addition to regular wages or sala-explained in chapter 1.deductions and losses separately for each activ- ries are discussed next. For specialized andity that is not for profit. In addition, the pay must meet both of the detailed information on employees' pay and thefollowing tests. employment tax treatment of employees' pay,
see Publications 15, 15-A, and 15-B.• Test 1. It must be reasonable.
• Test 2. It must be for services performed. Awards
The form or method of figuring the pay does not
You can generally deduct amounts you pay toaffect its deductibility. For example, bonuses
2. your employees as awards, whether paid inand commissions based on sales or earnings,
cash or property. If you give property to anand paid under an agreement made before the
employee as an employee achievement award,services were performed, are both deductible.
your deduction may be limited.
Employees' Pay Test 1ÐReasonableness Achievement awards. An achievement
award is an item of tangible personal propertyYou must be able to prove that the pay is rea-
that meets all the following requirements.sonable. Base this determination on the circum-
Introduction stances that exist when you contract for the • It is given to an employee for length of
services, not those that exist when the reasona-You can generally deduct the pay you give your service or safety achievement.
bleness is questioned. If the pay is excessive,employees for the services they perform. The • It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-the excess is disallowed for deduction.pay may be in cash, property, or services. It may entation.include wages, salaries, or other compensation
Factors to consider. Determine the reasona-such as vacation allowances, bonuses, commis- • It is awarded under conditions and circum-
bleness of pay by the facts and circumstances.sions, and fringe benefits. For information about stances that do not create a significant
Generally, reasonable pay is the amount thatdeducting employment taxes see chapter 5. likelihood of disguised pay.
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees' Pay

Page 7 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Length-of-service award. An award will Gifts of nominal value. If, to promote em- • Meals you furnish to your employees as
qualify as a length-of-service award only if either ployee goodwill, you distribute food or merchan- part of the expense of providing recrea-
of the following applies. dise of nominal value to your employees at tional or social activities, such as a com-
holidays, you can deduct the cost of these items pany picnic.• The employee receives the award after his as a nonwage business expense. Your deduc-or her first 5 years of employment. • Meals you are required by federal law totion for de minimis gifts of food or drink are not furnish to crew members of certain com-• The employee did not receive another subject to the 50% deduction limit that generally mercial vessels (or would be required tolength-of-service award (other than one of applies to meals. For more information on this furnish if the vessels were operated atvery small value) during the same year or deduction limit, see Meals and lodging, later. sea). This does not include meals you fur-in any of the prior 4 years. nish on vessels primarily providing luxury
Education Expenses water transportation.Safety achievement award. An award for
safety achievement will qualify as an achieve- • Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platformIf you pay or reimburse education expenses for
ment award unless one of the following applies. or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.an employee, you can deduct the payments if
This includes meals you furnish at a sup-they are part of a qualified educational assis-1. It is given to a manager, administrator, port camp that is near and integral to antance program. Deduct them on the ªEmployeeclerical employee, or other professional oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.benefit programsº or other appropriate line ofemployee. your tax return. For information on educational
2. During the tax year, more than 10% of assistance programs, see Educational Assis- Employee benefit programs. Employee ben-your employees, excluding those listed in tance in section 2 of Publication 15-B. efit programs include the following.(1), have already received a safety
• Accident and health plans.achievement award (other than one of very Fringe Benefits
small value). • Adoption assistance.
A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform-
• Cafeteria plans.Deduction limit. Your deduction for the ance of services. You can generally deduct the
cost of employee achievement awards given to cost of fringe benefits. • Dependent care assistance.any one employee during the tax year is limited You may be able to exclude all or part of the • Educational assistance.to the following. value of some fringe benefits from your employ-
ees' pay. You also may not owe employment • Life insurance coverage.• $400 for awards that are not qualified plan
taxes on the value of the fringe benefits. Seeawards. • Welfare benefit funds.Table 2-1, Special Rules for Various Types of
• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual- Fringe Benefits, in Publication 15-B for details. You can generally deduct amounts you spendified plan awards. Your deduction for the cost of fringe benefits on employee benefit programs on the applicablefor activities generally considered entertain- line of your tax return. For example, if you pro-A qualified plan award is an achievement ment, amusement, or recreation, or for a facility vide dependent care by operating a dependentaward given as part of an established written used in connection with such an activity (for care facility for your employees, deduct yourplan or program that does not favor highly com- example, a company aircraft) for certain officers, costs in whatever categories they fall (utilities,pensated employees as to eligibility or benefits. directors, and more-than-10% shareholders is salaries, etc.).A highly compensated employee is an em- limited.ployee who meets either of the following tests. Life insurance coverage. You cannot de-Certain fringe benefits are discussed next.
duct the cost of life insurance coverage for you,See Publication 15-B for more details on these1. The employee was a 5% owner at any
an employee, or any person with a financialand other fringe benefits.time during the year or the preceding year.
interest in your business, if you are directly or
2. The employee received more than Meals and lodging. You can usually deduct indirectly the beneficiary of the policy. See Reg-
$110,000 in pay for the preceding year. the cost of furnishing meals and lodging to your ulations section 1.264-1 for more information.
employees. Deduct the cost in whatever cate-You can choose to ignore test (2) if the em- Welfare benefit funds. A welfare benefitgory the expense falls. For example, if you oper-ployee was not also in the top 20% of employees fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangementate a restaurant, deduct the cost of the mealsranked by pay for the preceding year. having the effect of a plan) that provides welfareyou furnish to employees as part of the cost ofAn award is not a qualified plan award if the benefits to your employees, independent con-goods sold. If you operate a nursing home,average cost of all the employee achievement tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefitsmotel, or rental property, deduct the cost ofawards given during the tax year (that would be are any benefits other than deferred compensa-furnishing lodging to an employee as expensesqualified plan awards except for this limit) is tion or transfers of restricted property.for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation,more than $400. To figure this average cost, Your deduction for contributions to a welfareetc.ignore awards of nominal value. benefit fund is limited to the fund's qualified costDeduct achievement awards as a nonwage Deduction limit on meals. You can gener- for the tax year. If your contributions to the fundbusiness expense on your return or business ally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishing are more than its qualified cost, carry the excessschedule. meals to your employees. However, you can over to the next tax year.
deduct the full cost of the following meals.You may not owe employment taxes Generally, the fund's ªqualified costº is the
on the value of some achievement total of the following amounts, reduced by the• Meals whose value you include in an em-
awards you provide to an employee.
TIP after-tax income of the fund.ployee's wages.
See Publication 15-B.
• The cost you would have been able to• Meals that qualify as a de minimis fringe
deduct using the cash method of account-benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-
Bonuses ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.cation 15-B. This generally includes meals
you furnish to employees at your place of • The contributions added to a reserve ac-You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an business if more than half of these em- count that are needed to fund claims in-employee if you intended the bonus as addi- ployees are provided the meals for your curred but not paid as of the end of thetional pay for services, not as a gift, and the convenience. year. These claims can be for supplemen-services were performed. However, the total bo-
• Meals you furnish to your employees at tal unemployment benefits, severancenuses, salaries, and other pay must be reasona-
the work site when you operate a restau- pay, or disability, medical, or life insuranceble for the services performed. If the bonus is
rant or catering service.paid in property, see Property, later. benefits.
Chapter 2 Employees' Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information, see sections 419(c) and the payment under a nonaccountable plan, de- have or will receive equity in or title to the prop-
duct it as wages and include it in the employee's419A of the Internal Revenue Code and the erty, the rent is not deductible.
W-2.related regulations.
Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rentalSee Reimbursement of Travel, Meals, and
Entertainment in chapter 11 for more informa- deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, theLoans or Advances
tion about deducting reimbursements and an issue of reasonableness arises only if you and
You generally can deduct as wages an advance explanation of accountable and nonaccountable the lessor are related. Rent paid to a related
you make to an employee for services per- plans. person (defined below) is reasonable if it is the
formed if you do not expect the employee to same amount you would pay to a stranger for
repay the advance. However, if the employee use of the same property. Rent is not unreason-Sick and Vacation Pay
performs no services, treat the amount you ad- able just because it is figured as a percentage of
vanced as a loan. If the employee does not gross sales.Sick pay. You can deduct amounts you pay torepay the loan, treat it as income to the em- your employees for sickness and injury, includ- Related persons. For this purpose, the fol-ployee. ing lump-sum amounts, as wages. However, lowing are considered related persons.
your deduction is limited to amounts not com-Below-market interest rate loans. On cer- • An individual and his or her brothers andpensated by insurance or other means.tain loans you make to an employee or share- sisters, half brothers, half sisters, spouse,
holder, you are treated as having received ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),Vacation pay. Vacation pay is an employee
interest income and as having paid compensa- and lineal descendants (children, grand-benefit. It includes amounts paid for unused
tion or dividends equal to that interest. See children, etc.).vacation leave. You can deduct vacation pay
Below-Market Loans in chapter 4. only in the tax year in which the employee actu- • An individual and a corporation if the indi-ally receives it. This rule applies regardless of vidual owns, directly or indirectly, moreProperty whether you use the cash or accrual method of than 50% in value of the outstanding stockaccounting. of the corporation.If you transfer property (including your com-
pany's stock) to an employee as payment for • Two corporations that are members of the
services, you can generally deduct it as wages. same controlled group as defined in sec-
The amount you can deduct is the property's fair tion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code.
market value on the date of the transfer less any
• A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.amount the employee paid for the property.
You can claim the deduction only for the tax • Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if the3.
year in which your employee includes the prop- same person is a grantor of both trusts.
erty's value in income. Your employee is • A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the samedeemed to have included the value in income if trust.you report it on Form W-2 in a timely manner. Rent Expense
• A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa- You treat the deductible amount as received
rate trusts if the same person is a grantorin exchange for the property, and you must rec-
of both trusts.ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer,
Introductionunless it is the company's stock transferred as • A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation ifpayment for services. Your gain or loss is the This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rent the trust or a grantor of the trust owns,difference between the fair market value of the or lease payments you make for property you directly or indirectly, more than 50% inproperty and its adjusted basis on the date of use in your business but do not own. It also value of the outstanding stock of the cor-transfer. discusses how to treat other kinds of payments poration.you make that are related to your use of thisThese rules also apply to property trans-
• A person and a tax-exempt educational orproperty. These include payments you make forferred to an independent contractor for services,
charitable organization that is controlledtaxes on the property, improvements to thegenerally reported on Form 1099-MISC.
directly or indirectly by that person or byproperty, and getting a lease. There is a discus-
members of the family of that person.sion about capitalizing (including in the cost ofRestricted property. If the property you
property) certain rent expenses at the end of thetransfer for services is subject to restrictions that • A corporation and a partnership if thechapter.affect its value, you generally cannot deduct it same persons own more than 50% in
and do not report gain or loss until it is substan- value of the outstanding stock of the cor-Topicstially vested in the recipient. However, if the poration and more than 50% of the capitalrecipient pays for the property, you must report This chapter discusses: or profits interest in the partnership.any gain at the time of the transfer up to the
• Two S corporations or an S corporationamount paid. • The definition of rent
and a regular corporation if the same per-ªSubstantially vestedº means the property is • Taxes on leased property sons own more than 50% in value of thenot subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. This
outstanding stock of each corporation.• The cost of getting a leasemeans that the recipient is not likely to have to
give up his or her rights in the property in the • An executor of an estate and a beneficiary• Improvements by the lessee
future. of the estate except in the case of a sale• Capitalizing rent expenses or exchange in satisfaction of a pecuniary
Reimbursements bequest.
See chapter 12 for information about gettingfor Business Expenses
publications and forms. To determine whether an individual directly or
indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock of aYou can generally deduct the amount you pay or
reimburse employees for business expenses in- corporation, see Related Persons in Publication
curred for your business. However, your deduc- 542, Corporations. For rules that apply to trans-
tion may be limited. actions between partners and partnerships, seeRent
Publication 541, Partnerships.If you make the payment under an accounta-
ble plan, deduct it in the category of the expense Rent is any amount you pay for the use of
Rent on your home. If you rent your homepaid. For example, if you pay an employee for property you do not own. In general, you can
and use part of it as your place of business, youtravel expenses incurred on your behalf, deduct deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is for
may be able to deduct the rent you pay for thatthis payment as a travel expense. If you make property you use in your trade or business. If you
Page 8 Chapter 3 Rent Expense

Page 9 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
part. You must meet the requirements for busi- Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans- more than $250,000 and any of the following
apply.ness use of your home. For more information, actions may not be considered leases. Lever-
see Business use of your home in chapter 1. aged leases generally involve three parties: a • Rents increase during the lease.lessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor.
• Rents decrease during the lease.Usually the lease term covers a large part of theRent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid in
useful life of the leased property, and theyour trade or business is deductible in the year • Rents are deferred (rent is payable afterlessee's payments to the lessor are enough topaid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, you the end of the calendar year following thecover the lessor's payments to the lender.can deduct only the amount that applies to your calendar year in which the use occurs and
use of the rented property during the tax year. If you plan to take part in what appears to be the rent is allocated).
You can deduct the rest of your payment only a leveraged lease, you may want to get an • Rents are prepaid (rent is payable beforeover the period to which it applies. advance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001-28 on the end of the calendar year preceding thepage 1156 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 calendar year in which the use occurs andExample 1. You are a calendar year tax- contains the guidelines the IRS will use to deter- the rent is allocated).payer and you leased a building for 5 years mine if a leveraged lease is a lease for federal
beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per year. income tax purposes. Revenue Procedure These rules do not apply if your lease specifies
You paid the first year's rent ($12,000) on June 2001-29 on page 1160 of the same Internal equal amounts of rent for each month in the
30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 ×  $12,000) Revenue Bulletin provides the information re- lease term and all rent payments are due in the
for the rent that applies to the first year. quired to be furnished in a request for an ad- calendar year to which the rent relates (or in the
vance ruling on a leveraged lease transaction. preceding or following calendar year).
Example 2. You are a calendar year tax- Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 is available at Generally, if the special rules apply, you mustpayer. Last January you leased property for 3 www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdf. use an accrual method of accounting (and timeyears for $6,000 a year. You paid the full In general, Revenue Procedure 2001-28 value of money principles) for your rental ex-$18,000 (3 ×  $6,000) during the first year of the provides that, for advance ruling purposes only, penses, regardless of your overall method oflease. Each year you can deduct only $6,000, the IRS will consider the lessor in a leveraged accounting. In addition, in certain cases in whichthe part of the lease that applies to that year. lease transaction to be the owner of the property the IRS has determined that a lease was de-
and the transaction to be a valid lease if all the signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must takeCanceling a lease. You generally can deduct factors in the revenue procedure are met, in- rent and stated or imputed interest into accountas rent an amount you pay to cancel a business cluding the following. under a constant rental accrual method in whichlease. the rent is treated as accruing ratably over the• The lessor must maintain a minimum un-
entire lease term. For details, see section 467 ofconditional ªat riskº equity investment inLease or purchase. There may be instances the Internal Revenue Code.the property (at least 20% of the cost ofin which you must determine whether your pay- the property) during the entire lease term.ments are for rent or for the purchase of the
property. You must first determine whether your • The lessee may not have a contractual
right to buy the property from the lessor atagreement is a lease or a conditional sales con- Taxes onless than fair market value when the righttract. Payments made under a conditional sales
is exercised.contract are not deductible as rent expense. Leased Property
• The lessee may not invest in the property,Conditional sales contract. Whether an
If you lease business property, you can deductexcept as provided by Revenue Procedureagreement is a conditional sales contract de-
as additional rent any taxes you have to pay to2001-28.pends on the intent of the parties. Determine
or for the lessor. When you can deduct theseintent based on the provisions of the agreement • The lessee may not lend any money to the taxes as additional rent depends on your ac-and the facts and circumstances that exist when lessor to buy the property or guarantee the counting method.you make the agreement. No single test, or loan used by the lessor to buy the prop-special combination of tests, always applies. erty. Cash method. If you use the cash method ofHowever, in general, an agreement may be con- accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-• The lessor must show that it expects tosidered a conditional sales contract rather than tional rent only for the tax year in which you payreceive a profit apart from the tax deduc-a lease if any of the following is true. them.tions, allowances, credits, and other tax• The agreement applies part of each pay- attributes. Accrual method. If you use an accrualment toward an equity interest you will re-
method of accounting, you can deduct taxes asceive. The IRS may charge you a user fee for issuing additional rent for the tax year in which you cana tax ruling. For more information, see Revenue• You get title to the property after you make determine all the following.Procedure 2011-1 as modified by Announce-a stated amount of required payments.
• That you have a liability for taxes on thement 2011-7. See Revenue Procedure 2011-1,• The amount you must pay to use the prop- leased property.2011-1 I.R.B. 1, available at erty for a short time is a large part of the www.irs.gov/irb/2011-01_IRB/ar06.html . See • How much the liability is.amount you would pay to get title to the Announcement 2011-7, 2011-5 I.R.B. 446,property. • That economic performance occurred.available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2011-05_IRB/ar10.html.• You pay much more than the current fair The liability and amount of taxes are deter-rental value of the property. Leveraged leases of limited-use property. mined by state or local law and the lease agree-
The IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever-• You have an option to buy the property at ment. Economic performance occurs as you use
aged leases of so-called limited-use property.a nominal price compared to the value of the property.
Limited-use property is property not expected tothe property when you may exercise the
be either useful to or usable by a lessor at theoption. Determine this value when you Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendar
end of the lease term except for continued leas-make the agreement. year taxpayer that uses an accrual method of
ing or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce- accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-• You have an option to buy the property at dure 2001-28 for examples of limited-use ness. Under state law, owners of real propertya nominal price compared to the total property and property that is not limited-use become liable (incur a lien on the property) foramount you have to pay under the agree- property. real estate taxes for the year on January 1 ofment. that year. However, they do not have to pay
• The agreement designates part of the pay- Leases over $250,000. Special rules are pro- these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18
ments as interest, or that part is easy to vided for certain leases of tangible property. The months later) when tax bills are issued. Under
recognize as interest. rules apply if the lease calls for total payments of the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable for
Chapter 3 Rent Expense Page 9

Page 10 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the real estate taxes in the later year when the Cost of a modification agreement. You may amortize it over the remaining term of the lease.
tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the have to pay an additional ªrentº amount over part You can depreciate the part that is for your
tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable for of the lease period to change certain provisions investment in the improvements over the recov-
the taxes for that year. in your lease. You must capitalize these pay- ery period of the property as discussed earlier,
ments and amortize them over the remaining without regard to the lease term.Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as
period of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay-rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak's
ments as additional rent, even if they are de-liability under the lease becomes fixed.
scribed as rent in the agreement.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in CapitalizingExample 1 except that, according to the terms of Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer
the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estate and sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a building Rent Expensestaxes when the owner of the property becomes starting on January 1. However, before you oc-
liable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct the cupy it, you decide that you really need less Under the uniform capitalization rules, you mustreal estate taxes as rent on its tax return for the space. The lessor agrees to reduce your rent capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirectearlier year. This is the year in which Oak's from $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release costs for certain production or resale activities.liability under the lease becomes fixed. the excess space from the original lease. In Include these costs in the basis of property you
exchange, you agree to pay an additional rent produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-
amount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install- ing them as a current deduction. You recover the
ments of $50 each. costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost
Cost of Getting a Lease You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise
it over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor- dispose of the property.You may either enter into a new lease with the tization deduction each year will be $150 Indirect costs include amounts incurred forlessor of the property or get an existing lease ($3,000 ÷  20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 × renting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.from another lessee. Very often when you get an $50) that you will pay during each of the first 5existing lease from another lessee, you must years as rent.pay the previous lessee money to get the lease, Uniform capitalization rules. You may bebesides having to pay the rent on the lease. subject to the uniform capitalization rules if youCommissions, bonuses, and fees. Commis-
If you get an existing lease on property or do any of the following, unless the property issions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts you
equipment for your business, you generally produced for your use other than in a businesspay to get a lease on property you use in your
must amortize any amount you pay to get that or an activity carried on for profit.business are capital costs. You must amortizelease over the remaining term of the lease. For these costs over the term of the lease.example, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and 1. Produce real property or tangible personal
there are 10 years remaining on the lease with property. For this purpose, tangible per-Loss on merchandise and fixtures. If youno option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 each sonal property includes a film, sound re-sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that youyear. cording, video tape, book, or similarbought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of
property.The cost of getting an existing lease of tangi- getting the lease. You must capitalize the loss
ble property is not subject to the amortization and amortize it over the remaining term of the 2. Acquire property for resale.rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in lease. However, these rules do not apply to the follow-chapter 8.
ing property.
Option to renew. The term of the lease for
1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifamortization includes all renewal options plus
Improvements your average annual gross receipts areany other period for which you and the lessor
$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.reasonably expect the lease to be renewed. by LesseeHowever, this applies only if less than 75% of 2. Property you produce if you meet either ofthe cost of getting the lease is for the term the following conditions.If you add buildings or make other permanentremaining on the purchase date (not including improvements to leased property, depreciateany period for which you may choose to renew, a. Your indirect costs of producing thethe cost of the improvements using the modifiedextend, or continue the lease). Allocate the property are $200,000 or less.accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS).lease cost to the original term and any option b. You use the cash method of accountingDepreciate the property over its appropriate re-term based on the facts and circumstances. In
and do not account for inventories.covery period. You cannot amortize the costsome cases, it may be appropriate to make the
over the remaining term of the lease.allocation using a present value computation.
If you do not keep the improvements whenFor more information, see Regulations section Example 1. You rent construction equip-you end the lease, figure your gain or loss based1.178-1(b)(5).
ment to build a storage facility. If you are subjecton your adjusted basis in the improvements at
to the uniform capitalization rules, you must cap-Example 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease that time.
italize as part of the cost of the building the rentwith 20 years remaining on it and two options to For more information, see the discussion of you paid for the equipment. You recover yourrenew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paid MACRS in Publication 946, How To Depreciate
cost by claiming a deduction for depreciation on$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for the Property.
renewal options. Because $7,000 is less than the building.
75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (or Assignment of a lease. If a long-term lessee Example 2. You rent space in a facility to$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30 who makes permanent improvements to landyears. That is the remaining life of your present conduct your business of manufacturing tools. Iflater assigns all lease rights to you for moneylease plus the periods for renewal. you are subject to the uniform capitalizationand you pay the rent required by the lease, the rules, you must include the rent you paid toamount you pay for the assignment is a capitalExample 2. The facts are the same as in occupy the facility in the cost of the tools youinvestment. If the rental value of the leased landExample 1, except that you paid $8,000 for the produce.increased since the lease began, part of youroriginal lease and $2,000 for the renewal op-
capital investment is for that increase in thetions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 over
rental value. The rest is for your investment in More information. For more information onthe 20-year remaining life of the original lease.
the permanent improvements. these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules inThe $8,000 cost of getting the original lease was
The part that is for the increased rental value Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-not less than 75% of the total cost of the lease
of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you nal Revenue Code section 263A.(or $7,500).
Page 10 Chapter 3 Rent Expense

Page 11 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Allocate your interest expense to the follow- for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem-
ber 4, Connie uses an additional $40,000 froming categories.
the account for personal purposes.• Nonpassive trade or business activity in-4. Under the interest allocation rules, the entireterest $100,000 loan is treated as property held for
• Passive trade or business activity interest investment for the period from January 4
through April 1. From April 2 through September• Investment interestInterest 3, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan as used
• Portfolio interest in the passive activity and $80,000 of the loan as
property held for investment. From September 4• Personal interest through December 31, she must treat $40,000
Introduction In general, you allocate interest on a loan the of the loan as used for personal purposes,
same way you allocate the loan proceeds. You $20,000 as used in the passive activity, andThis chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-
allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse- $40,000 as property held for investment.ness interest expense. Business interest ex-
ments to specific uses.pense is an amount charged for the use of Order of funds spent. Generally, you treat
money you borrowed for business activities. loan proceeds deposited in an account as usedThe easiest way to trace disburse- (spent) before either of the following amounts.ments to specific uses is to keep theTopics proceeds of a particular loan separate • Any unborrowed amounts held in the
TIPThis chapter discusses: from any other funds. same account.
• Any amounts deposited after these loan• Allocation of interest Secured loan. The allocation of loan pro- proceeds.• Interest you can deduct ceeds and the related interest is not generally
affected by the use of property that secures the• Interest you cannot deduct Example. On January 9, Edith opened aloan.
checking account, depositing $500 of the pro-• Capitalization of interest
ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowedExample. You secure a loan with property• When to deduct interest funds. The following table shows the transac-used in your business. You use the loan pro-
tions in her account during the tax year.• Below-market loans ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use.
You must allocate interest expense on the loan
Date Transactionto personal use (purchase of the automobile)Useful Items even though the loan is secured by business January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan AYou may want to see: property. and $1,000 unborrowed
funds depositedIf the property that secures the loan isPublication
January 14 $500 proceeds of Loan B your home, you generally do not allo-
❏ 537 Installment Sales depositedcate the loan proceeds or the related
TIP
interest. The interest is usually deductible as February 19 $800 used for personal❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses qualified home mortgage interest, regardless of purposes❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction how the loan proceeds are used. For more infor-
February 27 $700 used for passivemation, see Publication 936. activityForm (and Instructions)
June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan C Allocation period. The period for which a❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions depositedloan is allocated to a particular use begins on the
❏ Sch E (Form 1040) Supplemental date the proceeds are used and ends on the November 20 $800 used for anIncome and Loss earlier of the following dates. investment
❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1065) Partner's Share of • The date the loan is repaid. December 18 $600 used for personal
Income, Deductions, Credits, etc. purposes• The date the loan is reallocated to another
❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder's use. Edith treats the $800 used for personal pur-
Share of Income, Deductions, poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loan
Credits, etc. A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. SheProceeds not disbursed to borrower. Even
treats the $700 used for a passive activity asif the lender disburses the loan proceeds to a❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement
made from the remaining $200 proceeds ofthird party, the allocation of the loan is still based❏ 3115 Application for Change in Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. Sheon your use of the funds. This applies whetherAccounting Method treats the $800 used for an investment as madeyou pay for property, services, or anything else
entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treatsby incurring a loan, or you take property subject❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense
the $600 used for personal purposes as madeto a debt.Deduction
from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C
❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations and $400 of unborrowed funds.Proceeds deposited in borrower's account.
For the periods during which loan proceedsTreat loan proceeds deposited in an account asSee chapter 12 for information about getting are held in the account, Edith treats them asproperty held for investment. It does not matterpublications and forms. property held for investment.whether the account pays interest. Any interest
you pay on the loan is investment interest ex- Payments from checking accounts. Gen-pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan, erally, you treat a payment from a checking oryou must reallocate the loan based on the use of similar account as made at the time the check isthe funds.Allocation of Interest written if you mail or deliver it to the payee within
a reasonable period after you write it. You canExample. Connie, a calendar-year tax-The rules for deducting interest vary, depending treat checks written on the same day as writtenpayer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im-on whether the loan proceeds are used for busi- in any order.mediately uses the proceeds to open a checkingness, personal, or investment activities. If you
account. No other amounts are deposited in theuse the proceeds of a loan for more than one Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re-
account during the year and no part of the loantype of expense, you must make an allocation to ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-
principal is repaid during the year. On April 2,determine the interest for each use of the loan's ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat
Connie uses $20,000 from the checking accountproceeds. any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)
Chapter 4 Interest Page 11

Page 12 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
made from any account you own, or from cash, account ($867) continues to be investment inter- you use the proceeds of the loan for a trade or
est expense until you either repay it or reallocate business expense. It does not matter what typeas made from those proceeds. This applies to
it to another use. of property secures the loan. You can deductany payment made within 30 days before or
interest on a debt only if you meet all the follow-after the proceeds are received in cash or de- Loan repayment. When you repay any part of ing requirements.posited in your account. a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it asIf the loan proceeds are deposited in an • You are legally liable for that debt.being repaid in the following order.
account, you can apply this rule even if the rules • Both you and the lender intend that the1. Personal use.stated earlier under Order of funds spent would debt be repaid.otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as 2. Investments and passive activities (other • You and the lender have a trueused for other purposes. If you apply this rule to than those included in (3)). debtor-creditor relationship.any payments, disregard those payments (and
3. Passive activities in connection with athe proceeds from which they are made) when
rental real estate activity in which you ac-applying the rules stated under Order of funds Partial liability. If you are liable for part of atively participate.spent. business debt, you can deduct only your share
If you received the loan proceeds in cash, 4. Former passive activities. of the total interest paid or accrued.
you can treat the payment as made on the date 5. Trade or business use and expenses for Example. You and your brother borrowyou received the cash instead of the date you certain low-income housing projects. money. You are liable for 50% of the note. Youactually made the payment.
use your half of the loan in your business, andLine of credit (continuous borrowings). you make one-half of the loan payments. YouExample. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 on The following rules apply if you have a line of can deduct your half of the total interest pay-August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash. credit or similar arrangement. ments as a business deduction.Frank deposits $1,500 in an account on August
18 and on August 28 writes a check on the 1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interest Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paidaccount for a passive activity expense. Also, accrues at the same fixed or variable rate or accrued on real estate you own legally orFrank deposits his paycheck, deposits other as a single loan. equitably is deductible. However, rather than
loan proceeds, and pays his bills during the deducting the interest currently, you may have2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowedsame period. Regardless of these other transac- to add it to the cost basis of the property asfunds on which interest accrues at differenttions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit he explained later under Capitalization of Interest.fixed or variable rates as different loans.made on August 18 as being paid on August 4 Treat these loans as repaid in the order Statement. If you paid $600 or more offrom the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank can shown on the loan agreement. mortgage interest (including certain points) dur-treat the passive activity expense he paid on ing the year on any one mortgage, you generallyAugust 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro- Loan refinancing. Allocate the replacement will receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement.ceeds treated as deposited in the account. loan to the same uses to which the repaid loan You will receive the statement if you pay interest
was allocated. Make the allocation only to theOptional method for determining date of to a person (including a financial institution or a
extent you use the proceeds of the new loan toreallocation. You can use the following cooperative housing corporation) in the course
repay any part of the original loan. of that person's trade or business. A govern-method to determine the date loan proceeds are
mental unit is a person for purposes of furnishingreallocated to another use. You can treat all Debt-financed distribution. A debt-financed the statement.payments from loan proceeds in the account distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor- If you receive a refund of interest you over-during any month as taking place on the later of poration borrows funds and allocates those paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-the following dates. funds to distributions made to partners or share- ported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannotholders. The manner in which you report the• The first day of that month. deduct this amount. For information on how tointerest expense associated with the distributed report this refund, see Refunds of interest later• The date the loan proceeds are deposited debt proceeds depends on your use of those in this chapter.in the account. proceeds.
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.However, you can use this optional method only How to report. If the proceeds were used in Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgageif you treat all payments from the account during a nonpassive trade or business activity, report cannot be deducted as interest. These ex-the same calendar month in the same way. the interest on Schedule E (Form 1040), line 28; penses, which include mortgage commissions,enter ªinterest expenseº and the name of theInterest on a segregated account. If you abstract fees, and recording fees, are capitalpartnership or S corporation in column (a) andhave an account that contains only loan pro- expenses. If the property mortgaged is businessthe amount in column (h). If the proceeds wereceeds and interest earned on the account, you or income-producing property, you can amortizeused in a passive activity, follow the Instructionscan treat any payment from that account as the costs over the life of the mortgage.for Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-being made first from the interest. When the Prepayment penalty. If you pay off yourtions, to determine the amount of interest ex-interest earned is used up, any remaining pay- mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty forpense that can be reported on Schedule Ements are from loan proceeds. doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter-(Form 1040), line 28; enter ªinterest expenseº
est.and the name of the partnership in column (a)Example. You borrowed $20,000 and used and the amount in column (f). If the proceeds Interest on employment tax deficiency. In-the proceeds of this loan to open a new savings were used in an investment activity, enter the terest charged on employment taxes assessedaccount. When the account had earned interest interest on Form 4952. If the proceeds are used on your business is deductible.of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur- for personal purposes, the interest is generallyposes. You can treat the withdrawal as coming not deductible. Original issue discount (OID). OID is a formfirst from the interest earned on the account, of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-$867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133 erally has OID when its proceeds are less than
($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on the its principal amount. The OID is the difference
loan from the time it was deposited in the ac- between the stated redemption price at maturityInterest Youcount until the time of the withdrawal is invest- and the issue price of the loan.
ment interest expense. The interest charged on  A loan's stated redemption price at maturityCan Deduct
the part of the proceeds used for personal pur- is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest)
poses ($19,133) from the time you withdrew it You can generally deduct as a business ex- payable on it other than qualified stated interest.
until you either repay it or reallocate it to another pense all interest you pay or accrue during the Qualified stated interest is stated interest that is
use is personal interest expense. The interest tax year on debts related to your trade or busi- unconditionally payable in cash or property
charged on the loan proceeds you left in the ness. Interest relates to your trade or business if (other than another loan of the issuer) at least
Page 12 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 13 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
annually over the term of the loan at a single Example. The facts are the same as in the You cannot currently deduct interest that
previous example, except that you deduct the must be capitalized, and you generally cannotfixed rate.
OID on a constant yield basis over the term of deduct personal interest.You generally deduct OID over the term of
the loan. The yield to maturity on your loan isthe loan. Figure the amount to deduct each year
Interest paid with funds borrowed from origi-10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2010,using the constant-yield method, unless the OID
nal lender. If you use the cash method ofyou can deduct $93 [($98,500 ×  .102467) −on the loan is de minimis.
accounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay$10,000]. For 2011, you can deduct $103
De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it with funds borrowed from the original lender[($98,593 ×  .102467) − $10,000].
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the through a second loan, an advance, or any otherLoan or mortgage ends. If your loan orstated redemption price of the loan at maturity arrangement similar to a loan. You can deductmortgage ends, you may be able to deduct anymultiplied by the number of full years from the the interest expense once you start making pay-remaining OID in the tax year in which the loandate of original issue to maturity (the term of the ments on the new loan.or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may endloan). When you make a payment on the new loan,due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure,If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one you first apply the payment to interest and thenor similar event.of the following ways to figure the amount you to the principal. All amounts you apply to the
If you refinance with the original lender,can deduct each year. interest on the first loan are deductible, along
you generally cannot deduct the re- with any interest you pay on the second loan,• On a constant-yield basis over the term of maining OID in the year in which the subject to any limits that apply.
CAUTION
!the loan. refinancing occurs, but you may be able to de-
duct it over the term of the new mortgage or• On a straight-line basis over the term of Capitalized interest. You cannot currently
loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed fromthe loan. deduct interest you are required to capitalize
original lender under Interest You Cannot De- under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-• In proportion to stated interest payments. duct, later. talization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy
• In its entirety at maturity of the loan. property and pay interest owed by the seller (for
Points. The term ªpointsº is used to describe example, by assuming the debt and any interestYou make this choice by deducting the OID in a certain of the charges paid, or treated as paid, accrued on the property), you cannot deduct themanner consistent with the method chosen on by a borrower to obtain a loan or a mortgage. interest. Add this interest to the basis of theyour timely filed tax return for the tax year in These charges are also called loan origination property.which the loan is issued. fees, maximum loan charges, discount points, or
Commitment fees or standby charges.premium charges. If any of these chargesExample. On January 1, 2010, you took out Fees you incur to have business funds available(points) are solely for the use of money, they area $100,000 discounted loan and received on a standby basis, but not for the actual use ofinterest.$98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on the funds, are not deductible as interest pay-Because points are prepaid interest, youJanuary 1, 2020 (a 10-year term), and the ments. You may be able to deduct them asgenerally cannot deduct the full amount in the$100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter- business expenses.year paid. However, you can choose to fullyest of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of each deduct points in the year paid if you meet certain If the funds are for inventory or certain prop-year, beginning January 1, 2011. The $1,500 tests. For exceptions to the general rule, see erty used in your business, the fees are indirectOID on the loan is de minimis because it is less Publication 936. costs and you generally must capitalize themthan $2,500 ($100,000 ×  .0025 ×  10). You The points reduce the issue price of the loan under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-choose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basis and result in original issue discount, deductible talization of Interest, later.over the term of the loan. Beginning in 2010, you as explained in the preceding discussion.can deduct $150 each year for 10 years. Interest on income tax. Interest charged on
Partial payments on a nontax debt. If youConstant-yield method. If the OID is not de income tax assessed on your individual income
make partial payments on a debt (other than aminimis, you must use the constant-yield tax return is not a business deduction even
debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied,method to figure how much you can deduct each though the tax due is related to income from
in general, first to interest and any remainder toyear. You figure your deduction for the first year your trade or business. Treat this interest as a
principal. You can deduct only the interest. Thisusing the following steps. business deduction only in figuring a net operat-
rule does not apply when it can be inferred that ing loss deduction.
the borrower and lender understood that a differ-1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen-
Penalties. Penalties on underpaid deficien-ent allocation of the payments would be made.erally, this equals the proceeds of the loan.
cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-If you paid points on the loan (as dis-
est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, youInstallment purchase. If you make an install-cussed later), the issue price generally is
cannot deduct any fines or penalties.ment purchase of business property, the con-the difference between the proceeds and
tract between you and the seller generallythe points. Interest on loans with respect to life insur-provides for the payment of interest. If no inter-
2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to ance policies. You generally cannot deductest or a low rate of interest is charged under the
maturity. interest on a debt incurred with respect to anycontract, a portion of the stated principal amount
life insurance, annuity, or endowment contractpayable under the contract may be recharacter-3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay- that covers any individual unless that individualized as interest (unstated interest). The amountments from the result in (2). This is the is a key person.recharacterized as interest reduces your basisOID you can deduct in the first year.
in the property and increases your interest ex- If the policy or contract covers a key person,To figure your deduction in any subsequent pense. For more information on installment you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 of
year, follow the above steps, except determine sales and unstated interest, see Publication debt for that person. However, the deduction for
the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the 537. any month cannot be more than the interest
adjusted issue price, add to the issue price any figured using Moody's Composite Yield on Sea-
OID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2) soned Corporate Bonds (formerly known as
and (3) above. Moody's Corporate Bond Yield Aver-
The yield to maturity is generally shown in age-Monthly Average Corporates) (Moody'sInterest You
the literature you receive from your lender. If you rate) for that month.
do not have this information, consult your lender Cannot Deduct Who is a key person? A key person is anor tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity is officer or 20% owner. However, the number ofthe discount rate that, when used in computing Certain interest payments cannot be deducted. individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-the present value of all principal and interest In addition, certain other expenses that may ited to the greater of the following.payments, produces an amount equal to the seem to be interest are not, and you cannot
principal amount of the loan. deduct them as interest. • Five individuals.
Chapter 4 Interest Page 13

Page 14 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The lesser of 5% of the total officers and the property is used in your trade or business, until the tax year the final determination of liabil-
employees of the company or 20 individu- recover capitalized interest through an adjust- ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency,
als. ment to basis, depreciation, amortization, or then the interest accrues in the year the tax was
other method. asserted and agreed to by you.
Exceptions for pre-June 1997 contracts. However, if you contest but pay the pro-Partnerships and S corporations. The inter-You can generally deduct the interest if the con- posed tax deficiency and interest, and you doest capitalization rules are applied first at thetract was issued before June 9, 1997, and the not designate the payment as a cash bond, thenpartnership or S corporation level. The rules arecovered individual is someone other than an the interest is deductible in the year paid.then applied at the partners' or shareholders'employee, officer, or someone financially inter-
level to the extent the partnership or S corpora- Related person. If you use an accrualested in your business. If the contract was pur-
tion has insufficient debt to support the produc-chased before June 21, 1986, you can generally method, you cannot deduct interest owed to a
tion or construction costs.deduct the interest no matter who is covered by related person who uses the cash method until
If you are a partner or a shareholder, youthe contract. payment is made and the interest is includible in
may have to capitalize interest you incur during the gross income of that person. The relation-Interest allocated to unborrowed policy the tax year for the production costs of the part- ship is determined as of the end of the tax yearcash value. Corporations and partnerships nership or S corporation. You may also have to for which the interest would otherwise be de-generally cannot deduct any interest expense capitalize interest incurred by the partnership or ductible. See section 267 of the Internal Reve-allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in- S corporation for your own production costs. To nue Code for more information.surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. This properly capitalize interest under these rules,rule applies to contracts issued after June 8, you must be given the required information in an1997, that cover someone other than an officer, attachment to the Schedule K-1 you receivedirector, employee, or 20% owner. For more from the partnership or S corporation.information, see section 264(f) of the Internal Below-Market Loans
Revenue Code. Additional information. The procedures for
If you receive a below-market gift or demandapplying the uniform capitalization rules are be-
yond the scope of this publication. For more loan and use the proceeds in your trade or
information, see sections 1.263A-8 through business, you may be able to deduct the forgone
Capitalization 1.263A-15 of the regulations and Notice 88-99. interest. See Treatment of gift and demand
Notice 88-99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988-2. loans later in this discussion.
of Interest A below-market loan is a loan on which no
interest is charged or on which interest isUnder the uniform capitalization rules, you gen- charged at a rate below the applicable federalerally must capitalize interest on debt equal to When To rate. A gift or demand loan that is a be-your expenditures to produce real property or low-market loan generally is considered ancertain tangible personal property. The property Deduct Interest arm's-length transaction in which you, the bor-must be produced by you for use in your trade or
rower, are considered as having received bothbusiness or for sale to customers. You cannot If the uniform capitalization rules, discussed the following.capitalize interest related to property that you under Capitalization of Interest,  earlier, do not
acquire in any other manner. apply to you, deduct interest as follows. • A loan in exchange for a note that requires
Interest you paid or incurred during the pro- the payment of interest at the applicableCash method. Under the cash method, youduction period must be capitalized if the property federal rate.can generally deduct only the interest you actu-produced is designated property. Designated
• An additional payment in an amount equalally paid during the tax year. You cannot deductproperty is any of the following.
to the forgone interest.a promissory note you gave as payment be-• Real property. cause it is a promise to pay and not an actual The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-payment.• Tangible personal property with a class life dend, contribution to capital, payment of com-of 20 years or more. pensation, or other payment, depending on thePrepaid interest. You generally cannot de-
duct any interest paid before the year it is due. substance of the transaction.• Tangible personal property with an esti-
Interest paid in advance can be deducted only inmated production period of more than 2
Forgone interest.the tax year in which it is due.years.
For any period, forgone interest is:Discounted loan. If interest or a discount is• Tangible personal property with an esti-
subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not amated production period of more than 1 1. The interest that would be payable for that
payment of interest and you cannot deduct ityear if the estimated cost of production is period if interest accrued on the loan at thewhen you get the loan. For more information,more than $1 million. applicable federal rate and was payablesee Original issue discount (OID) under Interest annually on December 31,You Can Deduct, earlier. minusProperty you produce. You produce property
Refunds of interest. If you pay interest andif you construct, build, install, manufacture, de- 2. Any interest actually payable on the loanthen receive a refund in the same tax year of anyvelop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treat for the period.part of the interest, reduce your interest deduc-property produced for you under a contract as
tion by the refund. If you receive the refund in aproduced by you up to the amount you pay or Applicable federal rates are publishedlater tax year, include the refund in your incomeincur for the property. by the IRS each month in the Internalto the extent the deduction for the interest re- Revenue Bulletin. Internal RevenueCarrying charges. Carrying charges include
TIP duced your tax. Bulletins are available on the IRS web site attaxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or
www.irs.gov/irb. You can also contact an IRSto carry, transport, or install personal property. Accrual method. Under an accrual method,
office to get these rates.You can choose to capitalize carrying charges you can deduct only interest that has accrued
not subject to the uniform capitalization rules if during the tax year.
they are otherwise deductible. For more infor- Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be-Prepaid interest. See Prepaid interest,mation, see chapter 7. low-market loans apply to the following.above.
Capitalized interest. Treat capitalized inter- 1. Gift loans (below-market loans where theDiscounted loan. See Discounted loan,est as a cost of the property produced. You forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).above.recover your interest when you sell or use the
2. Compensation-related loans (be-property. If the property is inventory, recover Tax deficiency. If you contest a federal in-
low-market loans between an employercapitalized interest through cost of goods sold. If come tax deficiency, interest does not accrue
Page 14 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 15 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exceptions for loans without significant taxand an employee or between an indepen- the health of the individual or individual's
effect. The following loans are specifically ex-dent contractor and a person for whom the spouse in an:
empted from the rules for below-market loanscontractor provides services).
a. independent living unit (which has addi-because their interest arrangements do not3. Corporation-shareholder loans. tional available facilities outside the unithave a significant effect on the federal tax liabil-
for the provision of meals and other per-4. Tax avoidance loans (below-market loans ity of the borrower or the lender.
sonal care), andwhere the avoidance of federal tax is one
1. Loans made available by lenders to theof the main purposes of the interest ar- b. assisted living or nursing facility avail-general public on the same terms and con-rangement). able in the continuing care facility.ditions that are consistent with the lender's
5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilities customary business practices. 3. The individual or individual's spouse will beunder a continuing care contract (made af-
provided with assisted living or nursing2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, orter October 11, 1985).
care available in the continuing care facil-municipal government that are made avail-
Except as noted in (5) above, these rules ity, as required for the health of the individ-able under a program of general applica-
apply to demand loans (loans payable in full at ual or the individual's spouse.tion to the public.any time upon the lender's demand) outstanding
For more information, see section 7872(h) of3. Certain employee-relocation loans.after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans that
the Internal Revenue Code.are not demand loans) made after that date. 4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person,
unless the interest income would be effec- Sale or exchange of property. Different rulesTreatment of gift and demand loans. If you tively connected with the conduct of a U.S. generally apply to a loan connected with the salereceive a below-market gift loan or demand trade or business and not exempt from or exchange of property. If the loan does notloan, you are treated as receiving an additional U.S. tax under an income tax treaty. provide adequate stated interest, part of thepayment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to the
principal payment may be considered interest.5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can showforgone interest on the loan. You are then
However, there are exceptions that may requirethat the interest arrangement has no signif-treated as transferring this amount back to the
you to apply the below-market interest rate rulesicant effect on the federal tax liability of thelender as interest. These transfers are consid-
to these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi-lender or the borrower. Whether an inter-ered to occur annually, generally on December
nal Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537.est arrangement has a significant effect on31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade or
the federal tax liability of the lender or thebusiness, you can deduct the forgone interest More information. For more information onborrower will be determined by all the factseach year as a business interest expense. The below-market loans, see section 7872 of theand circumstances. Consider all the follow-lender must report it as interest income. Internal Revenue Code and section 1.7872-5 ofing factors.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of the regulations.
$100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi- a. Whether items of income and deduction
viduals, forgone interest treated as transferred generated by the loan offset each other.
back to the lender is limited to the borrower's net
b. The amount of the items.investment income for the year. This limit ap-
plies if the outstanding loans between the lender c. The cost of complying with the be-
and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the bor- low-market loan provisions if they were
rower's net investment income is $1,000 or less, to apply. 5.
it is treated as zero. This limit does not apply to a
d. Any reasons, other than taxes, forloan if the avoidance of any federal tax is one of
structuring the transaction as a be-the main purposes of the interest arrangement.
low-market loan. Taxes
Treatment of term loans. If you receive a
below-market term loan other than a gift or de-
Exception for loans to qualified continuingmand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi- Introductioncare facilities. The below-market interesttional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on the
rules do not apply to a loan owed by a qualifieddate the loan is made. This payment is equal to You can deduct various federal, state, local, and
continuing care facility under a continuing carethe loan amount minus the present value, at the foreign taxes directly attributable to your trade or
contract if the lender or lender's spouse is ageapplicable federal rate, of all payments due business as business expenses.
62 or older by the end of the calendar year.under the loan. The same amount is treated as You cannot deduct federal incomeoriginal issue discount on the loan. See Original A qualified continuing care facility is one or taxes, estate and gift taxes, or stateissue discount (OID)  under Interest You Can more facilities (excluding nursing homes) meet- inheritance, legacy, and succession
CAUTION
!Deduct, earlier. ing the requirements listed below. taxes.
1. Designed to provide services under contin-Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less. The
uing care contracts (defined below). Topicsrules for below-market loans do not apply to any
This chapter discusses:day on which the total outstanding loans be- 2. Includes an independent living unit, andtween the borrower and lender is $10,000 or either an assisted living or nursing facility, • When to deduct taxesless. This exception applies only to the follow- or both.ing. • Real estate taxes3. Substantially all of the independent living
1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan is • Income taxesunit residents are covered by continuing
not directly used to buy or carry in- care contracts. • Employment taxescome-producing assets.
A continuing care contract is a written con- • Other taxes2. Compensation-related loans or corpora- tract between an individual and a qualified con-
tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of tinuing care facility that includes all of the
any federal tax is not a principal purpose of following conditions. Useful Items
the interest arrangement. You may want to see:
1. The individual or individual's spouse mustThis exception does not apply to a term loan be entitled to use the facility for the rest of Publicationdescribed in (2) above that was previously sub- their life or lives.ject to the below-market loan rules. Those rules ❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax Guide2. The individual or individual's spouse will bewill continue to apply even if the outstanding
provided with housing, as appropriate forbalance is reduced to $10,000 or less. ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business
Chapter 5 Taxes Page 15

Page 16 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 510 Excise Taxes deduction reduced your federal income tax in date of sale. You can usually find this informa-
the earlier year. For more information, see Re- tion on the settlement statement you received at❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods covery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule)  in closing.
❏ 551 Basis of Assets chapter 1. If you (the seller) use an accrual method and
have not elected to ratably accrue real estateYou must include in income any inter-Form (and Instructions) taxes, you are considered to have accrued yourest you receive on tax refunds.
part of the tax on the date you sell the property.❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
TIP
❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment Example. Al Green, a calendar year accrual
Tax method taxpayer, owns real estate in Elm
County. He has not elected to ratably accrue❏ 3115 Application for Change in
property taxes. November 30 of each year is theAccounting Method Real Estate Taxes assessment and lien date for the current real
property tax year, which is the calendar year. HeSee chapter 12 for information about getting Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local, sold the property on June 30, 2010. Under hispublications and forms. or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the accounting method he would not be able togeneral public welfare. The taxing authority claim a deduction for the taxes because the salemust base the taxes on the assessed value of occurred before November 30. He is treated asthe real estate and charge them uniformly having accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu-When To against all property under its jurisdiction. De- ary 1±June 29), on June 30, and he can deductductible real estate taxes generally do not in- it for 2010.Deduct Taxes clude taxes charged for local benefits and
improvements that increase the value of theGenerally, you can only deduct taxes in the year Electing to ratably accrue. If you use an ac-property. See Taxes for local benefits, later.you pay them. This applies whether you use the crual method, you can elect to accrue real estateIf you use an accrual method, you generallycash method or an accrual method of account- tax related to a definite period ratably over thatcannot accrue real estate taxes until you paying. period.them to the government authority. However, youUnder an accrual method, you can deduct a can elect to ratably accrue the taxes during thetax before you pay it if you meet the exception Example. John Smith is a calendar yearyear. See Electing to ratably accrue, later.for recurring items discussed under Economic taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His real
Performance in Publication 538. You can also estate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1,Taxes for local benefits. Generally, you can-elect to ratably accrue real estate taxes as dis- 2010, to June 30, 2011, are $1,200. July 1 is thenot deduct taxes charged for local benefits andcussed later under Real Estate Taxes. assessment and lien date.improvements that tend to increase the value of
your property. These include assessments for If John elects to ratably accrue the taxes,Limit on accrual of taxes. A taxing jurisdic-
streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, $600 will accrue in 2010 ($1,200 ×  6/12, Julytion can require the use of a date for accruing
and public parking facilities. You should in- 1±December 31) and the balance will accrue intaxes that is earlier than the date it originally
crease the basis of your property by the amount 2011.required. However, if you use an accrual
of the assessment.method, and can deduct the tax before you pay Separate elections. You can elect to rata-You can deduct taxes for these local benefitsit, use the original accrual date for the year of bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade oronly if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, orchange and all future years to determine when business and for nonbusiness activities if youinterest charges related to those benefits. If partyou can deduct the tax. account for them separately. Once you elect toof the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest,
ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must useyou must be able to show how much of the tax isExample. Your state imposes a tax on per- that method unless you get permission from thefor these expenses to claim a deduction for thatsonal property used in a trade or business con- IRS to change. See Form 3115, later.part of the tax.ducted in the state. This tax is assessed and
becomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). In Making the election. If you elect to ratably
Example. To improve downtown commer-2010, the state changed the assessment and accrue the taxes for the first year in which youcial business, Waterfront City converted a down-lien dates from July 1, 2011, to December 31, incur real estate taxes, attach a statement totown business area street into an enclosed2010, for property tax year 2011. Use the origi- your income tax return for that year. The state-pedestrian mall. The city assessed the full costnal accrual date (July 1, 2011) to determine ment should show all the following items.of construction, financed with 10-year bonds,when you can deduct the tax. You must also use
• The trades or businesses to which theagainst the affected properties. The city is pay-the July 1 accrual date for all future years to
election applies and the accountinging the principal and interest with the annualdetermine when you can deduct the tax.
method or methods used.payments made by the property owners.
Uniform capitalization rules. Uniform capi- The assessments for construction costs are • The period to which the taxes relate.talization rules apply to certain taxpayers who not deductible as taxes or as business ex-produce real property or tangible personal prop- • The computation of the real estate tax de-penses, but are depreciable capital expenses.erty for use in a trade or business or for sale to duction for that first year.The part of the payments used to pay the inter-customers. They also apply to certain taxpayers est charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes.who acquire property for resale. Under these Generally, you must file your return by the due
rules, you either include certain costs in inven- Charges for services. Water bills, sewerage, date (including extensions). However, if you
tory or capitalize certain expenses related to the and other service charges assessed against timely filed your return for the year without elect-
property, such as taxes. For more information, your business property are not real estate taxes, ing to ratably accrue, you can still make thesee chapter 1. but are deductible as business expenses. election by filing an amended return within 6
months after the due date of the return (exclud-Carrying charges. Carrying charges include Purchase or sale of real estate. If real estate ing extensions). Attach the statement to thetaxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or is sold, the real estate taxes must be allocated amended return and write ªFiled pursuant toto carry, transport, or install personal property. between the buyer and the seller. section 301.9100-2º on the statement. File theYou can elect to capitalize carrying charges not The buyer and seller must allocate the real amended return at the same address where yousubject to the uniform capitalization rules if they estate taxes according to the number of days in filed the original return.are otherwise deductible. For more information, the real property tax year (the period to whichsee chapter 7. Form 3115. If you elect to ratably accruethe tax imposed relates) that each owned the
real estate taxes for a year after the first year inRefunds of taxes. If you receive a refund for property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes up
which you incur real estate taxes, or if you wantany taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in- to but not including the date of sale. Treat the
to revoke your election to ratably accrue realclude the refund in income to the extent the buyer as paying the taxes beginning with the
Page 16 Chapter 5 Taxes

Page 17 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
estate taxes, file Form 3115. For more informa- the tax as part of that service or cost. If the
tion, including applicable time frames for filing, property is merchandise bought for resale, theEmployment Taxessee the Instructions for Form 3115. sales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. If
the property is depreciable, add the sales tax toIf you have employees, you must withhold vari-Note. If you are filing an application for a the basis for depreciation. For more informationous taxes from your employees' pay. Most em-change in accounting method filed after January on basis, see Publication 551.ployers must withhold their employees' share of9, 2011, for a year of change ending after April social security and Medicare taxes along with Do not deduct state and local sales29, 2010, see Revenue Procedure 2011-14, state and federal income taxes. You may also taxes imposed on the buyer that you2011-4 I.R.B. 330, available at need to pay certain employment taxes from your must collect and pay over to the state
CAUTION
!www.irs.gov/irb/2011-04IRB/ar08.html. own funds. These include your share of social or local government. Also, do not include these
security and Medicare taxes as an employer, taxes in gross receipts or sales.
along with unemployment taxes.
Your deduction for wages paid is not re-
Income Taxes Self-employment tax. You can deductduced by the social security, medicare, and in-
one-half of your self-employment tax as a busi-come taxes you withhold from your employees.This section discusses federal, state, local, and ness expense in figuring your adjusted grossYou can deduct the employment taxes you mustforeign income taxes. income. This deduction only affects your incomepay from your own funds as taxes.
tax. It does not affect your net earnings fromFederal income taxes. You cannot deduct Example. You pay your employee $18,000 self-employment or your self-employment tax.federal income taxes. a year. However, after you withhold various To deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, linetaxes, your employee receives $14,500. You 27, the amount shown on the Deduction forState and local income taxes. A corporation also pay an additional $1,500 in employment one-half of self-employment tax line of Scheduleor partnership can deduct state and local in- taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as SE (Form 1040).come taxes imposed on the corporation or part- wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay fromnership as business expenses. An individual For more information on self-employmentyour own funds as taxes.can deduct state and local income taxes only as tax, see Publication 334.For more information on employment taxes,an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form see Publication 15 (Circular E).1040).
However, an individual can deduct a state Unemployment fund taxes. As an employer,tax on gross income (as distinguished from net you may have to make payments to a stateincome) directly attributable to a trade or busi- unemployment compensation fund or to a stateness as a business expense. disability benefit fund. Deduct these payments
as taxes.Accrual of contested income taxes. If you 6.
use an accrual method, and you contest a state
or local income tax liability, you must accrue and
deduct any contested amount in the tax year in
which the liability is finally determined. Other Taxes InsuranceIf additional state or local income taxes for a
prior year are assessed in a later year, you can The following are other taxes you can deduct if
deduct the taxes in the year in which they were you incur them in the ordinary course of your
originally imposed (the prior year) if the tax liabil- trade or business. What's Newity is not contested. You cannot deduct them in
the year in which the liability is finally deter- Excise taxes. You can deduct as a business Self-employed health insurance deduction.mined. expense all excise taxes that are ordinary and Effective March 30, 2010, if you werenecessary expenses of carrying on your trade orThe filing of an income tax return is not self-employed and paid for health insurance,business. However, see Fuel taxes, later.considered a contest and, in the ab- you may be able to include in your deduction any
sence of an overt act of protest, you
TIP premiums you paid to cover your child who wasFranchise taxes. You can deduct corporatecan deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, you under age 27 at the end of 2010, even if the childfranchise taxes as a business expense.can deduct any additional taxes in the prior year was not your dependent. For 2010, the
if you do not show some affirmative evidence of self-employed health insurance deduction isFuel taxes. Generally, taxes on gasoline, die-denial of the liability. also allowed on Schedule SE. Seesel fuel, and other motor fuels that you use in
However, if you consistently deduct addi- Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction.your business are included as part of the cost of
tional assessments in the year they are paid or the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-
finally determined (including those for which rate item.
there was no contest), you must continue to do You may be entitled to a credit or refund for
so. You cannot take a deduction in the earlier federal excise tax you paid on fuels used for Introductionyear unless you receive permission to change certain purposes. For more information, see
You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-your method of accounting. For more informa- Publication 510.
essary cost of insurance as a business expensetion on accounting methods, see When Can I
if it is for your trade, business, or profession.Deduct an Expense in chapter 1. Occupational taxes. You can deduct as a
However, you may have to capitalize certainbusiness expense an occupational tax charged
Foreign income taxes. Generally, you can insurance costs under the uniform capitalizationat a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of
take either a deduction or a credit for income rules. For more information, see Capitalizedworking or conducting a business in the locality.
taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or a Premiums, later.
U.S. possession. However, an individual cannot Personal property tax. You can deduct any
take a deduction or credit for foreign income tax imposed by a state or local government on Topics
taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S. personal property used in your trade or busi- This chapter discusses:tax under the foreign earned income exclusion ness.
or the foreign housing exclusion. For information • Deductible premiumson these exclusions, see Publication 54, Tax Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a
Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens service or on the purchase or use of property as • Nondeductible premiums
Abroad. For information on the foreign tax credit, part of the cost of the service or property. If the • Capitalized premiumssee Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi- service or the cost or use of the property is a
• When to deduct premiumsviduals. deductible business expense, you can deduct
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 17

Page 18 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8. Overhead insurance that pays for business them and report the premium amounts onUseful Items
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteedoverhead expenses you have during longYou may want to see: payments to be included in your gross in-periods of disability caused by your injury
come. However, if the policy is in youror sickness.Publication name and you pay the premiums yourself,9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov- the partnership must reimburse you and❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe ers vehicles used in your business for lia- report the premium amounts on ScheduleBenefits bility, damages, and other losses. If you K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed paymentsoperate a vehicle partly for personal use,❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income to be included in your gross income. Oth-deduct only the part of the insurance pre- erwise, the insurance plan will not be con-❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods mium that applies to the business use of sidered to be established under yourthe vehicle. If you use the standard mile-❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts business.age rate to figure your car expenses, you
• For more-than-2% shareholders, a policyForm (and Instructions) cannot deduct any car insurance premi-
can be either in the name of the S corpo-ums.
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return ration or in the name of the shareholder.
10. Life insurance covering your officers and You can either pay the premiums yourself
employees if you are not directly or indi-See chapter 12 for information about getting or your S corporation can pay them and
rectly a beneficiary under the contract.publications and forms. report the premium amounts on Form W-2
as wages to be included in your gross11. Business interruption insurance that pays
income. However, if the policy is in yourfor lost profits if your business is shut down
name and you pay the premiums yourself,due to a fire or other cause.
the S corporation must reimburse you andDeductible Premiums report the premium amounts on Form W-2
Self-Employed Health as wages to be included in your grossYou generally can deduct premiums you pay for income. Otherwise, the insurance plan willInsurance Deductionthe following kinds of insurance related to your not be considered to be established undertrade or business. your business.You may be able to deduct premiums paid for
medical and dental insurance and qualified1. Insurance that covers fire, storm, theft, ac-
Medicare premiums you voluntarily pay to ob-long-term care insurance for yourself, yourcident, or similar losses.
tain insurance that is similar to qualifying privatespouse, and your dependents. Effective March2. Credit insurance that covers losses from health insurance can be used to figure the de-30, 2010, the insurance can also cover yourbusiness bad debts. duction. If you previously filed a return withoutchild who was under age 27 at the end of 2010,
using Medicare premiums to figure the deduc-3. Group hospitalization and medical insur- even if the child was not your dependent. A child
tion, you can file an amended return to refigureance for employees, including long-term includes your son, daughter, stepchild, adopted
the deduction. For more information, see Formcare insurance. child, or foster child. A foster child is any child
1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Taxplaced with you by an authorized placement
a. If a partnership pays accident and Return.agency or by judgment, decree, or other order of
health insurance premiums for its part- Amounts paid for health insurance coverageany court of competent jurisdiction.
ners, it generally can deduct them as from retirement plan distributions that were non-One of the following statements must beguaranteed payments to partners. taxable because you are a retired public safetytrue. officer cannot be used to figure the deduction.b. If an S corporation pays accident and • You were self-employed and had a net Take the deduction on Form 1040, line 29.health insurance premiums for its profit for the year reported on Schedule Cmore-than-2% shareholder-employees, (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi- Qualified long-term care insurance. Youit generally can deduct them, but must ness; Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net can include premiums paid on a qualifiedalso include them in the shareholder's Profit From Business; or Schedule F long-term care insurance contract when figuringwages subject to federal income tax (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming. your deduction. But, for each person covered,withholding. See Publication 15-B.
you can include only the smaller of the following• You were a partner with net earnings from
amounts.4. Liability insurance. self-employment for the year reported on
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner's5. Malpractice insurance that covers your 1. The amount paid for that person.Share of Income, Deductions, Credits,personal liability for professional negli- 2. The amount shown below. Use the per-etc., box 14, code A.gence resulting in injury or damage to pa- son's age at the end of the tax year.tients or clients. • You used one of the optional methods to
figure your net earnings from a. Age 40 or younger±$3306. Workers' compensation insurance set by self-employment on Schedule SE.state law that covers any claims for bodily b. Age 41 to 50±$620
injuries or job-related diseases suffered by • You were a shareholder owning more than
c. Age 51 to 60±$1,230employees in your business, regardless of 2% of the outstanding stock of an S corpo-
fault. ration with wages for the year from the d. Age 61 to 70±$3,290
corporation reported on Form W-2, Wagea. If a partnership pays workers' compen- e. Age 71 or older±$4,110and Tax Statement.sation premiums for its partners, it gen-
erally can deduct them as guaranteed The insurance plan must be established, or Qualified long-term care insurance con-payments to partners. considered to be established as discussed in the tract. A qualified long-term care insurance
following bullets, under your business.b. If an S corporation pays workers' com- contract is an insurance contract that only pro-
pensation premiums for its vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-• For self-employed individuals filing amore-than-2% shareholder-employees, ices. The contract must meet all the followingSchedule C, C-EZ, or F, a policy can beit generally can deduct them, but must requirements.either in the name of the business or in thealso include them in the shareholder's name of the individual. • It must be guaranteed renewable.wages.
• For partners, a policy can be either in the • It must provide that refunds, other than
name of the partnership or in the name of7. Contributions to a state unemployment in- refunds on the death of the insured or
the partner. You can either pay the premi-surance fund are deductible as taxes if complete surrender or cancellation of the
they are considered taxes under state law. ums yourself or your partnership can pay contract, and dividends under the contract
Page 18 Chapter 6 Insurance

Page 19 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
may be used only to reduce future premi- Effect on self-employment tax. For tax years you cannot get business insurance cover-
ums or increase future benefits. beginning in 2010, you can subtract the age for certain business risks. However,
self-employed health insurance deduction when your actual losses may be deductible. See• It must not provide for a cash surrender figuring net earnings for your self-employment Publication 547.value or other money that can be paid, tax from the business under which the insuranceassigned, pledged, or borrowed. 2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre-plan is established, or considered to be estab- miums for a policy that pays for lost earn-• It generally must not pay or reimburse ex- lished as discussed earlier. For more informa- ings due to sickness or disability. However,penses incurred for services or items that tion, see Schedule SE (Form 1040). see the discussion on overhead insurance,would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
item (8), under Deductible Premiums, ear-cept where Medicare is a secondary payer How to figure the deduction. Generally, you lier.or the contract makes per diem or other can use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
periodic payments without regard to ex- 3. Certain life insurance and annuities.tions to figure your deduction. However, if any of
penses. the following apply, you must use Worksheet a. For contracts issued before June 9,6-A in this chapter.Qualified long-term care services. Quali- 1997, you cannot deduct the premiums
• You had more than one source of incomefied long-term care services are: on a life insurance policy covering you,
subject to self-employment tax. an employee, or any person with a fi-• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera- nancial interest in your business if you• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re- are directly or indirectly a beneficiary ofcome, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earnedhabilitative services, and
the policy. You are included amongIncome Exclusion.• Maintenance or personal care services. possible beneficiaries of the policy if the
• You are using amounts paid for qualified policy owner is obligated to repay aThe services must be required by a chronically ill long-term care insurance to figure the de- loan from you using the proceeds of theindividual and prescribed by a licensed health duction. policy. A person has a financial interestcare practitioner.
in your business if the person is anIf you are claiming the health coverage taxChronically ill individual. A chronically ill owner or part owner of the business orcredit, complete Form 8885, Health Coverageindividual is a person who has been certified as has lent money to the business.Tax Credit, before you figure this deduction.one of the following.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997,Health coverage tax credit. You may be• An individual who has been unable, due to you generally cannot deduct the premi-able to take this credit only if you were an eligibleloss of functional capacity for at least 90 ums on any life insurance policy, en-trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, al-days, to perform at least two activities of dowment contract, or annuity contract ifternative TAA (ATAA) recipient, reemploymentdaily living without substantial assistance you are directly or indirectly a benefi-trade adjustment assistance (RTAA) recipient,from another individual. Activities of daily ciary. The disallowance applies withoutor Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation pen-living are eating, toileting, transferring regard to whom the policy covers.sion recipient. Use Form 8885 to figure the(general mobility), bathing, dressing, and amount, if any, of this credit.continence. c. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner-
When figuring the amount to enter on line 1 ship, you take out an insurance policy• An individual who requires substantial su- of Worksheet 6-A, do not include the following. on your own life and name your part-pervision to be protected from threats to ners as beneficiaries to induce them to• Any amounts you included on Form 8885,health and safety due to severe cognitive retain their investments in the partner-line 4.impairment. ship, you are considered a beneficiary.• Any qualified health insurance premiumsThe certification must have been made by a You cannot deduct the insurance premi-you paid to ªU.S. Treasury-HCTC.ºlicensed health care practitioner within the previ- ums.
ous 12 months. • Any health coverage tax credit advance
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take outpayments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H,Benefits received. For information on ex-
a policy on your life or on the life of an-Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Ad-cluding benefits you receive from a long-term
other person with a financial interest invance Payments.care contract from gross income, see Publica-
your business to get or protect a businesstion 525.
loan, you cannot deduct the premiums asMore than one health plan and business.
a business expense. Nor can you deductIf you have more than one health plan during theOther coverage. You cannot take the deduc-
the premiums as interest on businessyear and each plan is established under a differ-tion for any month you were eligible to partici-
loans or as an expense of financing loans.ent business, you must use separate work-pate in any employer (including your spouse's)
In the event of death, the proceeds of thesheets (Worksheet 6-A) to figure each plan's netsubsidized health plan at any time during that
policy are generally not taxed as incomeearnings limit. Include the premium you paidmonth, even if you did not actually participate. In
even if they are used to liquidate the debt.under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa-addition, effective March 30, 2010, if you were
rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages)eligible for any month or part of a month to
from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For aparticipate in any subsidized health plan main-
tained by the employer of either your dependent plan that provides long-term care insurance, the
or your child who was under age 27 at the end of total of the amounts entered for each person on Capitalized Premiums2010, do not use amounts paid for coverage for line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than the
that month to figure the deduction. These rules appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person. Under the uniform capitalization rules, you mustare applied separately to plans that provide capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirectlong-term care insurance and plans that do not
costs for certain production or resale activities.provide long-term care insurance. However, any
Include these costs in the basis of property youmedical insurance payments not deductible on Nondeductible produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-Form 1040, line 29, can be included as medical
ing them as a current deduction. You recover theexpenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Premiums costs through depreciation, amortization, or costDeductions, if you itemize deductions.
of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwiseYou cannot deduct premiums on the following dispose of the property.Effect on itemized deductions. Subtract the kinds of insurance.
Indirect costs include premiums for insur-health insurance deduction from your medical
1. Self-insurance reserve funds.  You cannot ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip-insurance when figuring medical expenses on
deduct amounts credited to a reserve set ment, materials, property produced, or propertySchedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-
up for self-insurance. This applies even iftions. acquired for resale.
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 19

Page 20 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 6-A. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Note. Use a separate worksheet for each trade or business under which an insurance plan is established.
1. Enter the total amount paid in 2010 for health insurance coverage established under your business for
2010 for you, your spouse, and your dependents. Effective March 30, 2010, your insurance can also
cover your child who was under age 27 at the end of 2010, even if the child was not your dependent.
But do not include the following.
• Amounts for any month you were eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or your
spouse's employer or, effective March 30, 2010, the employer of either your dependent or your
child who was under the age of 27 at the end of 2010.
• Any amounts paid from retirement plan distributions that were nontaxable because you are a
retired public safety officer.
• Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4.
• Any qualified health insurance premiums you paid to ªU.S. Treasury-HCTC.º
• Any health coverage tax credit advance payments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H.
• Any payments for qualified long-term care insurance (see line 2) ...................... . 1.
2. For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract, enter for each person covered the
smaller of the following amounts.
a) Total payments made for that person during the year.
b) The amount shown below. Use the person's age at the end of the tax year.
 $330Ðif that person is age 40 or younger
$620Ðif age 41 to 50
$1,230Ðif age 51 to 60
$3,290Ðif age 61 to 70
$4,110Ðif age 71 or older
Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to participate in a long-term care
insurance plan subsidized by your or your spouse's employer or, effective March 30, 2010, the
employer of either your dependent or your child who was under the age of 27 at the end of 2010.
If more than one person is covered, figure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then
enter the total of those amounts ............................................ . 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 .......................................................... . 3.
4. Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from the trade or business under which the
insurance plan is established. Do not include Conservation Reserve Program payments exempt from
self-employment tax. If the business is an S corporation, skip to line 11 .................... . 4.
5. Enter the total of all net profits* from: Schedule C (Form 1040), line 31; Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
line 3; Schedule F (Form 1040), line 36; or Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), box 14, code A; plus any other
income allocable to the profitable businesses. Do not include Conservation Reserve Program
payments exempt from self-employment tax. See the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040). Do
not  include any net losses shown on these schedules. ................................ . 5.
6. Divide line 4 by line 5 ....................................................... . 6.
7a. Complete Schedule SE (Form 1040) as a worksheet. When completing Section A, line 3, or Section B,
line 3, of the worksheet Schedule SE, treat the amount from Form 1040, line 29, as zero. Enter on this
line the amount shown on that worksheet Schedule SE, Section A, line 6, or Section B, line 13 .... . 7a.
7b. Multiply line 7a by the percentage on line 6 ........................................ . 7b.
8. Subtract line 7b from line 4 ................................................... . 8.
9. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 28, attributable to the same trade or business in which
the insurance plan is established ............................................... . 9.
10. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .................................................... . 10.
11. Enter your Medicare wages (Form W-2, box 5) from an S corporation in which you are a
more-than-2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is established .................. . 11.
12. Enter any amount from Form 2555, line 45, attributable to the amount entered on line 4 or 11 above,
or any amount from Form 2555-EZ, line 18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11 above. When
completing Form 2555, line 44, use the deduction figured on line 7a above (in place of the amount
from Form 1040, line 27) that is allocable to the excluded income ......................... . 12.
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies ................................. . 13.
14. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 13 here and on Form 1040, line 29. Do not include this amount
when figuring any medical expense deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040). .................. . 14.
* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self-employment from any business, do not enter your net profit from the business.
Instead, enter the amount attributable to that business from Schedule SE (Form 1040), Section B, line 4b.
* *Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you created. However, it does not include capital gain
income.
Page 20 Chapter 6 Insurance

Page 21 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Uniform capitalization rules. You may be can deduct in 2011 and 2012 the premium allo- • Form 4626, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you cable to those years. Corporations.
do any of the following, unless the property is
Dividends received. If you receive dividendsproduced for your use other than in a business Topicsfrom business insurance and you deducted theor an activity carried on for profit. This chapter discusses:premiums in prior years, at least part of the
1. Produce real property or tangible personal dividends generally are income. For more infor- • Carrying chargesproperty. For this purpose, tangible per- mation, see Recovery of amount deducted (tax
sonal property includes a film, sound re- • Research and experimental costsbenefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can I
cording, video tape, book, or similar Deduct? • Intangible drilling costsproperty.
• Exploration costs2. Acquire property for resale.
• Development costsHowever, these rules do not apply to the follow-
ing property. • Circulation costs
• Environmental cleanup costs1. Personal property you acquire for resale if 7.your average annual gross receipts are • Qualified disaster expenses$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.
• Business start-up and organizational costs2. Property you produce if you meet either of
Costs You • Reforestation coststhe following conditions.
• Retired asset removal costsa. Your indirect costs of producing the Can Deductproperty are $200,000 or less. • Barrier removal costs
b. You use the cash method of accounting • Film and television production costsor Capitalizeand do not account for inventories.
Useful Items
More information. For more information on You may want to see:What's Newthese rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter- Publication
Business start-up costs. For tax years be-nal Revenue Code section 263A.
ginning in 2010, you can elect to deduct up to ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
$10,000 of business start-up costs paid or in- Assets
curred after 2009. See   Business Start-Up and
Organizational Costs for more information. Form (and Instructions)When To Deduct
Environmental cleanup costs. The election ❏ 3468 Investment CreditPremiums to deduct qualified environmental cleanup costs ❏ 8826 Disabled Access Creditwas extended to cover costs paid or incurred inYou can usually deduct insurance premiums in 2010 and 2011. See  Environmental Cleanup See chapter 12 for information about gettingthe tax year to which they apply. Costs for more information. publications and forms.
Cash method. If you use the cash method of
accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre-
miums in the tax year you actually paid them,
Introductioneven if you incurred them in an earlier year. Carrying ChargesHowever, see Prepayment, later. This chapter discusses costs you can elect to
deduct or capitalize. Carrying charges include the taxes and interestAccrual method. If you use an accrual You generally deduct a cost as a current you pay to carry or develop real property or tomethod of accounting, you cannot deduct insur- business expense by subtracting it from your carry, transport, or install personal property.ance premiums before the tax year in which you income in either the year you incur it or the year Certain carrying charges must be capitalizedincur a liability for them. In addition, you cannot you pay it. under the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor-deduct insurance premiums before the tax year If you capitalize a cost, you may be able to mation on capitalization of interest, see chapterin which you actually pay them (unless the ex- recover it over a period of years through periodic 4.) You can elect to capitalize carrying chargesception for recurring items applies). For more deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre- not subject to the uniform capitalization rules,information about the accrual method of ac- ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it to but only if they are otherwise deductible.counting, see chapter 1. For information about the basis of property to which it relates. You can elect to capitalize carrying chargesthe exception for recurring items, see Publica- A partnership, corporation, estate, or trust separately for each project you have and fortion 538. makes the election to deduct or capitalize the each type of carrying charge. For unimproved
costs discussed in this chapter except for explo-Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in and unproductive real property, your election is
ration costs for mineral deposits. Each individualadvance, even if you pay them in advance. This good for only 1 year. You must decide whether
partner, shareholder, or beneficiary electsrule applies to any expense paid far enough in to capitalize carrying charges each year the
whether to deduct or capitalize explorationadvance to, in effect, create an asset with a property remains unimproved and unproductive.
costs.useful life extending substantially beyond the For other real property, your election to capital-
end of the current tax year. ize carrying charges remains in effect until con-You may be subject to the alternativeExpenses such as insurance are generally struction or development is completed. Forminimum tax (AMT) if you deduct re-allocable to a period of time. You can deduct personal property, your election is effective untilsearch and experimental, intangible
CAUTION
!insurance expenses for the year to which they the date you install or first use it, whichever isdrilling, exploration, development, circulation, orare allocable. later.business organizational costs.
For more information on the alternative mini-Example. In 2010, you signed a 3-year in- How to make the election. To make the elec-mum tax, see the instructions for one of thesurance contract. Even though you paid the pre- tion to capitalize a carrying charge, write a state-following forms.miums for 2010, 2011, and 2012 when you ment saying which charges you elect to
signed the contract, you can only deduct the • Form 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ capitalize. Attach it to your original tax return for
premium for 2010 on your 2010 tax return. You Individuals. the year the election is to be effective. However,
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 21

Page 22 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IF you . . . THEN . . .if you timely filed your return for the year without
making the election, you can still make the elec- Elect to deduct research and Deduct all research and experimental costs in thetion by filing an amended return within 6 months experimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all laterof the due date of the return (excluding exten- business expense years.sions). Attach the statement to the amended
return and write ªFiled pursuant to section Do not deduct research and If you meet the requirements, amortize them over at
experimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you first301.9100-2º on the statement. File the amended
business expense receive an economic benefit from the research. Seereturn at the same address you filed the original
Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 8.return.
• Quality control testing. • Amounts properly allocable to the cost of
depreciable property, orResearch and • Research in connection with literary, his-
torical, or similar projects. • Amounts paid only out of production orExperimental Costs proceeds from production if these• The acquisition of another's patent, model, amounts are depletable income to the re-production, or process.The costs of research and experimentation are cipient.generally capital expenses. However, you can
elect to deduct these costs as a current business When and how to elect. You make the elec- How to make the election. You elect to de-expense. Your election to deduct these costs is tion to deduct research and experimental costs duct IDCs as a current business expense bybinding for the year it is made and for all later by deducting them on your tax return for the year taking the deduction on your income tax returnyears unless you get IRS approval to make a in which you first pay or incur research and for the first tax year you have eligible costs. Nochange. experimental costs. If you do not make the elec- formal statement is required. If you file ScheduleIf you meet certain requirements, you may tion to deduct research and experimental costs C (Form 1040), enter these costs under ªOtherelect to defer and amortize research and experi- in the first year in which you pay or incur the expenses.ºmental costs. For information on electing to de- costs, you can deduct the costs in a later year
For oil and gas wells, your election is bindingfer and amortize these costs, see Research and only with approval from the IRS.
for the year it is made and for all later years. ForExperimental Costs  in chapter 8.
geothermal wells, your election can be revokedResearch credit. If you pay or incur qualified
Research and experimental costs defined. by the filing of an amended return on which youresearch expenses, you may be able to take the
Research and experimental costs are reasona- do not take the deduction. You can file theresearch credit. For more information about the
ble costs you incur in your trade or business for amended return for the year up to the normalresearch credit, see the instructions for Form
activities intended to provide information that time of expiration for filing a claim for credit or6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities.
would eliminate uncertainty about the develop- refund, generally, within 3 years after the date
ment or improvement of a product. Uncertainty you filed the original return or within 2 years after
exists if the information available to you does not the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.
establish how to develop or improve a product or Intangible Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells.the appropriate design of a product. Whether
If you capitalize the drilling and developmentcosts qualify as research and experimental Drilling Costs
costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv-costs depends on the nature of the activity to
ice during the tax year, you may be able to claimwhich the costs relate rather than on the nature The costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal
a business energy credit. See the instructionsof the product or improvement being developed wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. You
for Form 3468 for more information.or the level of technological advancement. can usually recover them through depreciation
The costs of obtaining a patent, including or depletion. However, you can elect to deduct Nonproductive well. If you capitalize yourattorneys' fees paid or incurred in making and intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi- IDCs, you have another option if the well isperfecting a patent application, are research and ness expense. These are certain drilling and nonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of theexperimental costs. However, costs paid or in- development costs for wells in the United States nonproductive well as an ordinary loss. Youcurred to obtain another's patent are not re- in which you hold an operating or working inter- must indicate and clearly state your election onsearch and experimental costs. est. You can deduct only costs for drilling or your tax return for the year the well is completed.preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, orProduct. The term ªproductº includes any of Once made, the election for oil and gas wells isgeothermal steam or hot water.the following items. binding for all later years. You can revoke yourYou can elect to deduct only the costs of election for a geothermal well by filing an• Formula. items with no salvage value. These include amended return that does not claim the loss.wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re-• Invention. lated to drilling wells and preparing them for Costs incurred outside the United States.• Patent. production. Your cost for any drilling or develop- You cannot deduct as a current business ex-ment work done by contractors under any form• Pilot model. pense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil,of contract is also an IDC. However, see gas, or geothermal well located outside the• Process. Amounts paid to contractor that must be capital- United States. However, you can elect to includeized, later.• Technique. the costs in the adjusted basis of the well toYou can also elect to deduct the cost of figure depletion or depreciation. If you do not• Property similar to the items listed above. drilling exploratory bore holes to determine the make this election, you can deduct the costslocation and delineation of offshore hydrocarbonIt also includes products used by you in your over the 10-year period beginning with the taxdeposits if the shaft is capable of conductingtrade or business or held for sale, lease, or year in which you paid or incurred them. Thesehydrocarbons to the surface on completion. Itlicense. rules do not apply to a nonproductive well.does not matter whether there is any intent to
Costs not included. Research and experi- produce hydrocarbons.
mental costs do not include expenses for any of If you do not elect to deduct your IDCs as a
the following activities. current business expense, you can elect to de-
Exploration Costsduct them over the 60-month period beginning• Advertising or promotions.
with the month they were paid or incurred.
The costs of determining the existence, location,• Consumer surveys.
extent, or quality of any mineral deposit areAmounts paid to contractor that must be• Efficiency surveys. ordinarily capital expenditures if the costs leadcapitalized. Amounts paid to a contractor
to the development of a mine. You recover these• Management studies. must be capitalized if they are either:
Page 22 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 23 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
costs through depletion as the mineral is re- Method 2ÐDo not claim any depletion de- timely filed your return for the year without mak-
ing the election, you can still make the electionmoved from the ground. However, you can elect duction for the tax year the mine reaches
by filing an amended return within 6 months ofto deduct domestic exploration costs paid or the producing stage and any later tax years
the due date of the return (excluding exten-until the depletion you would have deductedincurred before the beginning of the develop-
sions). Clearly indicate the election on yourequals the exploration costs you deducted.ment stage of the mine (except those for oil, gas,
amended return and write ªFiled pursuant toand geothermal wells).
section 301.9100-2.º File the amended return atYou also must recapture deducted explora-
the same address you filed the original return.tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty fromHow to make the election. You elect to de-
mine property before it reaches the producingduct exploration costs by taking the deduction
Foreign development costs. The rules dis-stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction foron your income tax return, or on an amended
cussed earlier for foreign exploration costs applythe tax year you receive the bonus or royalty andincome tax return, for the first tax year for which
to foreign development costs.any later tax years, until the depletion you wouldyou wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred
have deducted equals the exploration costs youduring the tax year. Your return must adequately Reduced corporate deductions for develop-deducted.describe and identify each property or mine, and ment costs. The rules discussed earlier forGenerally, if you dispose of the mine beforeclearly state how much is being deducted for reduced corporate deductions for explorationyou have fully recaptured the exploration costseach one. The election applies to the tax year costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-you deducted, recapture the balance by treatingyou make this election and all later tax years. velopment costs.all or part of your gain as ordinary income.Partnerships and S corporations. Each Under these circumstances, you generallypartner, not the partnership, elects whether to treat as ordinary income all of your gain if it iscapitalize or to deduct that partner's share of less than your adjusted exploration costs withexploration costs. Each shareholder, not the S Circulation Costsrespect to the mine. If your gain is more thancorporation, elects whether to capitalize or to your adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi-deduct that shareholder's share of exploration A publisher can deduct as a current businessnary income only a part of your gain, up to thecosts. expense the costs of establishing, maintaining,amount of your adjusted exploration costs. or increasing the circulation of a newspaper,
Reduced corporate deductions for explora- magazine, or other periodical. For example, aForeign exploration costs. If you pay or incurtion costs. A corporation (other than an S publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extraexploration costs for a mine or other naturalcorporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes- employees for a limited time to get new sub-deposit located outside the United States, youtic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re- scriptions through telephone calls. Circulationcannot deduct all the costs in the current year.maining 30% of costs and amortize them over costs are deductible even if they normally wouldYou can elect to include the costs (other than forthe 60-month period starting with the month the be capitalized.an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the adjustedexploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo- This rule does not apply to the followingbasis of the mineral property to figure cost de-ration may also elect to capitalize and amortize costs that must be capitalized.pletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chaptermining exploration costs over a 10-year period. 9.) If you do not make this election, you must • The purchase of land or depreciable prop-For more information on this method of amorti- deduct the costs over the 10-year period begin- erty.zation, see Internal Revenue Code section ning with the tax year in which you pay or incur59(e). • The acquisition of circulation through thethem. These rules also apply to foreign develop-The 30% the corporation capitalizes cannot purchase of any part of the business ofment costs.be added to its basis in the property to figure another publisher of a newspaper, maga-
cost depletion. However, the amount amortized zine, or other periodical, including the
is treated as additional depreciation and is sub- purchase of another publisher's list of sub-
ject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo- scribers.
Development Costssition of the property. See Section 1250
Property under Depreciation Recapture in chap- Other treatment of circulation costs. If youYou can deduct costs paid or incurred during theter 3 of Publication 544. do not want to deduct circulation costs as atax year for developing a mine or any otherThese rules also apply to the deduction of current business expense, you can elect one ofnatural deposit (other than an oil or gas well)development costs by corporations. See Devel- the following ways to recover these costs.located in the United States. These costs mustopment Costs, later. be paid or incurred after the discovery of ores or • Capitalize all circulation costs that are
minerals in commercially marketable quantities. properly chargeable to a capital accountRecapture of exploration expenses. When Development costs include those incurred for (see chapter 1).your mine reaches the producing stage, you you by a contractor. Also, development costsmust recapture any exploration costs you • Amortize circulation costs over the 3-yearinclude depreciation on improvements used inelected to deduct. Use either of the following period beginning with the tax year theythe development of ores or minerals. They domethods. were paid or incurred.not include costs for the acquisition or improve-
ment of depreciable property.Method 1ÐInclude the deducted costs in
Instead of deducting development costs in How to make the election. You elect to capi-gross income for the tax year the mine
the year paid or incurred, you can elect to treat talize circulation costs by attaching a statementreaches the producing stage. Your election
them as deferred expenses and deduct them to your return for the first tax year the electionmust be clearly indicated on the return. In-
ratably as the units of produced ores or minerals applies. Your election is binding for the year it iscrease your adjusted basis in the mine by
benefited by the expenses are sold. This elec- made and for all later years, unless you get IRSthe amount included in income. Generally,
tion applies each tax year to expenses paid or approval to revoke it.you must elect this recapture method by the
incurred in that year. Once made, the election isdue date (including extensions) of your re-
binding for the year and cannot be revoked forturn. However, if you timely filed your return
any reason.for the year without making the election,
you can still make the election by filing an Environmental Cleanup
amended return within 6 months of the due How to make the election. The election to
date of the return (excluding extensions). deduct development costs ratably as the ores or Costs
Make the election on your amended return minerals are sold must be made for each mine
and write ªFiled pursuant to section or other natural deposit by a clear indication on Environmental cleanup costs are generally capi-
301.9100-2º on the form where you are in- your return or by a statement filed with the IRS tal expenditures. However, you can elect to de-
cluding the income. File the amended re- office where you file your return. Generally, you duct these costs as a current business expense
turn at the same address you filed the must make the election by the due date of the if certain requirements (discussed later) are met.
original return. return (including extensions). However, if you This special tax treatment is generally available
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 23

Page 24 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for environmental cleanup costs you pay or incur than one environmental cleanup cost, you can section 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose
before January 1, 2012. elect to deduct one or more of such expendi- of the property that would have received an
tures for that year. You can elect to deduct one addition to basis had you not made the election.
Environmental cleanup costs. Environmen- expenditure and elect to capitalize another ex- For more information on recapturing the deduc-
tal cleanup costs are generally costs you pay or penditure (whether or not they are of the same tion, see  Depreciation and amortization  under
incur to abate or control hazardous substances type or paid or incurred with respect to the same Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Publication
at a qualified contaminated site. qualified contaminated site). An election to de- 544.
duct an expenditure for one year has no effectHazardous substance. Hazardous sub- More information. For more informationon other years. You must make a separate elec-stances are defined in section 101(14) of the about expensing of qualified disaster expenses,tion for each year in which you intend to deductComprehensive Environmental Response, see Internal Revenue Code section 198A.environmental cleanup costs.Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 and
certain substances are designated as hazard- Recapture. This deduction may have to beous in section 102 of the Act. Also, petroleum recaptured as ordinary income under sectionproducts are treated as hazardous substances. 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the Business Start-Up andHowever, substances are not hazardous if a property that would have received an addition toremoval or remedial action is prohibited under basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen- Organizational Costssections 104 and 104(a)(3) of the Act. diture. For more information on recapturing the
deduction, see Depreciation Recapture in Publi-Qualified contaminated site. A qualified Business start-up and organizational costs are
cation 544.contaminated site is any area that meets both of generally capital expenditures. However, you
the following requirements. can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of businessMore information. For more information start-up and $5,000 of organizational costs paidabout the environmental cleanup cost deduc-1. You hold it for use in a trade or business, or incurred after October 22, 2004. The $5,000tion, see Internal Revenue Code section 198.for the production of income, or as inven- deduction is reduced by the amount your total
tory. start-up or organizational costs exceed $50,000.
Any remaining costs must be amortized. For2. There has been a release, threat of re-
information about amortizing start-up and orga-lease, or disposal of any hazardous sub- Qualified Disaster nizational costs, see chapter 8.stance at or on the site.
Start-up costs include any amounts paid orExpensesYou must get a statement from the designated incurred in connection with creating an active
state environmental agency that the site meets trade or business or investigating the creation orYou can elect to deduct rather than capitalizerequirement (2). acquisition of an active trade or business. Orga-any qualified disaster expenses that you paid orA site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for, nizational costs include the costs of creating aincurred after 2007.the national priorities list under section corporation. For more information on start-up
105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ- and organizational costs, see chapter 8.Qualified disaster expense. A qualified dis-mental Response, Compensation, and Liability aster expense is an expenditure that: Special rule for 2010 start-up costs. ForAct of 1980. To find out if a site is on the national
tax years beginning in 2010, you can elect topriorities list, contact the U.S. Environmental 1. Is paid or incurred in connection with a deduct up to $10,000 of business start-up costsProtection Agency. trade or business or with business-related paid or incurred after 2009. The $10,000 deduc-property,Expenditures for depreciable property. tion is reduced (but not below zero) by theYou cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre- 2. Is otherwise capitalized, and amount such start-up costs exceed $60,000.ciable property used in connection with the Any remaining costs must be amortized.3. Is for one of the following purposes.abatement or control of hazardous substances
at a qualified contaminated site. However, the How to make the election. You elect to de-a. The abatement or control of hazardouspart of the depreciation for such property that is duct the start-up or organizational costs bysubstances that were released becauseotherwise allocated to the qualified contami- claiming the deduction on the income tax returnof a federally declared disaster occur-nated site shall be treated as an environmental (filed by the due date including extensions) forring before January 1, 2010,cleanup cost. the tax year in which the active trade or business
b. The removal of debris from, or the dem- begins. However, if you timely filed your return
When and how to elect. You elect to deduct olition of structures on, real property for the year without making the election, you can
environmental cleanup costs by taking the de- that is business-related property dam- still make the election by filing an amended
duction on the income tax return (filed by the due aged or destroyed as a result of a fed- return within 6 months of the due date of the
date including extensions) for the tax year in erally declared disaster occurring return (excluding extensions). Clearly indicate
which the costs are paid or incurred. The costs before such date, or the election on your amended return and write
are deducted differently depending on the type ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File thec. The repair of business-related propertyof business entity involved. amended return at the same address you fileddamaged as a result of a federally de- the original return. The election applies whenIndividuals. Deduct the environmental clared disaster occurring before such computing taxable income for the current taxcleanup costs on the ªOther Expensesº line of date. year and all subsequent years.Schedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the schedule
requires you to separately identify each expense
Federally declared disaster. A federally de-included in ªOther Expensesº write ªSection 198
clared disaster is a disaster that occurred in anElectionº on the line next to the environmental
area declared by the President to be eligible for Reforestation Costscleanup costs.
federal assistance under the Robert T. Stafford
All other entities. All other taxpayers (in- Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. Reforestation costs are generally capital expen-cluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts) ditures. However, you can elect to deduct up toBusiness-related property. Busi-deduct the environmental cleanup costs on the $10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately; $0ness-related property is property you held (a) forªOther Deductionsº line of the appropriate fed- for a trust) of qualifying reforestation costs paiduse in a trade or business or for the productioneral income tax return. On a schedule attached or incurred after October 22, 2004, for eachof income or (b) that is stock in trade or otherto the return that separately identifies each ex- qualified timber property. The remaining costsproperty included in inventory or held mainly forpense included in ªOther Deductionsº write can be amortized over an 84-month period. Forsale to customers.ªSection 198 Electionº on the line next to the information about amortizing reforestationamount for environmental cleanup costs. Recapture. If you made the election to deduct costs, see chapter 8.
More than one environmental cleanup qualified disaster expenses, the deduction may Qualifying reforestation costs are the direct
cost. If, for any tax year, you pay or incur more have to be recaptured as ordinary income under costs of planting or seeding for forestation or
Page 24 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 25 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reforestation. Qualified timber property is prop- his share of the partnership's expenses because
of how John applied the limit, ABC can adderty that contains trees in significant commercial Retired Asset Removal
$6,000 to the basis of its property.quantities. See chapter 8 for more information
Costson qualifying reforestation costs and qualified
Qualification standards. You can deducttimber property.
If you retire and remove a depreciable asset in your costs as a current expense only if the bar-If you elect to deduct qualified reforestation connection with the installation or production of rier removal meets the guidelines and require-costs, create and maintain separate timber ac- a replacement asset, you can deduct the costs ments issued by the Architectural andcounts for each qualified timber property and of removing the retired asset. However, if you Transportation Barriers Compliance Boardinclude all reforestation costs and the dates replace a component (part) of a depreciable under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)each was applied. Do not include this qualified asset, capitalize the removal costs if the re- of 1990. You can view the Americans with Disa-
timber property in any account (for example, placement is an improvement and deduct the bilities Act at www.ada.gov/pubs/ada.htm.
costs if the replacement is a repair.depletion block) for which depletion is allowed. The following is a list of some architectural
barrier removal costs that can be deducted.
How to make the election. You elect to de- • Ground and floor surfaces.
duct qualifying reforestation costs by claiming Barrier Removal Costs • Walks.the deduction on your timely filed income tax
return (including extensions) for the tax year the • Parking lots.The cost of an improvement to a business asset
expenses were paid or incurred. If Form T (Tim- is normally a capital expense. However, you can • Ramps.ber), Forest Activities Schedule, is required, elect to deduct the costs of making a facility or
• Entrances.complete Part IV of Form T. If Form T is not public transportation vehicle more accessible to
required, attach a statement containing the fol- and usable by those who are disabled or elderly. • Doors and doorways.
You must own or lease the facility or vehicle forlowing information for each qualified timber
• Stairs.use in connection with your trade or business.property for which an election is being made.
A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc- • Floors.• The unique stand identification numbers. tures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or
• Toilet rooms.similar real or personal property. A public trans-• The total number of acres reforested dur-
portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus oring the tax year. • Water fountains.
railroad car, that provides transportation service• The nature of the reforestation treatments. • Telephones.to the public (including service for your custom-
ers, even if you are not in the business of provid-• The total amounts of qualified reforesta- • Elevators.
ing transportation services).tion expenditures eligible to be amortized • Controls.You cannot deduct any costs that you paid oror deducted.
incurred to completely renovate or build a facility • Signage.
or public transportation vehicle or to replaceHowever, if you timely filed your return for the • Alarms.depreciable property in the normal course ofyear without making the election, you can still business. • Protruding objects.make the election by filing an amended return
within 6 months of the due date of the return • Symbols of accessibility.Deduction limit. The most you can deduct as(excluding extensions). Clearly indicate the a cost of removing barriers to the disabled and You can find the ADA guidelines and require-election on your amended return and write ªFiled the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However, ments for architectural barrier removal at www.pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File the you can add any costs over this limit to the basis usdoj.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html.amended return at the same address you filed of the property and depreciate these excess
The following is a list of some deductiblethe original return. The election applies when costs.
transportation barrier removal costs.computing taxable income for the current tax
Partners and partnerships. The $15,000year and all subsequent years. • Rail facilities.limit applies to a partnership and also to eachIf you elected to deduct qualified timber costs • Buses.partner in the partnership. A partner can allocateon a federal income tax return filed before June the $15,000 limit in any manner among the part- • Rapid and light rail vehicles.15, 2006, but did not include the above informa- ner's individually incurred costs and the part-
tion, complete Part IV of Form T or the required You can find the guidelines and requirements forner's distributive share of partnership costs. If
statement and attach it to the first federal income transportation barrier removal at www.fta.dot.the partner cannot deduct the entire share of
tax return you file after June 14, 2006. If you gov.partnership costs, the partnership can add any
have not elected to deduct qualified timber costs costs not deducted to the basis of the improved Also, you can access the ADA website atproperty.in a prior year you may be able to do so by filing www.ada.gov for additional information.A partnership must be able to show that anyForm 3115, Application for Change in Account-
Other barrier removals. To be deductible,amount added to basis was not deducted by theing Method. For more information, see Notice
expenses of removing any barrier not coveredpartner and that it was over a partner's $15,0002006-47 on page 892 of Internal Revenue Bulle-
limit (as determined by the partner). If the part- by the above standards must meet all three oftin 2006-20. Internal Revenue Bulletin 2006-20 nership cannot show this, it is presumed that the the following tests. is available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-20. partner was able to deduct the distributive sharepdf. 1. The removed barrier must be a substantialof the partnership's costs in full.
barrier to access or use of a facility orFor additional information on reforestation
public transportation vehicle by personscosts, see chapter 8. Example. John Duke's distributive share of
who have a disability or are elderly.ABC partnership's deductible expenses for the
removal of architectural barriers was $14,000. 2. The removed barrier must have been aRecapture. This deduction may have to be John had $12,000 of similar expenses in his sole barrier for at least one major group of per-recaptured as ordinary income under section proprietorship. He elected to deduct $7,000 of sons who have a disability or are elderly1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 of (such as people who are blind, deaf, orproperty that would have received an addition to the $15,000 limit to his share of ABC's ex- wheelchair users).basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen- penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of his
diture. For more information on recapturing the 3. The barrier must be removed without cre-own expenses to the basis of the property used
deduction, see Depreciation Recapture in Publi- ating any new barrier that significantly im-in his business. Also, if ABC can show that John
cation 544. pairs access to or use of the facility orcould not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 ± $8,000) of
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 25

Page 26 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
vehicle by a major group of persons who see chapter 3 of Publication 550, Investment
have a disability or are elderly. Income and Expenses. Starting a Business
Topics When you start a business, treat all eligible costsHow to make the election. If you elect to
you incur before you begin operating the busi-This chapter discusses:deduct your costs for removing barriers to the
ness as capital expenditures which are part ofdisabled or the elderly, claim the deduction on
your basis in the business. Generally, you re-• Deducting amortizationyour income tax return (partnership return for
cover costs for particular assets through depre-partnerships) for the tax year the expenses were • Amortizing costs of starting a business ciation deductions. However, you generallypaid or incurred. Identify the deduction as a
• Amortizing costs of getting a lease cannot recover other costs until you sell theseparate item. The election applies to all the
business or otherwise go out of business. Seequalifying costs you have during the year, up to • Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles Capital Expenses in chapter 1 for a discussionthe $15,000 limit. If you make this election, you
• Amortizing reforestation costs on how to treat these costs if you do not go intomust maintain adequate records to support your
deduction. business.• Amortizing costs of geological and geo-
For your election to be valid, you generally For costs paid or incurred after September 8,physical costsmust file your return by its due date, including 2008, you can deduct a limited amount of• Amortizing costs of pollution control facili-extensions. However, if you timely filed your start-up and organizational costs. The costs that
tiesreturn for the year without making the election, are not deducted currently can be amortized
you can still make the election by filing an ratably over a 180-month period. The amortiza-• Amortizing costs of research and experi-amended return within 6 months of the due date tion period starts with the month you begin oper-mentationof the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi- ating your active trade or business. You are not
cate the election on your amended return and • Amortizing costs of certain tax preferences required to attach a statement to make this elec-write ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File tion. Once made, the election is irrevocable. Seethe amended return at the same address you Temporary Regulations sections 1.195-1T,Useful Itemsfiled the original return. Your election is irrevoca- 1.248-1T, and 1.709-1T.You may want to see:ble after the due date, including extensions, of For costs paid after October 22, 2004, andyour return. before September 9, 2008, you can elect toPublication
deduct a limited amount of business start-upDisabled access credit. If you make your ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of and organizational costs in the year your activebusiness accessible to persons with disabilities trade or business begins. Any costs not de-Assetsand your business is an eligible small business, ducted can be amortized ratably over ayou may be able to claim the disabled access ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses 180-month period, beginning with the month youcredit. If you choose to claim the credit, you must ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property begin business. If the election is made, you mustreduce the amount you deduct or capitalize by attach any statement required by Regulationsthe amount of the credit. Form (and Instructions) sections 1.195-1(b), 1.248-1(c), and 1.709-1(c).For more information about the disabled ac- However, you can apply the provisions of Tem-cess credit, see Form 8826. ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization porary Regulations sections 1.195-1T,
❏ 4626 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ 1.248-1T, and 1.709-1T to all business start-up
and organizational costs paid or incurred afterCorporations
October 22, 2004, provided the period of limita-Film and Television ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ tions on assessment has not expired for the yearIndividuals of the election. Otherwise the provisions underProduction Costs
Regulations section 1.195-1(b), 1.248-1(c), andSee chapter 12 for information about getting 1.709-1(c) will apply.Film and television production costs are gener- publications and forms.ally capital expenses. However, you can elect to For costs paid or incurred before October 23,
deduct costs paid or incurred for certain produc- 2004, you can elect to amortize business
tions that begin after October 22, 2004. For start-up and organization costs over an amorti-
more information, see section 181 of the Internal zation period of 60 months or more. See How To
How To DeductRevenue Code and Temporary Regulations Make the Election, later.
sections 1.181-1T through 1.181-6T. The cost must qualify as one of the following.Amortization
• A business start-up cost.
To deduct amortization that begins during the • An organizational cost for a corporation.
current tax year, complete Part VI of Form 4562
• An organizational cost for a partnership.and attach it to your income tax return.
To report amortization from previous years,
8. in addition to amortization that begins in the Note. For a tax year beginning in 2010, the
current year, list on Form 4562 each item sepa- maximum deduction for business start-up costs
rately. For example, in 2009, you began to amor- has increased. For more information, see Busi-
ness Start-Up and Organizational Costs in chap-tize a lease. In 2010, you began to amortize aAmortization
ter 7. Also see section 195(b)(3).second lease. Report amortization from the new
lease on line 42 of your 2010 Form 4562. Report
Business Start-Up Costsamortization from the 2009 lease on line 43 ofIntroduction your 2010 Form 4562.
Start-up costs are amounts paid or incurred for:Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct- If you do not have any new amortizable ex- (a) creating an active trade or business; or (b)ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period of penses for the current year, you are not required investigating the creation or acquisition of antime. It is similar to the straight line method of to complete Form 4562 (unless you are claiming active trade or business. Start-up costs includedepreciation.
depreciation). Report the current year's deduc- amounts paid or incurred in connection with anThe various amortizable costs covered in
tion for amortization that began in a prior year existing activity engaged in for profit; and for thethis chapter are included in the list below. How-
directly on the ªOther deductionº or ªOther ex- production of income in anticipation of the activ-ever, this chapter does not discuss amortization
pense lineº of your return. ity becoming an active trade or business.of bond premium. For information on that topic,
Page 26 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 27 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualifying costs. A start-up cost is amortiz- Qualifying costs. To qualify as an organiza- • Filing fees.
able if it meets both of the following tests. tional cost, it must be:
Nonqualifying costs. The following costs• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or • For the creation of the corporation,
cannot be amortized.incurred it to operate an existing active • Chargeable to a capital account (seetrade or business (in the same field as the • The cost of acquiring assets for the part-chapter 1),one you entered into). nership or transferring assets to the part-• Amortized over the life of the corporation if nership.• It is a cost you pay or incur before the day the corporation had a fixed life, andyour active trade or business begins. • The cost of admitting or removing part-• Incurred before the end of the first tax year ners, other than at the time the partnershipStart-up costs include amounts paid for the in which the corporation is in business. is first organized.following:
• The cost of making a contract concerningA corporation using the cash method of ac-• An analysis or survey of potential markets, the operation of the partnership trade orcounting can amortize organizational costs in-products, labor supply, transportation facil- business including a contract between acurred within the first tax year, even if it does notities, etc. partner and the partnership.pay them in that year.
• Advertisements for the opening of the Examples of organizational costs include: • The costs for issuing and marketing inter-business. ests in the partnership such as brokerage,• The cost of temporary directors.
registration, and legal fees and printing• Salaries and wages for employees who • The cost of organizational meetings. costs. These ªsyndication feesº are capitalare being trained and their instructors.
expenses that cannot be depreciated or• State incorporation fees.• Travel and other necessary costs for se- amortized.curing prospective distributors, suppliers, • The cost of legal services.
or customers.
Liquidation of partnership. If a partnership is• Salaries and fees for executives and con- Nonqualifying costs. The following items are liquidated before the end of the amortizationsultants, or for similar professional serv- capital expenses that cannot be amortized: period, the unamortized amount of qualifyingices. organizational costs can be deducted in the• Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-
partnership's final tax year. However, thesecurities, such as commissions, profes-
costs can be deducted only to the extent theyNonqualifying costs. Start-up costs do not sional fees, and printing costs.
qualify as a loss from a business.include deductible interest, taxes, or research • Costs associated with the transfer of as-and experimental costs. See Research and Ex- sets to the corporation.perimental Costs, later. How To Amortize
Purchasing an active trade or business. Deduct start-up and organizational costs inCosts of OrganizingAmortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac- equal amounts over the applicable amortizationa Partnershiptive trade or business include only investigative period (discussed earlier). You can choose an
costs incurred in the course of a general search amortization period for start-up costs that is dif-The costs to organize a partnership are thefor or preliminary investigation of the business. ferent from the period you choose for organiza-direct costs of creating the partnership.These are costs that help you decide whether to tional costs, as long as both are not less than the
purchase a business. Costs you incur in an applicable amortization period. Once youQualifying costs. A partnership can amortizeattempt to purchase a specific business are cap- choose an amortization period, you cannotan organizational cost only if it meets all theital expenses that you cannot amortize. change it.following tests. To figure your deduction, divide your total
Example. On June 1st, you hired an ac- start-up or organizational costs by the months in• It is for the creation of the partnership andcounting firm and a law firm to assist you in the the amortization period. The result is the amountnot for starting or operating the partner-potential purchase of XYZ, Inc. They researched you can deduct for each month.ship trade or business.XYZ's industry and analyzed the financial pro-
• It is chargeable to a capital account (seejections of XYZ, Inc. In September, the law firm Cash method partnership. A partnership us-chapter 1).prepared and submitted a letter of intent to XYZ, ing the cash method of accounting can deductInc. The letter stated that a binding commitment • It could be amortized over the life of the an organizational cost only if it has been paid bywould result only after a purchase agreement partnership if the partnership had a fixed the end of the tax year. However, any cost thewas signed. The law firm and accounting firm life. partnership could have deducted as an organi-continued to provide services including a review zational cost in an earlier tax year (if it had been• It is incurred by the due date of the part-of XYZ's books and records and the preparation paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year ofnership return (excluding extensions) forof a purchase agreement. On October 22nd, you payment.the first tax year in which the partnershipsigned a purchase agreement with XYZ, Inc.
is in business. However, if the partnershipAll amounts paid or incurred to investigate
uses the cash method of accounting andthe business before October 22nd are amortiz- How To Make the Electionpays the cost after the end of its first taxable investigative costs. Amounts paid on or
year, see Cash method partnership underafter that date relate to the attempt to purchase To elect to amortize start-up or organizationalHow To Amortize, later.the business and therefore must be capitalized. costs, you must complete and attach Form 4562
to your return for the first tax year you are in• It is for a type of item normally expected toDisposition of business. If you completely business. You may also be required to attach anbenefit the partnership throughout its en-dispose of your business before the end of the accompanying statement (described later) totire life.amortization period, you can deduct any remain- your return.
ing deferred start-up costs. However, you can For start-up or organizational costs paid orOrganizational costs include the followingdeduct these deferred start-up costs only to the incurred after September 8, 2008, an accompa-fees.extent they qualify as a loss from a business. nying statement is not required. Generally, for• Legal fees for services incident to the or- start-up or organizational costs paid or incurredganization of the partnership, such as ne-Costs of Organizing before September 9, 2008, unless you choosegotiation and preparation of the to apply Temporary Regulations sectionsa Corporation partnership agreement. 1.195-1T and 1.248-1T, you must also attach an
Amounts paid to organize a corporation are the • Accounting fees for services incident to accompanying statement to elect to amortize
direct costs of creating the corporation. the organization of the partnership. the costs.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 27

Page 28 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you have both start-up and organizational • The month your corporation or partnership You cannot deduct amortization for the month
began active business (or acquired the you dispose of the intangible.costs, attach a separate statement (if required)
business).to your return for each type of cost. See Starting If you pay or incur an amount that increasesa Business, earlier, for more information. • The number of months in your amortiza- the basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi-
Generally, you must file the return by the due tion period (which is generally 180 ble after the 15-year period begins, amortize it
date (including any extensions). However, if you months). over the remainder of the 15-year period begin-
timely filed your return for the year without mak- ning with the month the basis increase occurs.
ing the election, you can still make the election Partnerships. The statement prepared for You are not allowed any other depreciation
by filing an amended return within 6 months of a cash basis partnership must also indicate the or amortization deduction for an amortizable
the due date of the return (excluding exten- amount paid before the end of the year for each section 197 intangible.
sions). For more information, see the instruc- cost. Tax-exempt use property subject to a lease.tions for Part VI of Form 4562. You do not need to separately list any part- The amortization period for any section 197 in-nership organizational cost that is less than $10.Once you make the election to amortize tangible leased under a lease agreement en-Instead, you can list the total amount of thesestart-up or organizational costs, you cannot re- tered into after March 12, 2004, to a tax-exemptcosts with the dates the first and last costs werevoke it. organization, governmental unit, or foreign per-incurred.If your business is organized as a corpora- son or entity (other than a partnership), shall notAfter a partnership makes the election totion or partnership, only the corporation or part- be less than 125 percent of the lease term.amortize organizational costs, it can later file annership can elect to amortize its start-up or amended return to include additional organiza- Cost attributable to other property. Theorganizational costs. A shareholder or partner tional costs not included in the partnership's rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply tocannot make this election. You, as a share- original return and statement. any amount that is included in determining theholder or partner, cannot amortize any costs you cost of property that is not a section 197 intangi-incur in setting up your corporation or partner- ble. For example, if the cost of computership. Only the corporation or partnership can software is not separately stated from the cost ofamortize these costs. hardware or other tangible property and youGetting a LeaseHowever, you, as an individual, can elect to consistently treat it as part of the cost of the
amortize costs you incur to investigate an inter- hardware or other tangible property, these rulesIf you get a lease for business property, youest in an existing partnership. These costs qual- do not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac-recover the cost by amortizing it over the term ofify as business start-up costs if you acquire the quiring real property held for the production ofthe lease. The term of the lease for amortization
partnership interest. rental income is considered the cost of goodwill,purposes generally includes all renewal options
going concern value, or any other section 197(and any other period for which you and the
Start-up costs election statement. If you intangible.lessor reasonably expect the lease to be re-
elect to amortize your start-up costs, attach a newed). However, renewal periods are not in-
separate statement (if required) that contains cluded if 75% or more of the cost of acquiring the Section 197 Intangiblesthe following information. lease is for the term of the lease remaining on Definedthe acquisition date (not including any period for• A description of the business to which the which you may choose to renew, extend, or The following assets are section 197 intangiblesstart-up costs relate. continue the lease). and must be amortized over 180 months:• A description of each start-up cost in- For more information on the costs of getting
curred. a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in 1. Goodwill;
chapter 3.• The month your active business began (or 2. Going concern value;
was acquired). How to amortize. Enter your deduction in Part 3. Workforce in place;VI of Form 4562 if you are deducting amortiza-• The number of months in your amortiza- 4. Business books and records, operatingtion that begins during the current year, or on thetion period (which is generally 180 systems, or any other information base,appropriate line of your tax return if you are notmonths). including lists or other information concern-otherwise required to file Form 4562.
ing current or prospective customers;Filing the statement early. You can elect
to amortize your start-up costs by filing the state- 5. A patent, copyright, formula, process, de-
ment with a return for any tax year before the sign, pattern, know-how, format, or similar
Section 197 Intangiblesyear your active business begins. If you file the item;
statement early, the election becomes effective 6. A customer-based intangible;Generally, you may amortize the capitalizedin the month of the tax year your active business
costs of ªsection 197 intangiblesº (defined later) 7. A supplier-based intangible;begins. ratably over a 15-year period. You must amor-
8. Any item similar to items (3) through (7);Revised statement. You can file a revised tize these costs if you hold the section 197
statement to include any start-up costs not in- intangibles in connection with your trade or busi- 9. A license, permit, or other right granted bycluded in your original statement. However, you ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc- a governmental unit or agency (includingcannot include on the revised statement any tion of income. issuances and renewals);cost you previously treated on your return as a You may not be able to amortize sec- 10. A covenant not to compete entered into incost other than a start-up cost. You can file the tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans- connection with the acquisition of an inter-revised statement with a return filed after the action that did not result in a significant
CAUTION
! est in a trade or business;return on which you elected to amortize your change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churningstart-up costs. 11. Any franchise, trademark, or trade name;Rules, later.
andYour amortization deduction each year is theOrganizational costs election statement. If applicable part of the intangible's adjusted basis 12. A contract for the use of, or a term interestyou elect to amortize your corporation's or part- (for purposes of determining gain), figured by in, any item in this list.nership's organizational costs, attach a sepa- amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months).rate statement (if required) that contains the You cannot amortize any of the in-The 15-year period begins with the later of:following information. tangibles listed in items (1) through (8)• The month the intangible is acquired, or• A description of each cost. that you created rather than acquired
CAUTION
!
• The month the trade or business or activity unless you created them in acquiring assets that• The amount of each cost. engaged in for the production of income make up a trade or business or a substantial part
• The date each cost was incurred. begins. of a trade or business.
Page 28 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 29 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Goodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi- services used or sold by the business because 4. Most computer software. (See Computer
ness based on expected continued customer of business relationships with suppliers. software, later.)
patronage due to its name, reputation, or any For example, you must amortize the part of 5. Any of the following assets not acquired inother factor. the purchase price of a business that is for the connection with the acquisition of a tradeexistence of the following intangibles. or business or a substantial part of a tradeGoing concern value. This is the additional
or business.value of a trade or business that attaches to • A favorable relationship with distributors
property because the property is an integral part (such as favorable shelf or display space a. An interest in a film, sound recording,of an ongoing business activity. It includes value at a retail outlet). video tape, book, or similar property.based on the ability of a business to continue to • A favorable credit rating.function and generate income even though b. A right to receive tangible property or
there is a change in ownership (but does not • A favorable supply contract. services under a contract or from a gov-
include any other section 197 intangible). It also ernmental agency.
includes value based on the immediate use or Government-granted license, permit, etc. c. An interest in a patent or copyright.availability of an acquired trade or business, This is any right granted by a governmental unitsuch as the use of earnings during any period in d. Certain rights that have a fixed durationor an agency or instrumentality of a governmen-which the business would not otherwise be or amount. (See Rights of fixed durationtal unit. For example, you must amortize theavailable or operational. or amount, later.)capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing
or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-Workforce in place, etc. This includes the 6. An interest under either of the following.lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast-composition of a workforce (for example, its ex-
ing license.perience, education, or training). It also includes a. An existing lease or sublease of tangi-the terms and conditions of employment, ble property.Covenant not to compete. Section 197 in-whether contractual or otherwise, and any other
b. A debt that was in existence when thetangibles include a covenant not to compete (orvalue placed on employees or any of their attrib-
interest was acquired.similar arrangement) entered into in connectionutes.
with the acquisition of an interest in a trade orFor example, you must amortize the part of
7. A right to service residential mortgages un-business, or a substantial portion of a trade orthe purchase price of a business that is for the
less the right is acquired in connection withbusiness. An interest in a trade or businessexistence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, you
the acquisition of a trade or business or aincludes an interest in a partnership or a corpo-must amortize the cost of acquiring an existing
substantial part of a trade or business.ration engaged in a trade or business.employment contract or relationship with em-
ployees or consultants. An arrangement that requires the former 8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par-
owner to perform services (or to provide prop- ties to a corporate organization or reorgan-Business books and records, etc. This in- erty or the use of property) is not similar to a ization in which any part of a gain or loss iscludes the intangible value of technical manuals, covenant not to compete to the extent the not recognized.training manuals or programs, data files, and amount paid under the arrangement representsaccounting or inventory control systems. It also Intangible property that is not amortizablereasonable compensation for those services orincludes the cost of customer lists, subscription under the rules for section 197 intangibles canfor that property or its use.lists, insurance expirations, patient or client files, be depreciated if it meets certain requirements.
and lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, and You generally must use the straight line methodFranchise, trademark, or trade name. Atelevision advertisers. over its useful life. For certain intangibles, thefranchise, trademark, or trade name is a section
depreciation period is specified in the law andPatents, copyrights, etc. This includes pack- 197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase
regulations. For example, the depreciation pe-age design, computer software, and any interest or renewal costs, other than certain contingent
riod for computer software that is not a sectionin a film, sound recording, videotape, book, or payments that you can deduct currently. For
197 intangible is generally 36 months.other similar property, except as discussed later information on currently deductible contingent
For more information on depreciating intan-under Assets That Are Not Section 197 In- payments, see chapter 11.
gible property, see Intangible Property  undertangibles. Professional sports franchise. A What Method Can You Use To Depreciate Yourfranchise engaged in professional sports andCustomer-based intangible. This is the com- Property? in chapter 1 of Publication 946.any intangible assets acquired in connectionposition of market, market share, and any other
with acquiring the franchise (including playervalue resulting from the future provision of Computer software. Section 197 intangiblescontracts) is a section 197 intangible amortiz-goods or services because of relationships with do not include the following types of computerable over a 15-year period.customers in the ordinary course of business. software.For example, you must amortize the part of the
Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, apurchase price of a business that is for the 1. Software that meets all the following re-
section 197 intangible. Section 197 in-existence of the following intangibles. quirements.
tangibles include any right under a license, con-• A customer base. a. It is, or has been, readily available fortract, or other arrangement providing for the use
• A circulation base. of any section 197 intangible. It also includes purchase by the general public.
any term interest in any section 197 intangible,• An undeveloped market or market growth. b. It is subject to a nonexclusive license.whether the interest is outright or in trust.
• Insurance in force. c. It has not been substantially modified.
This requirement is considered met ifAssets That Are Not• A mortgage servicing contract. the cost of all modifications is not moreSection 197 Intangibles• An investment management contract. than the greater of 25% of the price of
the publicly available unmodifiedThe following assets are not section 197 in-• Any other relationship with customers in- software or $2,000.tangibles.volving the future provision of goods or
services. 2. Software that is not acquired in connection1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership,
with the acquisition of a trade or businesstrust, or estate.Accounts receivable or other similar rights to or a substantial part of a trade or business.income for goods or services provided to cus- 2. Any interest under an existing futures con-
tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi- tract, foreign currency contract, notional Computer software defined. Computerness are not section 197 intangibles. principal contract, interest rate swap, or software includes all programs designed tosimilar financial contract. cause a computer to perform a desired function.Supplier-based intangible. This is the value
It also includes any database or similar item thatresulting from the future acquisition of goods or 3. Any interest in land.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 29

Page 30 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is in the public domain and is incidental to the 1. You or a related person (defined later) held indirectly controls the organization (or
or used the intangible at any time from July whose family members control it).operation of qualifying software.
25, 1991, through August 10, 1993. • A corporation and a partnership if theRights of fixed duration or amount. Section 2. You acquired the intangible from a person same persons own more than 20% of the197 intangibles do not include any right under a who held it at any time during the period in value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
contract or from a governmental agency if the (1) and, as part of the transaction, the user poration and more than 20% of the capital
right is acquired in the ordinary course of a trade did not change. or profits interest in the partnership.
or business (or in an activity engaged in for the 3. You granted the right to use the intangible • Two S corporations, and an S corporationproduction of income) but not as part of a to a person (or a person related to that and a regular corporation, if the same per-purchase of a trade or business and either: person) who held or used it at any time sons own more than 20% of the value of
• Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or during the period in (1). This applies only if the outstanding stock of each corporation.
the transaction in which you granted the• Is of a fixed amount that, except for the • Two partnerships if the same personsright and the transaction in which you ac-rules for section 197 intangibles, would be own, directly or indirectly, more than 20%quired the intangible are part of a series ofrecovered under a method similar to the of the capital or profits interests in bothrelated transactions. See Related person,unit-of-production method of cost recov- partnerships.later, for more information.ery. • A partnership and a person who owns,
However, this does not apply to the following directly or indirectly, more than 20% of theExceptions. The anti-churning rules do not
intangibles. capital or profits interests in the partner-apply in the following situations.
ship.• Goodwill. • You acquired the intangible from a dece-
• Two persons who are engaged in tradesdent and its basis was stepped up to its• Going concern value. or businesses under common control (asfair market value.
• A covenant not to compete. described in section 41(f)(1) of the Internal• The intangible was amortizable as a sec- Revenue Code).• A franchise, trademark, or trade name. tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans-
feror you acquired it from. This exception• A customer-related information base, cus- When to determine relationship. Personsdoes not apply if the transaction in whichtomer-based intangible, or similar item. are treated as related if the relationship existedyou acquired the intangible and the trans- at the following time.action in which the seller or transferor ac-
quired it are part of a series of related • In the case of a single transaction, imme-Safe Harbor for Creative
transactions. diately before or immediately after theProperty Costs transaction in which the intangible was ac-• The gain-recognition exception, discussed quired.If you are engaged in the trade or business of later, applies.
film production, you may be able to amortize the • In the case of a series of related transac-
creative property costs for properties not set for tions (or a series of transactions that com-Related person. For purposes of theproduction within 3 years of the first capitalized prise a qualified stock purchase underanti-churning rules, the following are related per-transaction. You may amortize these costs rata- section 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenuesons.bly over a 15-year period beginning on the first Code), immediately before the earliest
• An individual and his or her brothers, sis-day of the second half of the tax year in which transaction or immediately after the last
ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, transaction.you properly write off the costs for financial ac-
ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),counting purposes. If, during the 15-year period,
and lineal descendants (children, grand- Ownership of stock. In determiningyou dispose of the creative property rights, you
children, etc.). whether an individual directly or indirectly ownsmust continue to amortize the costs over the
any of the outstanding stock of a corporation, theremainder of the 15-year period. • A corporation and an individual who owns,
following rules apply.directly or indirectly, more than 20% of theCreative property costs include costs paid or
value of the corporation's outstandingincurred to acquire and develop screenplays, Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by
stock.scripts, story outlines, motion picture production or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust
rights to books and plays, and other similar is considered owned proportionately by or for its• Two corporations that are members of theproperties for purposes of potential future film shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.same controlled group as defined in sec-
development, production, and exploitation. tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownAmortize these costs using the rules of Rev- Code, except that ªmore than 20%º is sub- the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for hisenue Procedure 2004-36. For more information, stituted for ªat least 80%º in that definition or her family. Family includes only brothers and
see Revenue Procedure 2004-36, 2004-24 and the determination is made without re- sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse,
I.R.B. 1063, available at gard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of ancestors, and lineal descendants.
www.irs.gov/irb/2004-24_IRB/ar16.html. section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-
Rule 3. An individual owning (other than bytion 1.197-2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.)A change in the treatment of creative applying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is
property costs is a change in method of • A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more considered to own the stock directly or indirectly
accounting. than 20% of the value of the corporation's
CAUTION
! owned by or for his or her partner.
outstanding stock is owned, directly or in-
Rule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2,directly, by or for the trust or grantor of the
Anti-Churning Rules or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per-trust.
son under Rule 1 as actually owned by that
• The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci-Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizing person. Do not treat stock constructively owned
ary and beneficiary, of any trust.most section 197 intangibles if the transaction in by an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by
which you acquired them did not result in a the individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to make• The fiduciaries of two different trusts, andsignificant change in ownership or use. These another person the constructive owner of thethe fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-
rules apply to goodwill and going concern value, stock.ferent trusts, if the same person is the
and to any other section 197 intangible that is grantor of both trusts.
not otherwise depreciable or amortizable. Gain-recognition exception. This exception• The executor and beneficiary of an estate.Under the anti-churning rules, you cannot to the anti-churning rules applies if the person
use 15-year amortization for the intangible if any you acquired the intangible from (the transferor)• A tax-exempt educational or charitable or-
of the following conditions apply. meets both of the following requirements.ganization and a person who directly or
Page 30 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 31 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• That person would not be related to you Changing Your Disposition of
(as described under Related person, ear- Accounting Method Section 197 Intangibleslier) if the 20% test for ownership of stock
Generally, you must get IRS approval to changeand partnership interests were replaced by A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia-your method of accounting. File Form 3115,a 50% test. ble property used in your trade or business. IfApplication for Change in Accounting Method, to you held the intangible for more than 1 year, any• That person chose to recognize gain on request a change to a permissible method of gain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow-the disposition of the intangible and pay accounting for amortization. able amortization, is ordinary income (sectionincome tax on the gain at the highest tax The following are examples of a change in 1245 gain). If multiple section 197 intangiblesrate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for method of accounting for amortization. are disposed of in a single transaction or ainformation on making this choice. series of related transactions, treat all of the• A change in the amortization method, pe-
section 197 intangibles as if they were a singleriod of recovery, or convention of an amor-If this exception applies, the anti-churning asset for purposes of determining the amount oftizable asset.rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted gain that is ordinary income. Any remaining
basis in the intangible that is more than the gain • A change in the accounting for amortiz- gain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or loss. If
recognized by the transferor. able assets from a single asset account to you held the intangible 1 year or less, any gain
a multiple asset account (pooling), or vice or loss on its disposition is an ordinary gain orNotification. If the person you acquired the versa. loss. For more information on ordinary or capitalintangible from chooses to recognize gain under
gain or loss on business property, see chapter 3• A change in the accounting for amortiz-the rules for this exception, that person must in Publication 544.able assets from one type of multiple as-notify you in writing by the due date of the return
set account to a different type of multipleon which the choice is made. Nondeductible loss. You cannot deduct anyasset account. loss on the disposition or worthlessness of a
section 197 intangible that you acquired in theAnti-abuse rule. You cannot amortize any Changes in amortization that are not a change same transaction (or series of related transac-section 197 intangible acquired in a transaction in method of accounting include the following: tions) as other section 197 intangibles you stillfor which the principal purpose was either of the have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of• A change in computing amortization in thefollowing. each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi-tax year in which your use of the asset
• To avoid the requirement that the intangi- ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductiblechanges.
loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non-ble be acquired after August 10, 1993. • An adjustment in the useful life of an am- deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi-• To avoid any of the anti-churning rules. ortizable asset. ble by the following fraction.
• Generally, the making of a late amortiza- • The numerator is the adjusted basis ofMore information. For more information tion election or the revocation of a timely each remaining intangible on the date ofabout the anti-churning rules, including addi- valid amortization election. the disposition.tional rules for partnerships, see Regulations • Any change in the placed-in-service date • The denominator is the total adjusted ba-section 1.197-2(h). of an amortizable asset. ses of all remaining amortizable section
197 intangibles on the date of the disposi-Incorrect Amount of See Regulations section 1.446-1(e)(2)(ii)(a) tion.
for more information and examples.Amortization Deducted
Covenant not to compete. A covenant not toIf you later discover that you deducted an incor- Automatic approval. In some instances, you compete, or similar arrangement, is not consid-rect amount for amortization for a section 197 may be able to get automatic approval from the ered disposed of or worthless before you dis-intangible in any year, you may be able to make IRS to change your method of accounting for pose of your entire interest in the trade ora correction for that year by filing an amended amortization. For a list of automatic accounting business for which you entered into the cove-return. See Amended Return, next. If you are not method changes, see the Instructions for Form nant.allowed to make the correction on an amended 3115. Also see the Instructions for Form 3115
return, you can change your accounting method for more information on getting approval, auto- Nonrecognition transfers. If you acquire a
matic approval procedures, and a list of excep-to claim the correct amortization. See Changing section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-
tions to the automatic approval process.Your Accounting Method, later. fer, you are treated as the transferor with respect
For more information, see Revenue Proce- to the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi-
dure 2006-12, as modified by Revenue Proce- ble that is not more than the transferor's ad-
Amended Return dure 2006-37, and Revenue Procedure justed basis. You amortize this part of the
2008-52, as amplified, clarified, and modified by adjusted basis over the intangible's remainingIf you deducted an incorrect amount for amorti- Revenue Procedure 2009-39. See Revenue amortization period in the hands of the trans-zation, you can file an amended return to correct Procedure 2006-12, 2006-3 I.R.B. 310, avail- feror. Nonrecognition transfers include transfersthe following. able at to a corporation, partnership contributions and
www.irs.gov/irb/2006-03_IRB/ar14.html. distributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun-• A mathematical error made in any year.
See Revenue Procedure 2006-37, 2006-38 tary conversions.• A posting error made in any year. I.R.B. 499, available at In a like-kind exchange or involuntary con-
www.irs.gov/irb/2006-38_IRB/ar10.html. version of a section 197 intangible, you must• An amortization deduction for a section
See Revenue Procedure 2008-52, 2008-36 continue to amortize the part of your adjusted197 intangible for which you have not
I.R.B. 587, available at basis in the acquired intangible that is not moreadopted a method of accounting.
www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09.html. than your adjusted basis in the exchanged or
See Revenue Procedure 2009-39, 2009-38 converted intangible over the remaining amorti-
When to file. If an amended return is allowed, I.R.B. 371, available at zation period of the exchanged or converted
you must file it by the later of the following dates. www.irs.gov/irb/2009-38_IRB/ar08.html. intangible. Amortize over a new 15-year period
the part of your adjusted basis in the acquired• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-
Note. If you are filing an application for a intangible that is more than your adjusted basisnal return for the year in which you did not change in accounting method filed on or after in the exchanged or converted intangible.deduct the correct amount. (A return filed January 10, 2011, for a year of change endingearly is considered filed on the due date.) on or after April 30, 2010, see Revenue Proce- Example. You own a section 197 intangible
• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for dure 2011-14, 2011-4 I.R.B. 330, available at you have amortized for 4 full years. It has a
www.irs.gov/irb/2011-04_IRB/ar08.html.that year. remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 31

Page 32 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kind Amortization period. The 84-month amorti-
section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro- zation period starts on the first day of the first Geological andvisions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor- month of the second half of the tax year you
tize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax- Geophysical Costsacquired intangible over the 11 years remaining payer), regardless of the month you actually
in the original 15-year amortization period for the incur the costs. You can claim amortization de- You can amortize the cost of geological and
transferred asset. You amortize the other ductions for no more than 6 months of the first geophysical expenses paid or incurred in con-
$10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-year and last (eighth) tax years of the period. nection with oil and gas exploration or develop-
period. ment within the United States. These costs can
be amortized ratably over a 24-month periodLife tenant and remainderman. If one per-
beginning on the mid-point of the tax year inson holds the property for life with the remainder
which the expenses were paid or incurred. Forgoing to another person, the life tenant is entitled
Reforestation Costs major integrated oil companies (as defined into the full amortization for qualifying reforesta-
section 167(h)(5)), these costs must be amor-tion costs incurred by the life tenant. Any re-You can elect to deduct a limited amount of tized ratably over a 5-year period for costs paidmainder interest in the property is ignored forreforestation costs paid or incurred during the or incurred after May 17, 2006 (a 7-year periodamortization purposes.tax year. See Reforestation Costs in chapter 7. for costs paid or incurred after December 19,
You can elect to amortize the qualifying costs 2007).Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timberthat are not deducted currently over an If you retire or abandon the property duringproperty within 10 years after the tax year you84-month period. There is no limit on the amount the amortization period, no amortization deduc-incur qualifying reforestation expenses, reportof your amortization deduction for reforestation tion is allowed in the year of retirement or aban-any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-costs paid or incurred during the tax year. donment.tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544The election to amortize reforestation costs
for more information.incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es-
tate must be made by the partnership, corpora-
How to make the election. To elect to amor-tion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, or Pollution Controltize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Partbeneficiary cannot make that election.
VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement thatA partner's or shareholder's share of amor- Facilitiescontains the following information.tizable costs is figured under the general rules
for allocating items of income, loss, deduction, • A description of the costs and the dates You can elect to amortize the cost of a certifiedetc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am- you incurred them. pollution control facility over 60 months. How-ortizable costs of an estate are divided between ever, see Atmospheric pollution control facilities• A description of the type of timber beingthe estate and the income beneficiary based on for an exception. The cost of a pollution controlgrown and the purpose for which it isthe income of the estate allocable to each. facility that is not eligible for amortization can begrown. depreciated under the regular rules for deprecia-Qualifying costs. Reforestation costs are the Attach a separate statement for each property tion. Also, you can claim a special depreciationdirect costs of planting or seeding for forestation for which you amortize reforestation costs. allowance on a certified pollution control facilityor reforestation. Qualifying costs include only that is qualified property even if you elect tothose costs you must capitalize and include in Generally, you must make the election on a amortize its cost. You must reduce its cost (am-the adjusted basis of the property. They include timely filed return (including extensions) for the ortizable basis) by the amount of any specialcosts for the following items. tax year in which you incurred the costs. How- allowance you claim. See chapter 3 of Publica-ever, if you timely filed your return for the year• Site preparation. tion 946.without making the election, you can still make A certified pollution control facility is a new• Seeds or seedlings. the election by filing an amended return within 6 identifiable treatment facility used in connectionmonths of the due date of the return (excluding• Labor. with a plant or other property in operation beforeextensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state- 1976, to reduce or control water or atmospheric• Tools. ment to the amended return and write ªFiled pollution or contamination. The facility must dopursuant to section 301.9100-2º on Form 4562.• Depreciation on equipment used in plant- so by removing, changing, disposing, storing, orFile the amended return at the same addressing and seeding. preventing the creation or emission of pollu-you filed the original return. tants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facilityQualifying costs do not include costs for which must be certified by state and federal certifyingthe government reimburses you under a Revoking the election. You must get IRS ap- authorities.cost-sharing program, unless you include the proval to revoke your election to amortize quali- The facility must not significantly increasereimbursement in your income. fying reforestation costs. Your application to the output or capacity, extend the useful life, orrevoke the election must include your name, reduce the total operating costs of the plant orQualified timber property. Qualified timber address, the years for which your election was in other property. Also, it must not significantlyproperty is property that contains trees in signifi- effect, and your reason for revoking it. Please change the nature of the manufacturing or pro-cant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlot provide your daytime telephone number (op- duction process or facility.or other site that you own or lease. The property tional), in case we need to contact you. You, or The federal certifying authority will not certifyqualifies only if it meets all of the following re- your duly authorized representative, must sign your property to the extent it appears you willquirements. the application and file it at least 90 days before recover (over the property's useful life) all or partthe due date (without extensions) for filing your• It is located in the United States. of its cost from the profit based on its operationincome tax return for the first tax year for which (such as through sales of recovered wastes).• It is held for the growing and cutting of your election is to end. The federal certifying authority will describe thetimber you will either use in, or sell for use
nature of the potential cost recovery. You mustin, the commercial production of timber  
then reduce the amortizable basis of the facilityproducts.
by this potential recovery.Send the application to:
• It consists of at least one acre planted with Internal Revenue Service New identifiable treatment facility. A newtree seedlings in the manner normally Associate Chief Counsel identifiable treatment facility is tangible depre-used in forestation or reforestation. Passthroughs and Special Industries ciable property that is identifiable as a treatment
CC:PSI:6 facility. It does not include a building and itsQualified timber property does not include
1111 Constitution Ave., NW, IR-5300 structural components unless the building is ex-property on which you have planted shelter belts
Washington, DC 20224 clusively a treatment facility.or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees.
Page 32 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 33 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Atmospheric pollution control facilities. (excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the
Certain atmospheric pollution control facilities amended return and write ªFiled pursuant to
can be amortized over 84 months. To qualify, section 301.9100-2º on Form 4562. File the 9.the following must apply. amended return at the same address you filed
the original return.• The facility must be acquired and placed
in service after April 11, 2005. If acquired, Your election is binding for the year it is
the original use must begin with you after Depletionmade and for all later years unless you obtain
April 11, 2005. approval from the IRS to change to a different
method.• The facility must be used in connection
with an electric generation plant or other What's New
property placed in operation after Decem-
ber 31, 1975, that is primarily coal fired. Marginal production of oil and gas. The
Optional Write-off temporary suspension of the 100% taxable in-• If you construct, reconstruct, or erect the
come limitation on percentage depletion on thefacility, only the basis attributable to the
of Certain Tax marginal production of oil and natural gas alsoconstruction, reconstruction, or erection
applies to tax years beginning in 2010 and 2011.completed after April 11, 2005, qualifies.
Preferences
Basis reduction for corporations. A corpo- You can elect to amortize certain tax preference
ration must reduce the amortizable basis of a items over an optional period beginning in the Introductionpollution control facility by 20% before figuring tax year in which you incurred the costs. If youthe amortization deduction. Depletion is the using up of natural resources bymake this election, there is no AMT adjustment.
mining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple-The applicable costs and the optional recoveryMore information. For more information on tion deduction allows an owner or operator toperiods are as follows:the amortization of pollution control facilities, account for the reduction of a product'ssee Code sections 169 and 291(c) and the re- • Circulation costs Ð 3 years, reserves.lated regulations. There are two ways of figuring depletion:• Intangible drilling and development costs
cost depletion and percentage depletion. ForÐ 60 months, mineral property, you generally must use the
• Mining exploration and development costs method that gives you the larger deduction. ForResearch and Ð 10 years, and standing timber, you must use cost depletion.
• Research and experimental costs Ð 10Experimental Costs Topicsyears.
This chapter discusses:You can elect to amortize your research and
experimental costs, deduct them as current How to make the election. To elect to amor- • Who can claim depletionbusiness expenses, or write them off over a tize qualifying costs over the optional recovery10-year period (see Optional write-off method • Mineral propertyperiod, complete Part VI of Form 4562 and at-below). tach a statement containing the following infor- • TimberIf you elect to amortize these costs, deduct
mation to your return for the tax year in which thethem in equal amounts over 60 months or more.
election begins:The amortization period begins the month you
first receive an economic benefit from the costs. • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-
For a definition of ªresearch and experimen- cation number; and Who Cantal costsº and information on deducting them as
• The type of cost and the specific amountcurrent business expenses, see chapter 7.
Claim Depletion?of the cost for which you are making the
Optional write-off method. Rather than election.amortize these costs or deduct them as a cur- If you have an economic interest in mineral prop-
rent expense, you have the option of deducting erty or standing timber, you can take a deductionGenerally, the election must be made on a(writing off) research and experimental costs for depletion. More than one person can have antimely filed return (including extensions) for theratably over a 10-year period beginning with the economic interest in the same mineral deposit ortax year in which you incurred the costs. How-tax year in which you incurred the costs. For timber.ever, if you timely filed your return for the yearmore information, see Optional Write-off of Cer- You have an economic interest if both thewithout making the election, you can still maketain Tax Preferences, later, and section 59(e) of following apply.the election by filing an amended return within 6the Internal Revenue Code. months of the due date of the return (excluding • You have acquired by investment any in-
Costs you can amortize. You can amortize extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the amended terest in mineral deposits or standing tim-
costs chargeable to a capital account (see chap- return and write ªFiled pursuant to section ber.
ter 1) if you meet both of the following require- 301.9100-2º on Form 4562. File the amended • You have a legal right to income from thements. return at the same address you filed the original extraction of the mineral or cutting of thereturn.• You paid or incurred the costs in your timber to which you must look for a return
trade or business. of your capital investment.
Revoking the election. You must obtain con-• You are not deducting the costs currently. A contractual relationship that allows you an
sent from the IRS to revoke your election. Your economic or monetary advantage from products
request to revoke the election must be submit- of the mineral deposit or standing timber is not,How to make the election. To elect to amor- ted to the IRS in the form of a letter ruling before in itself, an economic interest. A production pay-tize research and experimental costs, complete the end of the tax year in which the optional ment carved out of, or retained on the sale of,Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in-
recovery period ends. The request must contain mineral property is not an economic interest.come tax return. Generally, you must file the
all of the information necessary to demonstratereturn by the due date (including extensions).
Individuals, corporations, estates, andthe rare and unusual circumstances that wouldHowever, if you timely filed your return for the
trusts who claim depletion deductionsjustify granting revocation. If the request for rev-year without making the election, you can still
may be liable for alternative minimumocation is approved, any unamortized costs aremake the election by filing an amended return
CAUTION
!
tax.deductible in the year the revocation is effective.within 6 months of the due date of the return
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 33

Page 34 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must estimate or determine recoverable by your gross income from the property during
units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands the tax year.Mineral Property of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod- The rates to be used and other conditions
ucts using the current industry method and the and qualifications for oil and gas wells are dis-Mineral property includes oil and gas wells, most accurate and reliable information you can cussed later under Independent Producers andmines, and other natural deposits (including ge- obtain. Royalty Owners and under Natural Gas Wells.othermal deposits). For this purpose, the term Rates and other rules for percentage depletionªpropertyº means each separate interest you Number of units sold. You determine the of other specific minerals are found later inown in each mineral deposit in each separate number of units sold during the tax year based Mines and Geothermal Deposits.tract or parcel of land. You can treat two or more on your method of accounting. Use the following
separate interests as one property or as sepa- Gross income. When figuring your percent-table to make this determination.
rate properties. See section 614 of the Internal age depletion, subtract from your gross income
Revenue Code and the related regulations for from the property the following amounts.IF you THEN the units sold
use ... during the year are ...rules on how to treat separate mineral interests. • Any rents or royalties you paid or incurredThere are two ways of figuring depletion on for the property.The cash The units sold for whichmineral property. method of you receive payment • The part of any bonus you paid for a leaseaccounting during the tax year• Cost depletion. on the property allocable to the product(regardless of the year of sold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross• Percentage depletion. sale). income) for the tax year.
Generally, you must use the method that gives An accrual The units sold based on A bonus payment includes amounts you paid asyou the larger deduction. However, unless you method of your inventories and a lessee to satisfy a production payment re-are an independent producer or royalty owner, accounting method of accounting for tained by the lessor.you generally cannot use percentage depletion inventory.
for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells , Use the following fraction to figure the part of
later. The number of units sold during the tax year the bonus you must subtract.
does not include any for which depletion deduc-
tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years. No. of units sold in the tax yearCost Depletion BonusRecoverable units from the × PaymentsFiguring the cost depletion deduction. propertyTo figure cost depletion you must first determine
Once you have figured your property's basis forthe following. For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos-depletion, the total recoverable units, and the its, gross income from the property is defined• The property's basis for depletion. number of units sold during the tax year, you can later under Oil and Gas Wells. For property otherfigure your cost depletion deduction by taking• The total recoverable units of mineral in than a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well,the following steps.the property's natural deposit. gross income from the property is defined later
under Mines and Geothermal Deposits.• The number of units of mineral sold during Step Action Result
the tax year. Taxable income limit. The percentage deple- 1 Divide your property's Rate per
tion deduction generally cannot be more thanbasis for depletion by unit.
Basis for depletion. To figure the property's 50% (100% for oil and gas property) of yourtotal recoverable units.
taxable income from the property figured withoutbasis for depletion, subtract all the following  2 Multiply the rate per Cost the depletion deduction and the domestic pro-from the property's adjusted basis. unit by units sold depletion duction activities deduction.during the tax year. deduction.1. Amounts recoverable through: Taxable income from the property means
gross income from the property minus all allowa-a. Depreciation deductions, ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de-Note. You must keep accounts for the de- pletion or qualified domestic productionb. Deferred expenses (including deferred pletion of each property and adjust these ac- activities) attributable to mining processes, in-exploration and development costs), counts each year for units sold and depletion cluding mining transportation. These deductibleand claimed. items include, but are not limited to, the follow-c. Deductions other than depletion. ing.Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and gas
property. Owners of oil and gas property may • Operating expenses.2. The residual value of land and improve-
use an elective safe harbor in determining thements at the end of operations. • Certain selling expenses.property's recoverable reserves for purposes of
3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur- computing cost depletion. If this election is • Administrative and financial overhead.poses other than mineral production. made, special rules apply. See Revenue Proce- • Depreciation.dure 2004-19 on page 563 of Internal Revenue
Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of your Bulletin 2004-10, available at www.irs.gov/pub/ • Intangible drilling and development costs.property is your original cost or other basis, plus irs-irbs/irb04-10.pdf. • Exploration and development expendi-certain additions and improvements, and minus To make the election, attach a statement to tures.certain deductions such as depletion allowed or your timely filed (including extensions) original
allowable and casualty losses. Your adjusted return for the first tax year for which the safe The following rules apply when figuring yourbasis can never be less than zero. See Publica- harbor is elected. The statement must indicate taxable income from the property for purposestion 551, Basis of Assets, for more information that you are electing the safe harbor provided by of the taxable income limit.on adjusted basis. Revenue Procedure 2004-19. The election, if
made, is effective for the tax year in which it is • Do not deduct any net operating loss de-
Total recoverable units. The total recover- made and all subsequent years. It cannot be duction from the gross income from the
able units is the sum of the following. revoked for the tax year in which it is elected, but property.
may be revoked in a later year. Once revoked, it• The number of units of mineral remaining • Corporations do not deduct charitable con-cannot be re-elected for the next 5 years.at the end of the year (including units re- tributions from the gross income from the
covered but not sold). property.
Percentage Depletion• The number of units of mineral sold during • If, during the year, you dispose of an item
the tax year (determined under your To figure percentage depletion, you multiply a of section 1245 property that was used in
method of accounting, as explained next). certain percentage, specified for each mineral, connection with mineral property, reduce
Page 34 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 35 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any allowable deduction for mining ex- • The interest in the profits or capital of a • The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas
penses by the part of any gain you must from your customers or persons related topartnership.
report as ordinary income that is allocable your customers.• The beneficial interests in an estate orto the mineral property. See section • There are no arrangements for the retailertrust.1.613-5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor- to acquire oil or natural gas you producedmation on how to figure the ordinary gain for resale or made available for purchaseAny interest owned by or for a corporation,allocable to the property. by the retailer.partnership, trust, or estate is considered to be
owned directly both by itself and proportionately • Neither you nor the retailer knows of or
by its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.Oil and Gas Wells controls the final disposition of the oil or
natural gas you sold or the original sourceYou cannot claim percentage depletion for an oil of the petroleum products the retailer ac-Retailers who cannot claim percentage de-or gas well unless at least one of the following quired for resale.pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-applies.
tion if both the following apply.
• You are either an independent producer or Transferees who cannot claim percentage1. You sell oil or natural gas or theira royalty owner. depletion. You cannot claim percentage de-by-products directly or through a related pletion if you received your interest in a proven• The well produces natural gas that is ei- person in any of the following situations. oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 andther sold under a fixed contract or pro-
before October 12, 1990. For a definition of theduced from geopressured brine. a. Through a retail outlet operated by you term ªtransfer,º see section 1.613A-7(n) of theor a related person. regulations. For a definition of the term ªinterestIf you are an independent producer or royalty
b. To any person who is required under an in proven oil or gas property,º see sectionowner, see Independent Producers and Royalty
1.613A-7(p) of the regulations.agreement with you or a related personOwners, next.
to use a trademark, trade name, orFor information on the depletion deduction Figuring percentage depletion. Generally,service mark or name owned by you orfor wells that produce natural gas that is either as an independent producer or royalty owner,a related person in marketing or distrib-sold under a fixed contract or produced from you figure your percentage depletion by comput-uting oil, natural gas, or theirgeopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells , ing your average daily production of domestic oilby-products.later. or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil or
c. To any person given authority under an gas quantity. If your average daily production
agreement with you or a related person does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan-Independent Producers and to occupy any retail outlet owned, tity, you figure your percentage depletion byRoyalty Owners leased, or controlled by you or a related multiplying the gross income from the oil or gas
person. property (defined later) by 15%. If your averageIf you are an independent producer or royalty
daily production of domestic oil or gas exceedsowner, you figure percentage depletion using a 2. The combined gross receipts from sales your depletable oil or gas quantity, you mustrate of 15% of the gross income from the prop-
(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, or make an allocation as explained later under Av-erty based on your average daily production of
their by-products by all retail outlets taken erage daily production exceeds depletabledomestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up to
into account in (1) are more than $5 million quantities.your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-
for the tax year. In addition, there is a limit on the percentageever, certain refiners, as explained next, and
depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit,certain retailers and transferees of proven oil For the purpose of determining if this rule later.and gas properties, as explained later, cannot applies, do not count the following.claim percentage depletion. For information on
• Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities) Average daily production. Figure your aver-figuring the deduction, see Figuring percentage
of oil or natural gas to commercial or in- age daily production by dividing your total do-depletion, later.
mestic production of oil or gas for the tax year bydustrial users.
the number of days in your tax year.Refiners who cannot claim percentage de- • Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart-pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple- Partial interest. If you have a partial inter-ment of Defense.tion if you or a related person refine crude oil and est in the production from a property, figure youryou and the related person refined more than • Sales of oil or natural gas or their share of the production by multiplying total pro-75,000 barrels on any day during the tax year by-products outside the United States if duction from the property by your percentage ofbased on average (rather than actual) daily re- none of your domestic production or that interest in the revenues from the property.finery runs for the tax year. The average daily of a related person is exported during the You have a partial interest in the productionrefinery run is computed by dividing total refinery tax year or the prior tax year. from a property if you have a net profits interestruns for the tax year by the total number of days in the property. To figure the share of productionin the tax year. Related person. To determine if you and for your net profits interest, you must first deter-another person are related persons, see Re-Related person. You and another person mine your percentage participation (as mea-
lated person under Refiners who cannot claimare related persons if either of you holds a signif- sured by the net profits) in the gross revenue
percentage depletion, earlier.icant ownership interest in the other person or if from the property. To figure this percentage, you
a third person holds a significant ownership in- divide the income you receive for your net profitsSales through a related person. You are
terest in both of you. interest by the gross revenue from the property.considered to be selling through a related per-
Then multiply the total production from the prop-For example, a corporation, partnership, es- son if any sale by the related person produces erty by your percentage participation to figuretate, or trust and anyone who holds a significant gross income from which you may benefit be- your share of the production.ownership interest in it are related persons. A cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter-
partnership and a trust are related persons if one est in the person. Example. John Oak owns oil property inperson holds a significant ownership interest in You are not considered to be selling through which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest.each of them. a related person who is a retailer if all the follow- During the year, the property produced 10,000For purposes of the related person rules, ing apply. barrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000.significant ownership interest means direct or John had expenses of $90,000 attributable to• You do not have a significant ownershipindirect ownership of 5% or more in any one of the property. The property generated a net profitinterest in the retailer.the following. of $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re-
• You sell your production to persons who• The value of the outstanding stock of a ceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 ×  .20) for
are not related to either you or the retailer.corporation. his net profits interest.
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 35

Page 36 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Partner's or shareholder's adjusted basis.Paul determined his percentage participation percentage depletion purposes without regard
The partnership or S corporation must allocateto be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income he to the RMFP.
to each partner or shareholder his or her sharereceived) by $200,000 (the gross revenue from Gross income from the property does not
of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas propertythe property). Paul determined his share of the include lease bonuses, advance royalties, or
held by the partnership or S corporation. Theoil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar- other amounts payable without regard to pro-
partnership or S corporation makes the alloca-rels ×  11%). duction from the property.
tion as of the date it acquires the oil or gas
property.Depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Gen- Average daily production exceeds deplet-
Each partner's share of the adjusted basis oferally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar- able quantities. If your average daily produc-
the oil or gas property generally is figured ac-rels. Your depletable natural gas quantity is tion for the year is more than your depletable oil
cording to that partner's interest in partnership6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number of or natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for
capital. However, in some cases, it is figuredbarrels of your depletable oil quantity that you depletion for each domestic oil or natural gas
according to the partner's interest in partnershipchoose to apply. If you claim depletion on both property as follows. income.oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de-
The partnership or S corporation adjusts the1. Figure your average daily production of oilpletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num-
partner's or shareholder's share of the adjustedor natural gas for the year.ber of barrels you use to figure your depletable
basis of the oil and gas property for any capitalnatural gas quantity. 2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gas expenditures made for the property and for anyquantity for the year. change in partnership or S corporation interests.Example. You have both oil and natural gas
3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gasproduction. To figure your depletable natural Each partner or shareholder must sep-produced from the property using a per-gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels of arately keep records of his or her sharecentage depletion rate of 15%.your 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. Your of the adjusted basis in each oil and
RECORDSdepletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 million gas property of the partnership or S corporation.4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac-cubic feet of gas (360 ×  6000). You must reduce The partner or shareholder must reduce his ortion, the numerator of which is the resultyour depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000 her adjusted basis by the depletion allowed orfigured in (2) and the denominator of which− 360). allowable on the property each year. The part-is the result figured in (1). This is your
 If you have production from marginal wells, ner or shareholder must use that reduced ad-depletion allowance for that property for
see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue justed basis to figure cost depletion or his or herthe year.
Code to figure your depletable oil or natural gas gain or loss if the partnership or S corporation
quantity. disposes of the property.
Taxable income limit. If you are an indepen-Business entities and family members. dent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas, Reporting the deduction. Information thatYou must allocate the depletable oil or gas your deduction for percentage depletion is lim- you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figurequantity among the following related persons in ited to the smaller of the following. your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper-proportion to each entity's or family member's
ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora-• 100% of your taxable income from theproduction of domestic oil or gas for the year.
tion on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or onproperty figured without the deduction for• Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% or Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). Deduct oil and gasdepletion and the deduction for domesticmore of the beneficial interest is owned by depletion for your partnership or S corporationproduction activities under section 199 ofthe same or related persons (considering interest on Schedule E (Form 1040). The deple-the Internal Revenue Code. For a defini-only persons that own at least 5% of the tion deducted on Schedule E is included in figur-tion of taxable income from the property,beneficial interest). ing income or loss from rental real estate orsee Taxable income limit, earlier, under
royalty properties. The instructions for Schedule• You and your spouse and minor children. Mineral Property.
E explain where to report this income or loss andA related person is anyone mentioned in the • 65% of your taxable income from all whether you need to file either of the followingrelated persons discussion under Nondeduct- sources, figured without the depletion al- forms.ible loss in chapter 2 of Publication 544, except lowance, the deduction for domestic pro-
• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.that for purposes of this allocation, item (1) in duction activities, any net operating loss
that discussion includes only an individual, his or carryback, and any capital loss carryback. • Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-her spouse, and minor children. tions.You can carry over to the following year any
Controlled group of corporations. Mem- amount you cannot deduct because of the
bers of the same controlled group of corpora- 65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de- Electing large partnerships must figure de-
tions are treated as one taxpayer when figuring pletion allowance (before applying any limits) for pletion allowance. An electing large partner-
the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. They the following year. ship, rather than each partner, generally must
share the depletable quantity. Under this rule, a figure the depletion allowance. The partnership
controlled group of corporations is defined in figures the depletion allowance without takingNote. For tax years beginning after 2009section 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, into account the 65-percent-of-taxable-incomeand before 2012, the 100% taxable income limitexcept that the stock ownership requirement in limit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan-does not apply to percentage depletion on mar-that definition is ªmore than 50%º rather than ªat tity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner's inter-ginal production of oil and natural gas. For infor-least 80%.º est in the partnership is not affected by themation on marginal production, see section
depletion allowance.613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code.Gross income from the property. For pur- An electing large partnership is one that
poses of percentage depletion, gross income meets both the following requirements.
from the property (in the case of oil and gas Partnerships and S Corporations • The partnership had 100 or more partnerswells) is the amount you receive from the sale of
in the preceding year.the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well. Generally, each partner or shareholder, and not
If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property, the partnership or S corporation, figures the de- • The partnership chooses to be an electing
but manufacture or convert it into a refined prod- pletion allowance separately. (However, see large partnership.
uct before sale or transport it before sale, the Electing large partnerships must figure deple-
gross income from the property is the represen- tion allowance,  later.) Each partner or share- Disqualified persons. An electing large
tative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil or holder must decide whether to use cost or partnership does not figure the depletion allow-
gas, before conversion or transportation. percentage depletion. If a partner or shareholder ance of its partners that are disqualified per-
uses percentage depletion, he or she must ap-If you sold gas after you removed it from the sons. Disqualified persons must figure it
ply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his orpremises for a price that is lower than the RMFP, themselves, as explained earlier.
her taxable income from all sources.determine gross income from the property for All the following are disqualified persons.
Page 36 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 37 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Refiners who cannot claim percentage de- requirements, the additional authorized trans-Clay and shale used or sold forpletion (discussed under Independent Pro- portation is considered mining and included inuse in making sewer pipe or bricksducers and Royalty Owners, earlier). the computation of gross income from mining.or used or sold for use as sintered
or burned lightweight aggregates 71/2%• Retailers who cannot claim percentage If you wish to include transportation of
depletion (discussed under Independent more than 50 miles in the computationClay used or sold for use in
Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier). of gross income from mining, file anmaking drainage and roofing tile,
application in duplicate with the IRS. Include onflower pots, and kindred products,• Any partner whose average daily produc- the application the facts concerning the physicaland gravel, sand, and stone (othertion of domestic crude oil and natural gas than stone used or sold for use by and other requirements which prevented theis more than 500 barrels during the tax a mine owner or operator as construction and operation of the plant within 50year in which the partnership tax year dimension or ornamental stone) 5% miles of the point of extraction. Send this appli-ends. Average daily production is dis- cation to:You can find a complete list of minerals andcussed earlier. Internal Revenue Servicetheir percentage depletion rates in section Associate Chief Counsel613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. Passthroughs and Special IndustriesNatural Gas Wells
Corporate deduction for iron ore and coal. CC:PSI:FO
You can use percentage depletion for a well that The percentage depletion deduction of a corpo- 1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300
produces natural gas either sold under a fixed ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) is Washington, DC 20224
contract or produced from geopressured brine. reduced by 20% of:
Disposal of coal or iron ore. You cannot take• The percentage depletion deduction forNatural gas sold under a fixed contract. a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite)the tax year (figured without regard to thisNatural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifies or iron ore mined in the United States if both thereduction), minusfor a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This is following apply.• The adjusted basis of the property at thedomestic natural gas sold by the producer under
• You disposed of it after holding it for moreclose of the tax year (figured without thea contract that does not provide for a price in-
than 1 year.depletion deduction for the tax year).crease to reflect any increase in the seller's tax
liability because of the repeal of percentage de- • You disposed of it under a contract under
pletion for gas. The contract must have been in which you retain an economic interest inGross income from the property. For prop-effect from February 1, 1975, until the date of the coal or iron ore.erty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil orsale of the gas. Price increases after February 1, gas well, gross income from the property means Treat any gain on the disposition as a capital1975, are presumed to take the increase in tax the gross income from mining. Mining includes gain.liability into account unless demonstrated other- all the following.wise by clear and convincing evidence. Disposal to related person. This rule does• Extracting ores or minerals from the not apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore toground.Natural gas from geopressured brine. Qual- one of the following persons.
ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli- • Applying certain treatment processes. • A related person (as listed in chapter 2 ofgible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%.
Publication 544).• Transporting ores or minerals (generally,This is natural gas that is both the following.
not more than 50 miles) from the point of • A person owned or controlled by the same• Produced from a well you began to drill extraction to the plants or mills in which interests that own or control you.after September 1978 and before 1984. the treatment processes are applied.
• Determined in accordance with section Geothermal deposits. Geothermal depositsExcise tax. Gross income from mining in-503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978 located in the United States or its possessionscludes the separately stated excise tax receivedto be produced from geopressured brine. qualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. Aby a mine operator from the sale of coal to
geothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir ofcompensate the operator for the excise tax the
natural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquidMines and mine operator must pay to finance black lung
or vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, abenefits.Geothermal Deposits geothermal deposit is not considered a gas well.Extraction. Extracting ores or minerals Figure gross income from the property for aCertain mines, wells, and other natural deposits, from the ground includes extraction by mine geothermal steam well in the same way as for oilincluding geothermal deposits, qualify for per- owners or operators of ores or minerals from the and gas wells. See Gross income from the prop-centage depletion. waste or residue of prior mining. This does not erty earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells.  Percent-apply to extraction from waste or residue of prior age depletion on a geothermal deposit cannotMines and other natural deposits. For a nat- mining by the purchaser of the waste or residue be more than 50% of your taxable income fromural deposit, the percentage of your gross in- or the purchaser of the rights to extract ores or the property.come from the property that you can deduct as minerals from the waste or residue.depletion depends on the type of deposit.
Treatment processes. The processes in- Lessor's Gross IncomeThe following is a list of the percentage de-
cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineralpletion rates for the more common minerals. 
A lessor's gross income from the property thatmined. To qualify as mining, the treatment
qualifies for percentage depletion usually is theprocesses must be applied by the mine owner orDEPOSITS RATE
total of the royalties received from the lease.operator. For a listing of treatment processes
However, for oil, gas, or geothermal property,Sulphur, uranium, and, if from considered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) of
deposits in the United States, gross income does not include lease bonuses,the Internal Revenue Code and the related regu-
asbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickel advanced royalties, or other amounts payablelations.
ore, and mica ............ . 22% without regard to production from the property.Transportation of more than 50 miles. If
Gold, silver, copper, iron ore, and the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be Bonuses and advanced royalties. Bonusescertain oil shale, if from deposits in transported more than 50 miles to plants or mills and advanced royalties are payments a lesseethe United States .......... . 15% to be treated because of physical and other makes before production to a lessor for the grant
Borax, granite, limestone, marble, of rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil tomollusk shells, potash, slate, be extracted from leased property. If you are thesoapstone, and carbon dioxide lessor, your income from bonuses and ad-produced from a well ....... . 14% vanced royalties received is subject to an allow-
Coal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10% ance for depletion.
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 37

Page 38 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figuring cost depletion. To figure cost de- The term ªtimber propertyº means your eco- IRS's consent. The prior election (and revoca-
nomic interest in standing timber in each tract orpletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted basis tion) is disregarded for purposes of making a
block representing a separate timber account.in the property by a fraction, the numerator of subsequent election. See Form T (Timber), For-
which is the bonus and the denominator of which est Activities Schedule, for more information.Depletion unit. You figure your depletionis the total bonus and royalties expected to be unit each year by taking the following steps.received. To figure cost depletion on advanced Form T. Complete and attach Form T (Timber)royalties, use the computation explained earlier 1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis of to your income tax return if you claim a deduc-under Cost Depletion, treating the number of the timber on hand at the beginning of the tion for timber depletion, choose to treat theunits for which the advanced royalty is received year. Adjusted basis is defined under Cost
cutting of timber as a sale or exchange, or makeas the number of units sold. Depletion in the discussion on Mineral
an outright sale of timber.Property.Figuring percentage depletion. In the
case of mines, wells, and other natural deposits 2. Add to the amount determined in (1) the
other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you cost of any timber units acquired during
the year and any additions to capital.may use the percentage rates discussed earlier
under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo- 3. Figure the number of timber units to takenus or advanced royalty payments are generally into account by adding the number of tim-part of the gross income from the property to ber units acquired during the year to the 10.which the rates are applied in making the calcu- number of timber units on hand in the ac-lation. However, in the case of independent pro- count at the beginning of the year and thenducers and royalty owners of oil and gas adding (or subtracting) any correction toproperty, bonuses and advance royalty pay- the estimate of the number of timber units Businessments are not a part of gross income. remaining in the account.
Terminating the lease. If you receive a bo- 4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).nus on a lease that expires, terminates, or is Bad DebtsThis is your depletion unit.abandoned before you derive any income from
the extraction of mineral, include in income for
Example. You bought a timber tract forthe year of expiration, termination, or abandon-
$160,000 and the land was worth as much as Introductionment, the depletion deduction you took. Also
the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000.increase your adjusted basis in the property to If someone owes you money that you are notBased on an estimated one million board feetrestore the depletion deduction you previously going to be able to collect, you have a bad debt.(1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure yoursubtracted. There are two kinds of bad debts Ðbusinessdepletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷For advanced royalties, include in income for and nonbusiness. This chapter discusses only1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple-the year of lease termination, the depletion business bad debts.tion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF ×claimed on minerals for which the advanced $80). Generally, a business bad debt is one thatroyalties were paid if the minerals were not pro-
comes from operating your trade or business.duced before termination. Increase your ad- When to claim depletion. Claim your deple-
You can deduct business bad debts on yourjusted basis in the property by the amount you tion allowance as a deduction in the year of sale
include in income. business income tax return.or other disposition of the products cut from the
timber, unless you choose to treat the cutting of All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad
timber as a sale or exchange (explained below).Delay rentals. These are payments for defer- debts and are deductible only as short-term cap-Include allowable depletion for timber productsring development of the property. Since delay ital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For morenot sold during the tax year the timber is cut as arentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in- information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub-cost item in the closing inventory of timber prod-come that is not subject to depletion. These lication 550.ucts for the year. The inventory is your basis forrentals can be avoided by either abandoning the
determining gain or loss in the tax year you selllease, beginning development operations, or Topicsthe timber products.obtaining production.
This chapter discusses:
Example. Assume the same facts as in the
previous example except that you sold only half • Definition of business bad debt
of the timber products in the cutting year. YouTimber • When a debt becomes worthlesswould deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletion
that year. You would add the remaining $20,000 • How to claim a business bad debtYou can figure timber depletion only by the cost depletion to your closing inventory of timbermethod. Percentage depletion does not apply to • Recovery of a bad debtproducts.timber. Base your depletion on your cost or other
Electing to treat the cutting of timber as abasis in the timber. Your cost does not include Useful Itemssale or exchange. You can elect, under cer-the cost of land or any amounts recoverable
tain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timber You may want to see:through depreciation.
held for more than 1 year as a sale or exchange.Depletion takes place when you cut standing
You must make the election on your income tax Publicationtimber. You can figure your depletion deduction
return for the tax year to which it applies. If youwhen the quantity of cut timber is first accurately ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomemake this election, subtract the adjusted basismeasured in the process of exploitation.
for depletion from the fair market value of the ❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
timber on the first day of the tax year in which Individuals, Estates, and TrustsFiguring cost depletion. To figure your cost you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the cutting.depletion allowance, you multiply the number of ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofYou generally report the gain as long-term capi-timber units cut by your depletion unit. Assetstal gain. The fair market value then becomes
Timber units. When you acquire timber your basis for figuring your ordinary gain or loss ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesproperty, you must make an estimate of the on the sale or other disposition of the products
❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appealquantity of marketable timber that exists on the cut from the timber. For more information, see
Rights, and Claims for Refundproperty. You measure the timber using board Timber in chapter 2 of Publication 544, Sales
feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you later and Other Dispositions of Assets.
See chapter 12 for information about gettingdetermine that you have more or less units of You may revoke an election to treat the cut-
timber, you must adjust the original estimate. ting of timber as a sale or exchange without publications and forms.
Page 38 Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts

Page 39 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as debts sold by a business. The executor of the Example. Jane Zayne owns the Zayne
decedent's estate treats any loss from the debts Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of aDefinition of Business
as a business bad debt if the debts were closely $20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-
related to the decedent's trade or business let that is not a ªrelated person.º Elegant Fash-Bad Debt
when they became worthless. Otherwise, a loss ions is one of Zayne's largest clients. Elegant
from these debts becomes a nonbusiness bad Fashions later defaulted on the loan. As a result,A business bad debt is a loss from the worth-
debt for the decedent's estate. Ms. Zayne paid the remaining balance of thelessness of a debt that was either:
loan in full to the bank.Liquidation. If you liquidate your business• Created or acquired in your trade or busi- She can claim a business bad debt deduc-and some of your accounts receivable becomeness, or tion only for the amount she paid, since herworthless, they become business bad debts. guarantee was made in the course of her trade• Closely related to your trade or business
or business for a good faith business purpose.when it became partly or totally worthless. Types of Business Bad She was motivated by the desire to retain one of
her better clients and keep a sales outlet.DebtsA debt is closely related to your trade or busi-
ness if your primary motive for incurring the debt Deductible in the year paid. If you make aThe following are situations that may result in ais business related. Bad debts of a corporation payment on a loan you guaranteed, you canbusiness bad debt.(other than an S corporation) are always busi- deduct it in the year paid, unless you have rightsness bad debts. Loans to clients and suppliers. If you loan against the borrower.
money to a client, supplier, employee, or distrib-Credit sales. Business bad debts are mainly Rights against a borrower. When youutor for a business reason and subsequently,the result of credit sales to customers. Goods make payment on a loan you guaranteed, youafter making attempts to collect, the loan receiv-that have been sold, but not yet paid for, and may have the right to take the place of theable becomes worthless, you have a businessservices that have been performed, but not yet lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you havebad debt.paid for, are recorded in your books as either this right, or some other right to demand pay-
accounts receivable or notes receivable. After a ment from the borrower, you cannot claim a badDebts of political parties. If a political party
reasonable period of time, if you have tried to debt deduction until these rights become partly(or other organization that accepts contributions
collect the amount due, but are unable to do so, or totally worthless.or spends money to influence elections) owes
the uncollectible part becomes a business bad you money and the debt becomes worthless,
Joint debtor.  If two or more debtors jointlydebt. you can claim a bad debt deduction only if you
owe you money, your inability to collect from one Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair use an accrual method of accounting and meet
does not enable you to deduct a proportionatemarket value (FMV) when received are deducti- all the following tests.
amount as a bad debt.ble only at that value, even though the FMV may
1. The debt arose from the sale of goods orbe less than the face value. If you purchased an
Sale of mortgaged property. If mortgaged orservices in the ordinary course of youraccount receivable for less than its face value,
pledged property is sold for less than the debt,trade or business.and the receivable subsequently becomes
the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is aworthless, the most you are allowed to deduct is 2. More than 30% of your receivables ac- bad debt.the amount you paid to acquire it. crued in the year of the sale were from
sales to political parties.You can claim a bad debt deduction
only if the amount owed to you was 3. You made substantial and continuing ef-
previously included in gross income.
CAUTION
! forts to collect on the debt. When a Debt BecomesThis applies to amounts owed to you from all
sources of taxable income, including sales, WorthlessLoan or capital contribution. You cannotservices, rents, and interest. claim a bad debt deduction for a loan you made
You do not have to wait until a debt is due toto a corporation if, based on the facts and cir-Accrual method. If you use the accrual determine whether it is worthless. A debt be-cumstances, the loan is actually a contribution tomethod of accounting, generally, you report in- comes worthless when there is no longer anycapital.come as you earn it. You can only claim a bad chance the amount owed will be paid.debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable if Debts of an insolvent partner. If your busi- It is not necessary to go to court if you canyou have previously included the uncollectible ness partnership breaks up and one of your show that a judgment from the court would beamount in income. former partners becomes insolvent, you may uncollectible. You must only show that you haveIf you qualify, you can use the nonac- have to pay more than your pro rata share. If you taken reasonable steps to collect the debt.crual-experience method of accounting dis- pay any part of the insolvent partner's share of Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-cussed later. Under this method, you do not the debts, you can claim a bad debt deduction dence of the worthlessness of at least a part ofhave to accrue income that, based on your ex- for the amount you paid that is attributable to the an unsecured and unpreferred debt.perience, you do not expect to collect. insolvent partner's share.
Property received for debt. If you receiveCash method. If you use the cash method Business loan guarantee. If you guarantee a property in partial settlement of a debt, reduceof accounting, generally, you report income debt that subsequently becomes worthless, the the debt by the FMV of the property received.when you receive payment. You cannot claim a debt can qualify as a business bad debt if all the You can deduct the remaining debt as a badbad debt deduction for amounts owed to you following requirements are met. debt if and when it becomes worthless.because you never included those amounts in
If you later sell the property, any gain on the• You made the guarantee in the course ofincome. For example, a cash basis architect
sale is due to the appreciation of the property. Ityour trade or business.cannot claim a bad debt deduction if a client fails
is not a recovery of a bad debt. For informationto pay the bill because the architect's fee was • You have a legal duty to pay the debt. on the sale of an asset, see Publication 544.never included in income.
• You made the guarantee before the debt
Debts from a former business. If you sell became worthless. You meet this require-
your business but retain its receivables, these ment if you reasonably expected you
debts are business debts because they arose would not have to pay the debt without full How To Claim a
out of your trade or business. If any of these reimbursement from the issuer.
receivables subsequently become worthless, Business Bad Debt• You receive reasonable consideration forthe loss is still a business bad debt. making the guarantee. You meet this re- There are two methods to claim a business badDebt acquired from a decedent. The char- quirement if you made the guarantee in debt.acter of a loss from debts of a business acquired accord with normal business practice or
from a decedent is determined in the same way for a good faith business purpose. • The specific charge-off method.
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts Page 39

Page 40 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The nonaccrual-experience method. You may have longer to file the claim if you were Change in accounting method. See Form
3115, Application for Change in Accountingunable to manage your financial affairs due to aGenerally, you must use the specific charge-off Method, and the Instructions for Form 3115 forphysical or mental impairment. Such an impair-method. However, you may use the nonac- information on obtaining consent to change to ament requires proof of existence.crual-experience method if you meet the re- nonaccrual-experience method (other than onequirements discussed later under For details and more information about filing a of the safe harbor methods) or to change fromNonaccrual-Experience Method. claim, see Publication 556. Use one of the fol- one method to another.lowing forms to file a claim. For more informa-
tion, see the instructions for the applicable form.Specific Charge-Off Method
If you use the specific charge-off method, you Table 10-1. Forms Used To File a Recovery of a Badcan deduct specific business bad debts that Claim
become either partly or totally worthless during Debtthe tax year. IF you filed as THEN file...
a... If you claim a deduction for a bad debt on yourPartly worthless debts. You can deduct spe- income tax return and later recover (collect) allSole proprietor or  Form 1040Xcific bad debts that become partly uncollectible farmer or part of it, you may have to include all or part ofduring the tax year. Your tax deduction is limited the recovery in gross income. The amount youto the amount you charge off on your books Corporation  Form 1120X include is limited to the amount you actuallyduring the year. You do not have to charge off deducted. However, you can exclude theS corporation  Form 1120Sand deduct your partly worthless debts annually. amount deducted that did not reduce your tax.(check box H(4))You can delay the charge off until a later year. Report the recovery as ªOther incomeº on theHowever, you cannot deduct any part of a debt Partnership  Form 1065 appropriate business form or schedule.after the year it becomes totally worthless. (check box G(5)) See  Recoveries in Publication 525 for more
Significantly modified debt.  An exception information.
to the charge-off rule exists for debt which has Net operating loss (NOL) carryover. If abeen significantly modified and on which the Nonaccrual-Experience bad debt deduction increases an NOL carryoverholder recognized gain. For more information, Method that has not expired before the beginning of thesee Regulations section 1.166-3(a)(3). tax year in which the recovery takes place, youIf you use an accrual method of accounting andDeduction disallowed. Generally, you can treat the deduction as having reduced your tax.
qualify under the rules explained in this section,claim a partial bad debt deduction only in the A bad debt deduction that contributes to a NOL
you can use the nonaccrual-experience methodyear you make the charge-off on your books. If, helps lower taxes in the year to which you carry
for bad debts. Under this method, you do notunder audit, the IRS does not allow your deduc- the NOL. See Publication 536 for more informa-
accrue service related income you expect to betion and the debt becomes partly worthless in a tion about NOLs.
uncollectible.later tax year, you can deduct the amount you
charged off in that year plus the disallowed Generally, you can use the nonac-
amount charged off in the earlier year. The crual-experience method for accounts receiva-
charge-off in the earlier year, unless reversed on ble for services you performed only if:
your books, fulfills the charge-off requirement for • The services are provided in the fields ofthe later year. accounting, actuarial science, architecture, 11.consulting, engineering, health, law, or theTotally worthless debts. If a debt becomes performing arts, ortotally worthless in the current tax year, you can
deduct the entire amount, less any amount de- • You meet the $5 million gross receipts test
Other Expensesducted in an earlier tax year when the debt was for all prior years.
only partly worthless.
You do not have to make an actual Service related income. You can use thecharge-off on your books to claim a bad debt nonaccrual-experience method only for What's Newdeduction for a totally worthless debt. However, amounts earned by performing services. Youyou may want to do so. If you do not and the IRS cannot use this method for amounts owed to you Standard mileage rate. The standard mile-later rules the debt is only partly worthless, you from activities such as lending money, selling age rate for the cost of operating your car, van,will not be allowed a deduction for the debt in goods, or acquiring receivables or other rights to pickup, or panel truck in 2010 is 50 cents a milethat tax year. A deduction of a partly worthless receive payment. for all business miles. For more information, seebad debt is limited to the amount actually
Car and truck expenses , under Miscellaneouscharged off. Gross receipts test.  You meet the gross re- Expenses.
ceipts test if your average annual gross receiptsFiling a claim for refund. If you did not deduct for any prior 3-tax-year period does not exceeda bad debt on your original return for the year it $5,000,000.became worthless, you can file a claim for a
Introductioncredit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth-
Interest or penalty charged. Generally, youless, you must file the claim by the later of the This chapter covers business expenses thatcannot use the nonaccrual-experience methodfollowing dates. may not have been explained to you, as a busi-for amounts due on which you charge interest or ness owner, in previous chapters of this publica-• 7 years from the date your original return a late payment penalty. However, do not treat a tion.was due (not including extensions). discount offered for early payment as the charg-
ing of interest or a penalty if both the following• 2 years from the date you paid the tax. Topicsapply. This chapter discusses:If the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt, • You otherwise accrue the full amount dueyou must file the claim by the later of the follow- as gross income at the time you provide • Travel, meals, and entertainmenting dates. the services. • Bribes and kickbacks• 3 years from the date you filed your origi- • You treat the discount allowed for earlynal return. • Charitable contributionspayment as an adjustment to gross in-
come in the year of payment.• 2 years from the date you paid the tax. • Education expenses
Page 40 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 41 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Lobbying expenses Table 11-1. Reporting Reimbursements
• Penalties and fines IF the type of reimbursement (or other
expense allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-2• Repayments (claim of right)
• Other miscellaneous expenses An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount.
Adequate accounting made and excessUseful Items
returnedYou may want to see:
Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1.Publication Adequate accounting and return of excess
both required but excess not returned❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits Per diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount.
federal rate:❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Adequate accounting made and excessExpenses returned
❏ 526 Charitable Contributions Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount as wages in box 1. The
❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12Ðit is not reported in box 1.❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of both required but excess not returnedAssets
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the The excess amount as wages in box 1. The❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12Ðit is not reported in box 1.❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates
rate only and excess not returned
See chapter 12 for information about getting A nonaccountable plan with:publications and forms.
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1.
excess, or both, not required by plan
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.
Reimbursement of
Travel, Meals, and reimburse these expenses under an accounta- • You make the advance within a reasona-
ble period of time.ble plan, then you can deduct the amount allow-Entertainment
able to the extent of the tax law as travel, meal,
If any expenses reimbursed under this ar-and entertainment expenses on your tax return.The following discussion explains how to handle rangement are not substantiated, or an excessany reimbursements or allowances you may  If you reimburse these expenses under a reimbursement is not returned within a reasona-provide for travel, meals, and entertainment ex- nonaccountable plan, then you must report the ble period of time by an employee, you are notpenses when incurred by your employees. If you reimbursements as wages on Form W-2, Wage allowed to deduct these expenses as reim-are self-employed and report your income and and Tax Statement, and deduct them as wages bursed under an accountable plan. Instead,expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040), on the appropriate line of your tax return. If you treat the reimbursed expenses as paid under asee Publication 463. make a single payment to your employees and it nonaccountable plan, discussed later.To be deductible for tax purposes, expenses includes both wages and an expense reim-incurred for travel, meals, and entertainment Adequate accounting. Your employees mustbursement, you must specify the amount attribu-must be ordinary and necessary expenses in- adequately account to you for their travel,table to reimbursement and report it accordingly.curred while carrying on your trade or business. meals, and entertainment expenses. They mustSee Table 11-1, Reporting Reimbursements.Generally, you also must show that entertain- give you documentary evidence of their travel,
ment expenses (including meals) are directly mileage, and other employee business ex-
related to, or associated with, the conduct of penses. This evidence should include itemsAccountable Plansyour trade or business. For more information on such as receipts, along with either a statement
travel, meals, and entertainment, including de- of expenses, an account book, a day-planner, orAn accountable plan requires your employees toductibility, see Publication 463. similar record in which the employee enteredmeet all of the following requirements. They each expense at or near the time the expensemust: was incurred.Reimbursements
1. Have paid or incurred deductible expenses Excess reimbursement or allowance. AnA ªreimbursement or allowance arrangementº while performing services as your employ- excess reimbursement or allowance is anyprovides for payment of advances, reimburse- ees, amount you pay to an employee that is morements, and charges for travel, meals, and enter-
than the business-related expenses for which2. Adequately account to you for these ex-tainment expenses incurred by your employees
the employee adequately accounted. The em-during the ordinary course of business. Upon penses within a reasonable period of time,
ployee must return any excess reimbursementsatisfying your established substantiation re- and or other expense allowance to you within a rea-quirements, you can deduct the allowable 3. Return any excess reimbursement or al- sonable period of time.amount on your tax return. Because of differ- lowance within a reasonable period ofences between accounting methods and tax Reasonable period of time. A reasonabletime.law, these amounts may not be the same. For period of time depends on the facts and circum-example, you can deduct 100% of the cost of An arrangement under which you advance stances. Generally, actions that take placemeals on your business books and records. money to employees is treated as meeting (3) within the times specified in the following list willHowever, for tax purposes, only 50% of these be treated as taking place within a reasonableabove only if the following requirements are alsocosts are allowed by law as a tax deduction. period of time.met.A reimbursement or allowance arrangement
• The advance is reasonably calculated not(including per diem allowances, discussed later) 1. You give an advance within 30 days of the
to exceed the amount of anticipated ex-depends on whether you have: (1) an accounta- time the employee has incurred the ex-
penses.ble plan or (2) a nonaccountable plan. If you pense.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 41

Page 42 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Your employees adequately account for combination of payments covering fixed and va- allowance compares to the federal rate. See
their expenses within 60 days after the ex- riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to Table 11-1.
penses were paid or incurred. cover your employees' variable operating costs Allowance less than or equal to the federal(such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover rate. If your allowance for the employee is less3. Your employees return any excess reim- your employees' fixed costs (such as deprecia- than or equal to the appropriate federal rate, thatbursement within 120 days after the ex- tion, insurance, etc.). For information on using a allowance is not included as part of the em-penses were paid or incurred. FAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedure ployee's pay in box 1 of the employee's Form4. You give a periodic statement (at least 2010-39 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2010-42. W-2. Deduct the allowance as travel expensesquarterly) to your employees that asks You can read Revenue Procedure 2010-39 at (including meals that may be subject to the 50%them to either return or adequately ac- www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb10-42.pdf. limit, discussed later). See How to deduct undercount for outstanding advances and they Accountable Plans, earlier.Per diem allowance. If your employee actu-comply within 120 days of the date of the
ally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-statement. Allowance more than the federal rate. If
cussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursed your employee's allowance is more than theusing the per diem allowance, how you report appropriate federal rate, you must report theHow to deduct. You can claim a deduction for and deduct the allowance depends on whether allowance as two separate items.travel, meals, and entertainment expenses if the allowance is for lodging and meal expenses Include the allowance amount up to the fed-you reimburse your employees for these ex- or for meal expenses only and whether the al- eral rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee'spenses under an accountable plan. Generally, lowance is more than the federal rate. Form W-2. Deduct it as travel expenses (asthe amount you can deduct for meals and enter-
Regular federal per diem rate. The regular explained above). This part of the allowance istainment, is subject to a 50% limit, discussed
federal per diem rate is the highest amount the treated as reimbursed under an accountablelater. If you are a sole proprietor, or are filing as a
federal government will pay to its employees plan.single member limited liability company, deduct
while away from home on travel. It has twothe travel reimbursement on line 24a and the Include the amount that is more than the
components:deductible part of the meals and entertainment federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if they
reimbursement on line 24b, Schedule C (Form apply) of the employee's Form W-2. Deduct it as1. Lodging expense, and1040) or line 2, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). wages subject to income tax withholding, social
2. Meal and incidental expense (M & IE). security, Medicare, and federal unemploymentIf you are filing an income tax return for a
taxes. This part of the allowance is treated ascorporation, the reimbursement should be in- The rates are different for different locations. reimbursed under a nonaccountable plan as ex-cluded with the amount claimed on the Other Publication 1542 lists the rates in the continental plained later under Nonaccountable Plans.deductions line of Form 1120, U.S. Corporation United States.Income Tax Return. If you are filing any other
Standard meal allowance. The federal ratebusiness income tax return, such as a partner-
for meal and incidental expenses (M & IE) is the Meals and Entertainmentship or S corporation return, deduct the reim-
standard meal allowance. You can pay only anbursement on the appropriate line of the return Under an accountable plan, you can generallyM & IE allowance to employees who travel awayas provided in the instructions for that return. deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductiblefrom home if:
business-related meal and entertainment ex-
• You pay the employee for actual expenses penses you reimburse your employees. The de-Per Diem and Car Allowances for lodging based on receipts submitted to duction limit applies even if you reimburse themyou, for 100% of the expenses.You can reimburse your employees under an
accountable plan based on travel days, miles, or • You provide for the lodging,
Application of the 50% limit. The 50% de-some other fixed allowance. In these cases, • You pay for the actual expense of the duction limit applies to reimbursements youyour employee is considered to have accounted lodging directly to the provider, make to your employees for expenses they incurto you for the amount of the expense that does
for meals while traveling away from home on• You do not have reasonable belief thatnot exceed the rates established by the federal
lodging expenses were incurred by the business and for entertaining business custom-government. Your employee must actually sub-
employee, orstantiate to you the other elements of the ex- ers at your place of business, a restaurant, or
pense, such as time, place, and business another location. It applies to expenses incurred• The allowance is computed on a basispurpose. at a business convention or reception, businesssimilar to that used in computing the em- meeting, or business luncheon at a club. Theployee's wages (that is, number of hoursFederal rate. The federal rate can be figured deduction limit may also apply to meals youworked or miles traveled).using any one of the following methods. furnish on your premises to your employees.
Internet access.  Per diem rates are avail- Related expenses. Taxes and tips relating1. For per diem amounts:
able on the Internet. You can access per diem to a meal or entertainment activity you reim-
a. The regular federal per diem rate. rates at www.gsa.gov. burse to your employee under an accountable
plan are included in the amount subject to theb. The standard meal allowance. High-low method. This is a simplified 50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex-method of computing the federal per diem ratec. The high-low rate. penses, such as cover charges for admission tofor lodging and meal expenses for traveling a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinnerwithin the continental United States. It elimi-2. For car expenses: or cocktail party, or the amount you pay fornates the need to keep a current list of the per parking at a sports arena, are all subject to thediem rate in effect for each city in the continentala. The standard mileage rate. 50% limit. However, the cost of transportation toUnited States. and from an otherwise allowable business mealb. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). Under the high-low method, the per diem or a business-related entertainment activity isamount for travel during 2010 is $233 ($65 for M not subject to the 50% limit.& IE) for certain high-cost locations. All otherCar allowance. Your employee is considered areas have a per diem amount of $160 ($52 forto have accounted to you for car expenses that Amount subject to 50% limit. If you provideM & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for thedo not exceed the standard mileage rate. For your employees with a per diem allowance only$233 per diem amount under the high-low2010, the standard mileage rate for each busi- for meal and incidental expenses, the amountmethod are listed in Publication 1542.ness mile is 50 cents per mile for all business treated as an expense for food and beverages is
miles. the lesser of the following.Reporting per diem and car allowances.
You can choose to reimburse your employ- The following discussion explains how to report • The per diem allowance.ees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al- per diem and car allowances. The manner in
• The federal rate for M & IE.lowance. This is an allowance that includes a which you report them depends on how the
Page 42 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 43 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you provide your employees with a per diem deduct the reimbursement as compensation or reasonably expect to gain in the future. For ex-
allowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci- wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil- ample, the cost of advertising that encourages
dental expenses, you must treat an amount ity tests for employees' pay in chapter 2. Deduct people to contribute to the Red Cross, to buy
equal to the federal M & IE rate for the area of the allowable amount as compensation or U.S. Savings Bonds, or to participate in similar
travel as an expense for food and beverages. If wages on the appropriate line of your income tax causes is usually deductible.
the per diem allowance you provide is less than return, as provided in its instructions.
the federal per diem rate for the area of travel, Anticipated liabilities. Anticipated liabilitiesGenerally, amounts paid for meals, enter-
you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance as or reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de-tainment, and amusement provided to individu-
the amount for food and beverages. ductible. For example, assume you sold 1-yearals who are not your employees are not subject
TV service contracts this year totaling $50,000.to the 50% limit. Such activities must be directlyMeal expenses when subject to ªhours of From experience, you know you will have ex-related to the active conduct of your trade orserviceº limits. You can deduct 80% of the penses of about $15,000 in the coming year forbusiness. Examples include:reimbursed meals your employees consume these contracts. You cannot deduct any of thewhile away from their tax home on business • Amounts paid for meals, goods, services, $15,000 this year by charging expenses to aduring, or incident to, any period subject to the or the use of a facility. You are allowed a reserve or liability account. You can deduct yourDepartment of Transportation's ªhours of serv- deduction only to the extent it is included expenses only when you actually pay or accrueiceº limits. in the gross income of the recipient as them, depending on your accounting method.See Publication 463 for a detailed discussion compensation for services or as a prize or
of individuals subject to the Department of award. Bribes and kickbacks. Engaging in the pay-Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminal•  Expenses that exceed $600 and are re-
matter. Such activity could result in criminalquired to be reported on an informationDe minimis (minimal) fringe benefit. The
prosecution. Any payments that appear to havereturn, for example, Form 1099-MISC.50% limit does not apply to an expense for food
been made, either directly or indirectly, to anSee the General Instructions for Certainor beverage that is excluded from the gross
official or employee of any government or anInformation Returns, for more informationincome of an employee because it is a de
agency or instrumentality of any government areabout reporting requirements.minimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15-B for
not deductible for tax purposes and are in viola-additional information on de minimis fringe ben- • The cost of providing meals, entertain- tion of the law.efits. ment, goods and services, or use of facili- Payments paid directly or indirectly to a per-ties you sell to the public. For example, ifCompany cafeteria or executive dining son in violation of any federal or state law (butyou operate a nightclub, your expense forroom. The cost of food and beverages you only if that state law is generally enforced, de-the entertainment you furnish to your cus-provide primarily to your employees on your fined below) that provides for a criminal penaltytomers, such as a floor show, is a busi-business premises is deductible. This includes or for the loss of a license or privilege to engageness expense that is fully deductible.the cost of maintaining the facilities for providing in a trade or business are also not allowed as athe food and beverages. These expenses are deduction for tax purposes.• The cost of providing meals, entertain-subject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as a ment, or recreational facilities to the gen- Meaning of ªgenerally enforced.º A statede minimis fringe benefit, discussed in Publica- eral public as a means of advertising or law is considered generally enforced unless it istion 15-B, or unless they are compensation to promoting goodwill in the community is never enforced or enforced only for infamousyour employees and you treat them as provided fully deductible. persons or persons whose violations are ex-under a nonaccountable plan.
traordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law is
Employee activities. The expense of provid- generally enforced unless proper reporting of a
ing recreational, social, or similar activities (in- violation of the law results in enforcement only
cluding the use of a facility) for your employees under unusual circumstances.Miscellaneousis deductible. The benefit must be primarily for Kickbacks. A kickback is a payment for re-your employees who are not highly compen- Expenses ferring a client, patient, or customer. The com-sated. mon kickback situation occurs when money orFor this purpose, a highly compensated em- In addition to travel, meal, and entertainment property is given to someone as payment forployee is an employee who meets either of the expenses, other miscellaneous expenses that influencing a third party to purchase from, usefollowing requirements. are deductible, subject to limitations, include: the services of, or otherwise deal with the per-
son who pays the kickback. In many cases, the1. Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi- • Amounts paid for the reasonable cost of person whose business is being sought or en-ness during the year or the preceding year. advertising that are directly related to your joyed by the person who pays the kickback is notAn employee is treated as owning any in- business activities. Generally, amounts aware of the payment.terest owned by his or her brother, sister, paid to influence legislation (i.e., lobbying)
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend- For example, the Yard Corporation is in theare not deductible for tax purposes. See
ants. business of repairing ships. It engages in theLobbying expenses, later.
practice of returning 10% of the repair bills as2. Received more than $110,000 in pay for • Amounts paid that are directly related to kickbacks to the captains and chief officers ofthe preceding year. You can choose to in- the conduct of business meetings of your the vessels it repairs. Although this practice isclude only employees who were also in the employees, partners, stockholders, considered an ordinary and necessary expensetop 20% of employees when ranked by agents, or directors. Some minor social of getting business, it is clearly a violation of apay for the preceding year. activities may be allowed, however, these state law that is generally enforced. These ex-expenses are subject to the 50% limit. For example, the expenses for food, bever- penditures are not deductible for tax purposes,
ages, and entertainment for a company-wide whether or not the owners of the shipyard are• Amounts paid that are directly related to
picnic are not subject to the 50% limit. subsequently prosecuted.and necessary for attending business
meetings or conventions of certain Form 1099-MISC. It does not mattertax-exempt organizations. These organi- whether any kickbacks paid during the tax yearNonaccountable Plans zations include business leagues, cham- are deductible on your income tax return in re-bers of commerce, real estates boards,A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement that gards to information reporting. See Formand trade and professional associations.does not meet the requirements for an account- 1099-MISC for more information.
able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid,
under a nonaccountable plan are reported as Advertising expenses. You can usually de- Car and truck expenses. The costs of operat-
wages on Form W-2. The payments are subject duct as a business expense the cost of institu- ing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your business
to income tax withholding, social security, Medi- tional or goodwill advertising to keep your name are deductible. For more information on how to
care, and federal unemployment taxes. You can before the public if it relates to business you figure your deduction, see Publication 463.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 43

Page 44 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Charitable contributions. Cash payments to of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola- you to be able to work (impairment-related ex-
an organization, charitable or otherwise, may be tions. You must include this compensation in penses) as a business expense, rather than as a
deductible as business expenses if the pay- your income. However, you may be able to take medical expense.
ments are not charitable contributions or gifts. If a special deduction. The deduction applies only You are disabled if you have either of the
the payments are charitable contributions or to amounts recovered for actual injury, not any following.
gifts, you cannot deduct them as business ex- additional amount. The deduction is the smaller • A physical or mental disability (for exam-penses. However, corporations (other than S of the following. ple, blindness or deafness) that function-corporations) can deduct charitable contribu- • The amount you received or accrued for ally limits your being employed.tions on their income tax returns, subject to damages in the tax year reduced by the • A physical or mental impairment that sub-limitations. See the Instructions for Form 1120 amount you paid or incurred in the year to stantially limits one or more of your majorfor more information. Sole proprietors, partners recover that amount. life activities.in a partnership, or shareholders in an S corpo-
• Your losses from the injury you have notration may be able to deduct charitable contribu-
The expense qualifies as a business expensededucted.tions made by their business on Schedule A
if all the following apply.(Form 1040).
Demolition expenses or losses. Amounts • Your work clearly requires the expense forExample. You paid $15 to a local church for paid or incurred to demolish a structure are not you to satisfactorily perform that work.a half-page ad in a program for a concert it is deductible. These amounts are added to thesponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en- • The goods or services purchased arebasis of the land where the demolished structurecourage readers to buy your products. Your pay- clearly not needed or used, other than in-was located. Any loss for the remaining un-ment is not a charitable contribution. However, cidentally, in your personal activities.depreciated basis of a demolished structureyou can deduct it as an advertising expense. would not be recognized until the property is • Their treatment is not specifically provided
disposed. for under other tax law provisions.Example. You made a $100,000 donation
to a committee organized by the local Chamber Education expenses. Ordinary and neces-of Commerce to bring a convention to your city, Example. You are blind. You must use asary expenses paid for the cost of the educationintended to increase business activity, including reader to do your work, both at and away fromand training of your employees are deductible.yours. Your payment is not a charitable contribu- your place of work. The reader's services areSee Education Expenses in chapter 2.tion. However, you can deduct it as a business only for your work. You can deduct your ex-You can also deduct the cost of your ownexpense. penses for the reader as a business expense.education (including certain related travel) re-See Publication 526 for a discussion of lated to your trade or business. You must be Internet-related expenses. Generally, youdonated inventory, including capital gain prop- able to show the education maintains or im- can deduct internet-related expenses includingerty. proves skills required in your trade or business, domain registrations fees and webmaster con-or that it is required by law or regulations, for sulting costs. If you are starting a business youClub dues and membership fees. Generally, keeping your license to practice, status, or job. may have to amortize these expenses asamounts paid or incurred for membership in any For example, an attorney can deduct the cost of start-up costs. For more information about am-club organized for business, pleasure, recrea- attending Continuing Legal Education (CLE) ortizing start-up and organizational costs, seetion, or any other social purpose are not deducti- classes that are required by the state bar associ- chapter 8.ble. Clubs organized for business, pleasure, ation to maintain his or her license to practice
recreation, or other social purpose include, but law. Interview expense allowances. Reimburse-are not limited to country clubs, golf and athletic Education expenses you incur to meet the ments you make to job candidates for transpor-clubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline clubs, minimum requirements of your present trade or tation or other expenses related to interviews forand clubs operated to provide meals under cir- business, or those that qualify you for a new possible employment are not wages. You cancumstances generally considered to be condu- trade or business, are not deductible. This is true deduct the reimbursements as a business ex-cive to business discussions. even if the education maintains or improves pense. However, expenses for food, beverages,skills presently required in your business. ForException. The following organizations are and entertainment are subject to the 50% limitmore information on education expenses, seenot treated as clubs organized for business, discussed earlier under Meals and Entertain-Publication 970.pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose un- ment.
less one of the main purposes is to conduct
Franchise, trademark, trade name. If youentertainment activities for members or their Legal and professional fees. Fees chargedbuy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, youguests or to provide members or their guests by accountants and attorneys that are ordinarycan deduct the amount you pay or incur as awith access to entertainment facilities. and necessary expenses directly related to op-business expense only if your payments are part erating your business are deductible as busi-• Boards of trade. of a series of payments that are: ness expenses. However, usually legal fees you
• Business leagues. pay to acquire business assets are not deducti-1. Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi- ble. These costs are added to the basis of the• Chambers of commerce. tion of the item, property.
• Civic or public service organizations. 2. Payable at least annually for the entire Fees that include payments for work of a
term of the transfer agreement, and personal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam-• Professional organizations such as bar as- ages arising from a personal injury), are notsociations and medical associations. 3. Substantially equal in amount (or payable allowed as a business deduction on Schedule Cunder a fixed formula).• Real estate boards. or C-EZ. If the invoice includes both business
When determining the term of the transfer and personal charges, compute the business• Trade associations. agreement, include all renewal options and any portion as follows: multiply the total amount of
other period for which you and the transferrer the bill by a fraction, the numerator of which is
Credit card convenience fees. Credit card reasonably expect the agreement to be re- the amount attributable to business matters, the
companies charge a fee to businesses who ac- newed. denominator of which is the total amount paid.
cept their cards. This fee when paid or incurred A franchise includes an agreement that gives The result is the portion of the invoice attributa-
by the business can be deducted as a business one of the parties to the agreement the right to ble to business expenses. The portion attributa-
expense. distribute, sell, or provide goods, services, or ble to personal matters is the difference
facilities within a specified area. between the total amount and the business por-
Damages recovered. Special rules apply to tion (computed above).
compensation you receive for damages sus- Impairment-related expenses. If you are dis- Legal fees relating to personal tax advice
tained as a result of patent infringement, breach abled, you can deduct expenses necessary for may be deductible on Line 22, Schedule A
Page 44 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 45 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040), if you itemize deductions. How- 3. Any officer or employee of the White each day that completion is delayed beyond the
House Office of the Executive Office of theever, the deduction is subject to the 2% limita- completion date stipulated in the contract.
President and the two most senior leveltion on miscellaneous itemized deductions. See These additional costs are deductible business
officers of each of the other agencies inPublication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. expenses.
the Executive Office. On the other hand, penalties or fines paid toTax preparation fees. The cost of hiring a
any government agency or instrumentality be-4. Any individual who:tax professional, such as a C.P.A., to prepare
cause of a violation of any law are not deducti-that part of your tax return relating to your busi-
a. Is serving in a position in Level I of the ble. These fines or penalties include theness as a sole proprietor is deductible on Sched- Executive Schedule under section 5312 following amounts.ule C or Schedule C-EZ. Any remaining cost of title 5, United States Code,may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if • Paid because of a conviction for a crime oryou itemize deductions. b. Has been designated by the President after a plea of guilty or no contest in a
You can also claim a business deduction for as having Cabinet-level status, or criminal proceeding.amounts paid or incurred in resolving asserted c. Is an immediate deputy of an individual • Paid as a penalty imposed by federal,tax deficiencies for your business operated as a listed in item (a) or (b). state, or local law in a civil action, includ-sole proprietor.
ing certain additions to tax and additional
Licenses and regulatory fees. Licenses and amounts and assessable penalties im-Exceptions to denial of deduction. The
regulatory fees for your trade or business paid posed by the Internal Revenue Code.general denial of the deduction does not apply to
annually to state or local governments generally the following. • Paid in settlement of actual or possibleare deductible. Some licenses and fees may • Expenses of appearing before, or commu- liability for a fine or penalty, whether civilhave to be amortized. See chapter 8 for more nicating with, any local council or similar or criminal.information. governing body concerning its legislation • Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro-(local legislation) if the legislation is of di-Lobbying expenses. Generally, lobbying ex- ceeding that could result in a fine or pen-rect interest to you or to you and an organ-penses are not deductible. Lobbying expenses alty.ization of which you are a member. Aninclude amounts paid or incurred for any of the Indian tribal government is treated as afollowing activities. Examples of nondeductible penalties andlocal council or similar governing body. fines include the following.• Influencing legislation. • Any in-house expenses for influencing leg- • Fines for violating city housing codes.• Participating in or intervening in any politi- islation and communicating directly with a
cal campaign for, or against, any candi- covered executive branch official if those • Fines paid by truckers for violating state
date for public office. expenses for the tax year do not exceed maximum highway weight laws.
$2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).• Attempting to influence the general public, • Fines for violating air quality laws.
or segments of the public, about elections, • Expenses incurred by taxpayers engaged • Civil penalties for violating federal laws re-legislative matters, or referendums. in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-
garding mining safety standards and dis-fessional lobbyists) on behalf of another• Communicating directly with covered ex- charges into navigable waters.person (but does apply to payments by theecutive branch officials (defined later) in other person to the lobbyist for lobbyingany attempt to influence the official actions A fine or penalty does not include any of theactivities).or positions of those officials. following.
• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor- • Legal fees and related expenses to defendMoving machinery. Generally, the cost ofdinating any of the preceding activities. yourself in a prosecution or civil action formoving machinery from one city to another is a
a violation of the law imposing the fine ordeductible expense. So is the cost of movingYour expenses for influencing legislation and civil penalty.machinery from one plant to another, or fromcommunicating directly with a covered execu- one part of your plant to another. You can de- • Court costs or stenographic and printingtive branch official include a portion of your labor duct the cost of installing the machinery in the charges.costs and general and administrative costs of new location. However, you must capitalize theyour business. For information on making this • Compensatory damages paid to a govern-costs of installing or moving newly purchasedallocation, see section 1.162-28 of the regula- ment.machinery.tions.
You cannot claim a charitable or business Outplacement services. The costs of out- Political contributions. Contributions or giftsexpense deduction for amounts paid to an or- placement services you provide to your employ-
paid to political parties or candidates are notganization if both of the following apply. ees to help them find new employment, such as
deductible. In addition, expenses paid or in-career counseling, rÂesumÂe assistance, skills as-• The organization conducts lobbying activi- curred to take part in any political campaign of asessment, etc. are deductible.ties on matters of direct financial interest candidate for public office are not deductible.The costs of outplacement services mayto your business. cover more than one deduction category. For Indirect political contributions. You can-• A principal purpose of your contribution is example, deduct as a utilities expense the cost not deduct indirect political contributions andto avoid the rules discussed earlier that of telephone calls made under this service and costs of taking part in political activities as busi-prohibit a business deduction for lobbying deduct as rental expense the cost of renting ness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex-expenses. machinery and equipment for this service. penses include the following.For information on whether the value of out-
• Advertising in a convention program of aIf a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec- placement services is includable in your employ-
tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with a political party, or in any other publication ifees' income, see Publication 15-B.
notice on the part of dues that is allocable to any of the proceeds from the publication
Penalties and fines. Penalties paid for latenondeductible lobbying and political expenses, are for, or intended for, the use of a politi-
performance or nonperformance of a contractyou cannot deduct that part of the dues. cal party or candidate.are generally deductible. For instance, you own
Covered executive branch official. For • Admission to a dinner or program (includ-and operate a construction company. You have
purposes of this discussion, a covered executive ing, but not limited to, galas, dances, filmbeen contracted to construct a building by a
branch official is any of the following. presentations, parties, and sportingcertain date. Due to construction delays, the
events) if any of the proceeds from thebuilding is not completed and ready for occu-1. The President. function are for, or intended for, the use ofpancy on the date stipulated in the contract. You
2. The Vice President. a political party or candidate.are now required to pay an additional amount for
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 45

Page 46 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, Method 1. Figure your tax for 2010 claiming for the tax year in which it is a proper deduction
a deduction for the repaid amount. under your accounting method. For example, ifparade, concert, or similar event if identi-
you use the accrual method, you are entitled tofied with a political party or candidate. Method 2. Figure your tax for 2010 claiming the deduction or credit in the tax year in whicha credit for the prepaid amount. Follow these the obligation for the repayment accrues.steps.Repairs. The cost of repairing or improving
property used in your trade or business is either Subscriptions. Subscriptions to professional,1. Figure your tax for 2010 without deductinga deductible or capital expense. Routine mainte- technical, and trade journals that deal with yourthe repaid amount.nance that keeps your property in a normal effi- business field are deductible.
cient operating condition, but that does not 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year
materially increase the value or substantially Supplies and materials. Unless you have de-without including in income the amount
prolong the useful life of the property is deducti- ducted the cost in any earlier year, you generallyyou repaid in 2010.
can deduct the cost of materials and suppliesble in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, the 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown actually consumed and used during the tax year.cost must be depreciated over the useful life of on your return for the earlier year. This is If you keep incidental materials and suppliesthe property. See Form 4562 and its instructions the amount of your credit. on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden-for how to compute and claim the depreciation
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for tal materials and supplies you bought during thededuction.
2010 figured without the deduction (step tax year if all the following requirements are met.The cost of repairs includes the costs of
1).labor, supplies, and certain other items. The • You do not keep a record of when they are
value of your own labor is not deductible. Exam- If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct the used.
ples of repairs include: amount repaid as discussed earlier under Type • You do not take an inventory of theof deduction.• Reconditioning floors (but not replace- amount on hand at the beginning and end
If Method 2 results in less tax, claim thement), of the tax year.
credit on line 72 of Form 1040, and write ªI.R.C.
• Repainting the interior and exterior walls • This method does not distort your income.1341º next to line 72.
of a building,
You can also deduct the cost of books, profes-Example. For 2009, you filed a return and• Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters, sional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor-reported your income on the cash method. Inand mally use them within a year. However, if the2010, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2009
• Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replace- usefulness of these items extends substantiallygross income under a claim of right. Your filing
beyond the year they are placed in service, youment of fixtures). status in 2010 and 2009 is single. Your income
generally must recover their costs through de-and tax for both years are as follows:
preciation. For more information regarding de-Repayments. If you had to repay an amount preciation see Publication 946, How To2009 2009 you included in your income in an earlier year, With Income Without Income Depreciate Property.you may be able to deduct the amount repaid for Taxablethe year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amount Utilities. Business expenses for heat, lights,Income $15,000 $10,000you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be able power, telephone service, and water and sewer-Tax $ 1,836 $ 1,086to take a credit against your tax for the year in age are deductible. However, any part attributa-
which you repaid it. ble to personal use is not deductible.2010 2010 
Type of deduction. The type of deduction Without Deduction With Deduction Telephone. The cost of basic local tele-
you are allowed in the year of repayment de- Taxable phone service (including any taxes) for the first
Income $49,950 $44,950pends on the type of income you included in the telephone line you have in your home, even
earlier year. For instance, if you repay an though you have an office in your home is notTax  $8,675  $7,425amount you previously reported as a capital deductible. However, charges for business
gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss on long-distance phone calls on that line, as well asYour tax under Method 1 is $7,425. Your tax
Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it as the cost of a second line into your home usedunder Method 2 is $7,925, figured as follows:
self-employment income, deduct it as a busi- exclusively for business, are deductible busi-
ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedule Tax previously determined for 2009 $ 1,836 ness expenses.
Less: Tax as refigured ......... . − 1,086C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).
Decrease in 2009 tax $ 750If you reported the amount as wages, unem-
Regular tax liability for 2010 ...... . $8,675ployment compensation, or other nonbusiness Less: Decrease in 2009 tax ...... . − 750ordinary income, enter it on Schedule A (Form Refigured tax for 2010 $ 7,9251040) as a miscellaneous itemized deduction
that is subject to the 2% limitation. However, if Because you pay less tax under Method 1, you 12.the repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1 should take a deduction for the repayment in(discussed later) applies, deduct it on Schedule 2010.
A (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized de-
Repayment does not apply. This discus-duction that is not subject to the 2% limitation. How To Get Taxsion does not apply to the following.
Repayment Ð $3,000 or less. If the
• Deductions for bad debts.amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it Helpfrom your income in the year you repaid it. • Deductions from sales to customers, such
as returns and allowances, and similarRepaymentÐover $3,000. If the amount You can get help with unresolved tax issues,items.you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de- order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-duct the repayment, as described earlier. How- • Deductions for legal and other expenses tions, and get information from the IRS in sev-
ever, you can instead choose to take a tax credit of contesting the repayment. eral ways. By selecting the method that is best
for the year of repayment if you included the for you, you will have quick and easy access to
income under a ªclaim of right.º This means that Year of deduction (or credit). If you use tax help.
at the time you included the income, it appeared the cash method of accounting, you can take the
that you had an unrestricted right to it. If you deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the tax Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The
qualify for this choice, figure your tax under both year in which you actually make the repayment. Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde-
methods and use the method that results in less If you use any other accounting method, you can pendent organization within the IRS. We help
tax. deduct the repayment or claim a credit for it only taxpayers who are experiencing economic
Page 46 Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

Page 47 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
harm, such as not being able to provide necessi- you can listen to on the telephone. The majority Phone. Many services are available by
ties like housing, transportation, or food; taxpay- phone. of the information and services listed in this
ers who are seeking help in resolving tax publication are available to you free of charge. If
problems with the IRS; and those who believe there is a fee associated with a resource or • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-that an IRS system or procedure is not working service, it is listed in the publication. tions. Call 1-800-TAX-FORMas it should. Here are seven things every tax- Accessible versions of IRS published prod- (1-800-829-3676) to order current-yearpayer should know about TAS: ucts are available on request in a variety of forms, instructions, and publications, and
alternative formats for people with disabilities.• The Taxpayer Advocate Service is your prior-year forms and instructions. You
voice at the IRS. should receive your order within 10 days.
Free help with your return. Free help in pre-• Our service is free, confidential, and tai- • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withparing your return is available nationwide fromlored to meet your needs. your tax questions at 1-800-829-4933.IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income
• You may be eligible for our help if you Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to • Solving problems. You can get
have tried to resolve your tax problem help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun- face-to-face help solving tax problems
through normal IRS channels and have seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-
gotten nowhere, or you believe an IRS to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their sistance Centers. An employee can ex-
procedure just isn't working as it should. tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic plain IRS letters, request adjustments to
filing and all volunteers will let you know about your account, or help you set up a pay-• We help taxpayers whose problems are ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-credits and deductions you may be entitled tocausing financial difficulty or significant tance Center for an appointment. To findclaim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, callcost, including the cost of professional the number, go to 1-800-829-1040.representation. This includes businesses www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in theAs part of the TCE program, AARP offers theas well as individuals. phone book under United States Govern-Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near-• Our employees know the IRS and how to ment, Internal Revenue Service.est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 ornavigate it. If you qualify for our help, we'll visit AARP's website at • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessassign your case to an advocate who will www.aarp.org/money/taxaide. to TTY/TDD equipment, calllisten to your problem, help you under- For more information on these programs, go 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or tostand what needs to be done to resolve it, to IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the order forms and publications.and stay with you every step of the way upper right-hand corner.until your problem is resolved. • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-
Internet. You can access the IRS web- ten to pre-recorded messages covering• We have at least one local taxpayer advo- site at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days various tax topics.cate in every state, the District of Colum- a week to:
bia, and Puerto Rico. You can call your • Refund information. To check the status of
local advocate, whose number is in your • E-file your return. Find out about commer- your 2010 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 or
phone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer Ad- cial tax preparation and e-file services 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund infor-
vocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, available free to eligible taxpayers. mation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week).
and on our website at www.irs.gov/advo- Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS ac-• Check the status of your 2010 refund. Gocate. You can also call our toll-free line at knowledges receipt of your e-filed return,to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re-1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper re-fund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS1-800-829-4059. turn. If you filed Form 8379 with your re-acknowledges receipt of your e-filed re- turn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed• You can learn about your rights and re- turn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper electronically). Have your 2010 tax returnsponsibilities as a taxpayer by visiting our return. If you filed Form 8379 with your available so you can provide your socialonline tax toolkit at www.taxtoolkit.irs.gov. return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you security number, your filing status, and theYou can get updates on hot tax topics by filed electronically). Have your 2010 tax exact whole dollar amount of your refund.visiting our YouTube channel at www.you- return available so you can provide your If you check the status of your refund andtube.com/tasnta and our Facebook page social security number, your filing status, are not given the date it will be issued,at www.facebook.com/YourVoiceAtIRS, or and the exact whole dollar amount of your please wait until the next week beforeby following our tweets at www.twitter. refund. checking back.com/YourVoiceAtIRS.
• Download forms, including talking tax • Other refund information. To check theLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). forms, instructions, and publications. status of a prior±year refund or amendedThe Low Income Taxpayer Clinic program return refund, call 1-800-829-1040.• Order IRS products online.serves individuals who have a problem with the
• Research your tax questions online.IRS and whose income is below a certain level. Evaluating the quality of our telephoneLITCs are independent from the IRS. Most services. To ensure IRS representatives give• Search publications online by topic orLITCs can provide representation before the accurate, courteous, and professional answers,keyword.IRS or in court on audits, tax collection disputes, we use several methods to evaluate the qualityand other issues for free or a small fee. If an • Use the online Internal Revenue Code, of our telephone services. One method is for aindividual's native language is not English, some regulations, or other official guidance. second IRS representative to listen in on orclinics can provide multilingual information record random telephone calls. Another is to ask• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)about taxpayer rights and responsibilities. For some callers to complete a short survey at thepublished in the last few years.more information, see Publication 4134, Low end of the call.Income Taxpayer Clinic List. This publication is • Figure your withholding allowances using
available at IRS.gov, by calling the withholding calculator online at Walk-in. Many products and services
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or at your www.irs.gov/individuals. are available on a walk-in basis.
local IRS office.
 • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by
using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS • Products. You can walk in to many post
Assistant.Guide to Free Tax Services, is your guide to IRS offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up
services and resources. Learn about free tax certain forms, instructions, and publica-• Sign up to receive local and national taxinformation from the IRS, including publications, tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocerynews by email.services, and education and assistance pro- stores, copy centers, city and county gov-
• Get information on starting and operatinggrams. The publication also has an index of over ernment offices, credit unions, and office
a small business.100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) supply stores have a collection of products
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help Page 47

Page 48 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
available to print from a CD or photocopy a special need, such as a disability, an • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS finding aid.appointment can be requested. All other
offices and libraries have the Internal Rev- issues will be handled without an appoint- • Tax law frequently asked questions.enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue ment. To find the number of your local
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail- office, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or sponse system.able for research purposes. look in the phone book under United
• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the• Services. You can walk in to your local States Government, Internal Revenue
U.S. Code.Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- Service.
ness day for personal, face-to-face tax • Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxhelp. An employee can explain IRS letters, Mail. You can send your order for forms.request adjustments to your tax account, forms, instructions, and publications to • Internal Revenue Bulletins.or help you set up a payment plan. If you the address below. You should receive
need to resolve a tax problem, have ques- a response within 10 days after your request is • Toll-free and email technical support.tions about how the tax law applies to your received. • Two releases during the year.individual tax return, or you are more com-
± The first release will ship the beginningfortable talking with someone in person,
Internal Revenue Service of January 2011.visit your local Taxpayer Assistance
± The final release will ship the beginningCenter where you can spread out your 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
of March 2011.records and talk with an IRS representa- Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-
DVD for tax products. You can order Purchase the DVD from National TechnicalessaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you
Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products Information Service (NTIS) at can call your local Center and leave a
DVD, and obtain: www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no handling fee)message requesting an appointment to re-
or call 1-877-233-6767 toll-free to buy the DVDsolve a tax account issue. A representa- • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub- for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).tive will call you back within 2 business lications.days to schedule an in-person appoint-
• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-ment at your convenience. If you have an
tions.ongoing, complex tax account problem or
Page 48 Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

Page 49 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Circulation costs, newspapers Experimentation costs .... . 22, Below-market ............. . 14A
and periodicals .......... . 23 33 Business expense for ...... . 11Advertising ................. . 43
Capitalized ............ . 13, 14Cleanup costs, Exploration costs .......... . 22Amortization:
Carrying charge ........... . 21environmental ............ . 23Anti-abuse rule ............ . 31 Deductible ................ . 12Club dues .................. . 44Anti-churning rules ........ . 30 F Forgone .................. . 14Comments on publication ... . 1Atmospheric pollution control Fees: Life insurance policies ..... . 13facilities ................ . 32 Commitment fees .......... . 13 Commitment .............. . 13 Not deductible ............ . 13Corporate organization Computer software ......... . 29 Legal and professional ..... . 44 Refunds of ................ . 14costs ................... . 27 Constant-yield method, Regulatory ................ . 45 When to deduct ........... . 14Dispositions of section 197 OID ...................... . 13 Tax return preparation ..... . 45 Internet-relatedintangibles .............. . 31 Contested liability ........... . 5 Fines ....................... . 45 expenses ................ . 44Experimental costs ........ . 33 Contributions: Forgone interest ........... . 14 Interview expenses ......... . 44Geological and geophysical Charitable ................ . 44 Form:costs ................... . 32 Political ................... . 45 3115 ................. . 16, 31How to deduct ............ . 26 KCopyrights ................. . 29 4562 ..................... . 26Incorrect amount Key person ................. . 13Cost depletion ............. . 34 5213 ...................... . 5deducted ............... . 31 Kickbacks .................. . 43Cost of getting lease ... . 10, 28 8826 ..................... . 26Partnership organization 8885 ..................... . 19Cost of goods sold .......... . 2costs ................... . 27 T ......................... . 38Cost recovery ............... . 3 LPollution control facilities ... . 32
Franchise .............. . 29, 44Covenant not to Leases:Reforestation costs ........ . 32
Franchise taxes ............ . 17compete ................. . 29 Canceling .................. . 9Reforestation expenses .... . 24
Free tax services ........... . 46 Cost of getting ........ . 10, 28Credit card convenienceRelated person ............ . 30
Improvements by lessee ... . 10fees ...................... . 44 Fringe benefits .............. . 7Research costs ........... . 33
Leveraged ................. . 9Section 197 intangibles Fuel taxes .................. . 17
Mineral ................... . 37defined ................. . 28
D Oil and gas ............... . 37Starting a business
G Sales distinguished ......... . 9De minimis OID ............ . 13costs ................... . 26
Taxes on .................. . 9Gas wells .................. . 37Debt-financedStart-up costs ............. . 26
Legal and professionaldistributions ............. . 12 Geological and geophysicalAnticipated liabilities ....... . 43
fees ...................... . 44costs:Definitions:Assessments, local ........ . 16
Development, oil and Licenses ............... . 29, 45Business bad debt ......... . 39Assistance  (See Tax help) gas ..................... . 32 Life insurance coverage ..... . 7Necessary expense ........ . 2At-risk limits ................ . 4 Exploration, oil and gas .... . 32Ordinary expense .......... . 2 Limit on deductions ......... . 5Attorney fees ............... . 44 Geothermal wells ....... . 22, 37Section 197 intangibles .... . 28 Line of credit ............... . 12Awards .................... . 6, 7 Gifts, nominal value ......... . 7Demolition expenses ....... . 44 Loans:
Going into business ...... . 3, 26 Below-market interestDepletion:
Goodwill ................... . 29 rate .................... . 14Mineral property ........... . 34B
Discounted ............... . 14Oil and gas wells .......... . 35Bad debts:
Loans or Advances .......... . 8Percentage table .......... . 37Defined ................... . 39 H Lobbying expenses ........ . 45Timber .................... . 38How to treat ............... . 39 Health insurance, deduction forWho can claim ............ . 33Recovery ................. . 40 Long-term careself-employed ............ . 18 insurance ................ . 18Types of .................. . 39 Depreciation  (See Cost Heating equipment .......... . 3When worthless ........... . 39 recovery) Losses .................... . 4, 5Help  (See Tax help) At-risk limits ................ . 4Bonuses: Development costs,
Net operating .............. . 4miners ................... . 23Employee .................. . 7
Passive activities ........... . 4Royalties ................. . 37 Disabled, improvements I
for ....................... . 25Bribes ...................... . 43 Impairment-related
Drilling and developmentBrownfields  (See Environmental expenses ................ . 44 M
costs ..................... . 22cleanup costs) Improvements ............... . 3 Machinery parts ............. . 3
Dues, membership ......... . 44Business: By lessee ................. . 10 Meals ...................... . 41Assets ..................... . 3 For disabled and elderly ... . 25 Meals and entertainment ... . 42Books and records ........ . 29 Income taxes ............... . 17 Meals and lodging ........... . 7EMeal expenses ............ . 42 Incorrect amount of Methods of accounting ...... . 4Economic interest .......... . 33Use of car .............. . 4, 43 amortization deducted ... . 31 Mining:Economic performance ..... . 4Use of home ............... . 3 Insurance: Depletion ................. . 37Education expenses ...... . 7, 44 Capitalized premiums ...... . 19 Development costs ........ . 23Elderly, improvements Deductible premiums ...... . 18 Exploration costs .......... . 22C for ....................... . 25 Nondeductible More information  (See Tax help)Campaign contribution ..... . 45 Employee benefit premiums ............... . 19 Mortgage ................... . 12Capital expenses ............ . 3 programs ................. . 7 Self-employed Moving expenses,Capitalization of interest ... . 14 Employment taxes ......... . 17 individuals .............. . 18 machinery ............... . 45Car allowance .............. . 42 Entertainment .............. . 41 Intangible drilling costs .... . 22
Car and truck expenses .... . 43 Environmental cleanup Intangibles, amortization ... . 28
Carrying charges ........... . 21 (remediation) costs ...... . 23 NInterest:
Charitable contributions .... . 44 Excise taxes ............... . 17 Allocation of ............... . 11 Natural gas ................. . 37
Publication 535 (2010) Page 49

Page 50 of 50 of Publication 535 15:23 - 25-MAR-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonqualifying Percentage depletion ....... . 34 Removal ................... . 25 Fuel ...................... . 17
intangibles ............... . 29 Income ................... . 17Personal property tax ...... . 17 Rent expense,
Leased property ............ . 9Not-for-profit activities ...... . 5 capitalizing ............... . 10Political contributions ...... . 45
Personal property ......... . 17Repairs .................... . 46Pollution control Real estate ............... . 16facilities .................. . 32 Repayments (claim ofO Sales ..................... . 17right) ..................... . 46Prepaid expense ............ . 4Office in home .............. . 3 Unemployment fund ....... . 17Extends useful life ......... . 21 Research costs ........ . 22, 33Oil and gas wells: Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 46Interest ................... . 14Depletion ................. . 35 Telephone .................. . 46Rent ....................... . 9Drilling costs .............. . 22 S Timber ................. . 32, 38Prepayment penalty ........ . 12Partnerships .............. . 36 Sales taxes ................. . 17 Tools ........................ . 3Presumption of profit ........ . 5S corporations ............ . 36 Section 179 expense deduction Trademark, trade name .... . 29,Publications  (See Tax help)Optional write-off method: (See Cost recovery) 44Circulation costs .......... . 33 Self-employed health insurance Travel ...................... . 41Experimental costs ........ . 33 R deduction ................ . 18 TTY/TDD information ....... . 46Intangible drilling and Real estate taxes ........... . 16 Self-employment tax ....... . 17development costs ...... . 33 Recapture: Self-insurance, reserveMining exploration and UExploration expenses ...... . 23 for ....................... . 19development costs ...... . 33 Unemployment fundTimber property ........... . 32 Sick pay ..................... . 8Research costs ........... . 33 taxes ..................... . 17Recovery of amount Standard meal allowance ... . 42Organization costs: Unpaid expenses, relateddeducted .................. . 4 Standard mileage rate ...... . 42Corporate ................. . 27 person ................... . 14Refiners who cannot claim Standby charges ........... . 13Partnership ............... . 27 Utilities ..................... . 46percentage depletion ..... . 35 Start-up costs .......... . 24, 26Organizational costs ....... . 24 Reforestation costs .... . 24, 32 Subscriptions .............. . 46Original issue discount ..... . 12 Regulatory fees ............ . 45 VSuggestions forOutplacement services ..... . 45 Reimbursements ........... . 41 Vacation pay ................ . 8publication ................ . 1
Business expenses ......... . 8 Supplies and materials ..... . 46P Mileage ................... . 42 WPassive activities ............ . 4 Nonaccountable plan ...... . 43 Wages:TPer diem .................. . 42Payments in kind ............ . 4 Property ................... . 8Tax help .................... . 46Related persons:Penalties ................... . 12 Tests for deducting pay ..... . 6Tax preparation fees ....... . 45Anti-churning rules ........ . 30Deductible ................ . 45 Welfare benefit funds ........ . 7Taxes ....................... . 9Coal or iron ore ........... . 37Nondeductible ............ . 45
Carrying charge ........... . 21Payments to ............ . 5, 14Prepayment ............... . 12 ■
Employment .............. . 17Refiners .................. . 35Per diem and car
Excise .................... . 17Rent expense .............. . 8allowances ............... . 42
Franchise ................. . 17Unreasonable rent .......... . 8
Page 50 Publication 535 (2010)