Userid: SD_6FGCB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\6fgcb\documents\epicfiles\P3340115changed.XML (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication
334Tax Guide for Catalog Number 11063P
Department Small Business
of the For use inTreasury
preparing(For Individuals Who UseInternal
Revenue
2009Service Schedule C or C-EZ)
Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet www.irs.gov
www.irs.gov/efile
Jan 19, 2010

Page 2 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in addition to your regular job or business may be
self-employment.Contents
Introduction ............................. . 2 Independent contractor.  People such as doctors, den-
tists, veterinarians, lawyers, accountants, contractors,What's New for 2009 ....................... . 3 subcontractors, public stenographers, or auctioneers who
are in an independent trade, business, or profession inWhat's New for 2010 ....................... . 3
which they offer their services to the general public are
Reminders ............................... . 4 generally independent contractors. However, whether they
are independent contractors or employees depends on thePhotographs of Missing Children ............ . 4 facts in each case. The general rule is that an individual is
1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes ........ . 5 an independent contractor if the payer has the right to
control or to direct only the result of the work and not how it2. Accounting Periods and Methods ......... . 11 will be done. The earnings of a person who is working as
an independent contractor are subject to self-employment3. Dispositions of Business Property ........ . 16
tax. For more information on determining whether you are
4. General Business Credits ............... . 18 an employee or independent contractor, see Publication
15-A, Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide.5. Business Income ...................... . 20
Statutory employee. A statutory employee has a6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold ........ . 27
checkmark in box 13 of his or her Form W-2, Wage and7. Figuring Gross Profit ................... . 29 Tax Statement. Statutory employees use Schedule C or
C-EZ to report their wages and expenses.8. Business Expenses .................... . 31
9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss .............. . 40 Limited liability company (LLC). A limited liability com-
pany (LLC) is an entity formed under state law by filing10. Self-Employment (SE) Tax ............... . 41 articles of organization. Generally, a single-member LLC is
disregarded as an entity separate from its owner and11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer .............. . 45
reports its income and deductions on its owner's federal
12. How To Get More Information ............ . 47 income tax return. An owner who is an individual may use
Schedule C or C-EZ.Index ................................... . 50
Husband and wife business. If you and your spouse
jointly own and operate an unincorporated business and
Introduction share in the profits and losses, you are partners in a
partnership, whether or not you have a formal partnershipThe purpose of this publication is to provide general infor-
agreement. Do not use Schedule C or C-EZ. Instead, filemation about the federal tax laws that apply to small
Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership Income. For morebusiness owners who are sole proprietors and to statutory
information, see Publication 541, Partnerships.employees. This publication has information on business
ExceptionÐCommunity income.  If you and yourincome, expenses, and tax credits that may help you file
your income tax return. spouse wholly own an unincorporated business as com-
munity property under the community property laws of a
Are you self-employed? You are self-employed if you state, foreign country, or U.S. possession, you can treat
carry on a trade or business as a sole proprietor or an the business either as a sole proprietorship or a partner-
independent contractor. ship. The only states with community property laws are
Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mex-Sole proprietor. A sole proprietor is someone who owns ico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. A change in youran unincorporated business by himself or herself. How- reporting position will be treated as a conversion of theever, if you are the sole member of a domestic limited entity.liability company (LLC), you are not a sole proprietor if you ExceptionÐQualified joint venture.  If you and yourelect to treat the LLC as a corporation. spouse materially participate as the only members of a
jointly owned and operated business, and you file a jointTrade or business.  A trade or business is generally an
return for the tax year, you can make a joint election to beactivity carried on to make a profit. The facts and circum-
taxed as a qualified joint venture instead of a partnership.stances of each case determine whether or not an activity
To make this election, you must divide all items of income,is a trade or business. You do not need to actually make a
gain, loss, deduction, and credit between you and yourprofit to be in a trade or business as long as you have a
spouse in accordance with your respective interests in theprofit motive. You do need to make ongoing efforts to
venture. Each of you must file a separate Schedule C orfurther the interests of your business.
C-EZ.You do not have to carry on regular full-time business
activities to be self-employed. Having a part-time business
Page 2 Publication 334 (2009)

Page 3 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This publication does not cover the topics listed in the 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax questions sent to
following table. either of the above addresses.
IF you need information about: THEN you should What's New for 2009see:
Corporations ................ . Publication 542 The following are some of the tax changes for 2009. For
Farming ................... . Publication 225 information on other changes, go to www.irs.gov, and click
Fishermen (Capital Construction on Forms and Publications. Then, click on What's Hot in
Fund) ..................... . Publication 595 forms and publications.
Partnerships ................ . Publication 541
Passive activities ............. . Publication 925 Self-employment tax. The maximum net
Recordkeeping .............. . Publication 583 self-employment earnings subject to the social security
Rental ..................... . Publication 527 part of the self-employment tax increases to $106,800 for
S corporations ............... . Instructions for 2009.
Form 1120S
Optional method to figure net earnings. For tax years
beginning after 2007, the amount of gross and net incomeWhat you need to know. Table A (shown later) provides from self-employment you may have when using the non-a list of questions you need to answer to help you meet farm optional method or the farm optional method to figureyour federal tax obligations. After each question is the your self-employment tax has increased. This allows elect-location in this publication where you will find the related ing taxpayers to secure up to four credits of social securitydiscussion. benefits coverage. In future years, the threshold will be
IRS mission. Provide America's taxpayers top quality increased to maintain that level of coverage. See chapter
service by helping them understand and meet their tax 10 for more information.
responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity
Section 179 deduction dollar limit. For tax years begin-and fairness to all.
ning in 2009, the maximum section 179 expense deductionComments and suggestions. We welcome your com- is $250,000 (higher limits apply to certain property). Forments about this publication and your suggestions for more information, see Depreciation in chapter 8.future editions.
You can write to us at the following address: Standard mileage rate. For 2009, the standard mileage
rate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel
truck for business miles is 55 cents per mile. For moreInternal Revenue Service
information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
Additional tax relief for businesses affected by the1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Kansas storms and tornadoes. Special rules not cov-Washington, DC 20224
ered in this publication may apply. For more information,
see Publication 4492-A, Information for Taxpayers Af-We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
fected by the May 4, 2007, Kansas Storms and Tornadoes.would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone
number, including the area code, in your correspondence.
Additional tax relief for affected businesses in theYou can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
Midwestern disaster areas. Special rules not covered inmust be included in the address.) Please put ªPublications
this publication may apply. For more information, see Pub-Commentº on the subject line. Although we cannot re-
lication 4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpayers in thespond individually to each email, we do appreciate your
Midwestern Disaster Areas.feedback and will consider your comments as we revise
our tax products.
Additional tax relief for businesses affected by feder-Ordering forms and publications. Visit www.irs.gov/ ally declared disasters. Special rules not covered in thisformspubs to download forms and publications, call publication may apply. For more information, see Publica-1-800-829-3676, or write to the address below and receive tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.a response within 10 days after your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service What's New for 20101201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613 The following are some of the tax changes for 2010. For
information on other changes, go to www.irs.gov, and click
on Forms and Publications. Then, click on What's Hot inTax questions. If you have a tax question, check the
forms and publications.information available on www.irs.gov  or call
Publication 334 (2009) Page 3

Page 4 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note. The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax
return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1 (page 6).
What forms must I file? See chapter 1 (page 10).
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1
(page 9).
Do I have to start my tax year in January, or can I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2
month? (page 12).
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2
(page 12).
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5 (page 20).
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See Business Expenses in chapter 8
(page 31).
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8 (page 40).
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9 (page 40).
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3 (page 16).
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11 (page 45).
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12 (page 47).
Self-employment tax. The maximum net 3. Transactions for which you have, or a related party
self-employment earnings subject to the social security has, contractual protection against disallowance of
part of the self-employment tax remains at $106,800 for the tax benefits,
2010. 4. Transactions that result in losses of at least $2 mil-
lion in any single tax year ($50,000 if from certainStandard mileage rate. For 2010, the standard mileage foreign currency transactions) or $4 million in anyrate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel combination of tax years, andtruck for business miles is 50 cents per mile. For more
information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8. 5. Transactions the same or substantially similar to one
of the types of transactions the IRS has identified as
a transaction of interest.
Reminders For more information, see the Instructions for Form 8886.
Accounting methods. Certain small business taxpayers
may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method of Photographs of Missing
accounting and may not be required to account for invento-
ries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2. Children
Reportable transactions. You must file Form 8886, Re- The Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer- National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Photo-
tain transactions. You may have to pay a penalty if you are graphs of missing children selected by the Center may
required to file Form 8886 but do not do so. You may also appear in this publication on pages that would otherwise
have to pay interest and penalties on any reportable trans- be blank. You can help bring these children home by
action understatements. Reportable transactions include: looking at the photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.1. Transactions the same as or substantially similar to
tax avoidance transactions identified by the IRS,
2. Transactions offered to you under conditions of confi-
dentiality for which you paid an advisor a minimum
fee,
Page 4 Publication 334 (2009)

Page 5 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1-800-772-1213. It is also available from the SSA website
at www.socialsecurity.gov. 
1. Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). The
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident
alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get an
Filing and Paying SSN. In general, if you need to obtain an ITIN, you must
attach Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Business Taxes Identification Number, with your signed, original, com-
pleted tax return and any other required documentation
and mail them to the following address.
Introduction
Internal Revenue ServiceThis chapter explains the business taxes you may have to ITIN Operationpay and the forms you may have to file. It also discusses P.O. Box 149342taxpayer identification numbers. Austin, TX 78714-9342
Table 1-1 lists the benefits of filing electronically.
The exceptions are covered in detail in the instructionsTable 1-2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay,
for Form W-7. If you must include another person's SSNtheir due dates, and the forms you use to report them.
on your return and that person does not have and cannotTable 1-3 provides checklists that highlight the typical
get an SSN, enter that person's ITIN. The application isforms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out
also available in Spanish. The form is available from theof business. IRS website at www.irs.gov or you can call
You may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen- 1-800-829-3676 to order the form.
dars. It has tax calendars that tell you when to file An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle thereturns and make tax payments.
TIP holder to social security benefits or change the
holder's employment or immigration status.
CAUTION
!
Useful Items
Employer identification number (EIN). You must alsoYou may want to see:
have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number if
you do either of the following.Publication
• Pay wages to one or more employees.❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
• File pension or excise tax returns.
Form (and Instructions)
If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSN❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
on your Schedule C or C-EZ.
❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals You can apply for an EIN:
❏ Sch C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business • Online by clicking on the EIN link at www.irs.gov/
businesses/small. The EIN is issued immediately❏ Sch C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit From Business
once the application information is validated.
❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment Tax
• By telephone at 1-800-829-4933 from 7:00 a.m. to
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica- 10:00 p.m. in your local time zone.
tions and forms.
• By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-
ployer Identification Number.
Identification Numbers New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the
form or the ownership of your business changes. For more
This section explains three types of taxpayer identification information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Your
numbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how to EIN.
get them. When you need identification numbers of other per-
sons. In operating your business, you will probably makeSocial security number (SSN). Generally, use your SSN certain payments you must report on information returns.
as your taxpayer identification number. You must put this These payments are discussed under Information Re-
number on each of your individual income tax forms, such turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient of
as Form 1040 and its schedules. these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total
To apply for an SSN, use Form SS-5, Application for a amount paid during the year. You must include the payee's
Social Security Card. This form is available at Social Se- identification number and your identification number on the
curity Administration (SSA) offices or by calling returns and statements.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 5

Page 6 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employee. If you have employees, you must get an IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of
each employee exactly as they are shown on the em-
ployee's social security card. If the employee's name is not
correct as shown on the card, the employee should re-
quest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the
You may be able to file your tax returns electronically usingemployee's name was changed due to marriage or di-
an IRS e-file option. Table 1-1 lists the benefits of IRSvorce.
e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most of theForm W-4, Employee's Withholding Allowance Certifi-
manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a re-cate, is completed by each employee so the correct federal
sult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and moreincome tax can be withheld from their pay.
accurate than the processing of paper returns. As with aIf your employee does not have an SSN, he or she
paper return, you are responsible for making sure yourshould file Form SS-5 with the SSA.
return contains accurate information and is filed on time.Other payee. If you make payments to someone who is Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRSnot your employee and you must report the payments on examination of your return.an information return, get that person's SSN. If you must You can file most commonly used business forms usingreport payments to an organization, such as a corporation IRS e-file. For more information, visit the IRS website ator partnership, you must get its EIN. www.irs.gov.To get the payee's SSN or EIN, use Form W-9, Request
Electronic signatures. Paperless filing is easier than youfor Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification.
think and it's available to most taxpayers who file electroni-A payee who does not provide you with an identification
callyÐincluding those first-time filers who were 16 or oldernumber may be subject to backup withholding. For infor-
at the end of 2009. If you file electronically using taxmation on backup withholding, see the Form W-9 instruc-
preparation software or a tax professional, you will partici-tions and the General Instructions for Certain Information
pate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identification number)Returns (1098, 1099, 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G).
program. If you are married filing jointly, you and your
spouse will each need to create a PIN and enter these
PINs as your electronic signatures.Income Tax  To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted gross
income (AGI) from your originally filed 2008 income taxThis part explains whether you have to file an income tax return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or anyreturn and when you file it. It also explains how you pay the math error notice from the IRS). You will also need totax. provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB is
accurate and matches the information on record with theDo I Have To File Social Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,
an Income Tax Return? check your annual Social Security Statement.
With a Self-Select PIN, there is nothing to sign and
You have to file an income tax return for 2009 if your net nothing to mail Ðnot even your Forms W-2. For more
earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If your details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit the IRS web-
net earnings from self-employment were less than $400, site at www.irs.gov.
you still have to file an income tax return if you meet any
State returns. In most states, you can file an electronicother filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc-
state return simultaneously with your federal return. Fortions.
more information, check with your local IRS office, state
tax agency, tax professional, or the IRS website at www.How Do I File? irs.gov.
File your income tax return on Form 1040  and attach Refunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you,
Schedule C  or Schedule C-EZ.  Enter the net profit or or you can have your refund deposited directly to your
loss from Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ on page 1 of Form checking or savings account.
1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or loss from With e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time as
your business. If you operated more than one business as when filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3
a sole proprietorship, you must attach a separate Schedule weeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive your
C for each business. You can use the simpler Schedule refund in as few as 10 days.
C-EZ if you operated only one business as a sole proprie- Offset against debts. As with a paper return, you maytorship, you did not have a net loss, and you meet the other not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-duerequirements listed in Part I of the schedule. amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or
child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed
has been offset against your debts.
Refund inquiries. You can check the status of your re-
fund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filed
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax return Using Your Personal Computer
available because you will need to know the filing status,
A computer with Internet access is all you need to file yourthe first social security number shown on the return, and
tax return using IRS e-file. When you use your personalthe exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check on
computer, you can e-file your return from your home anyyour refund, do one of the following.
time of the day or night. Sign your return electronically• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on Where's My Refund. using a self-selected PIN to complete the process. There is
no signature form to submit or Forms W-2 to send in.• Call 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund informa-
tion, and follow the recorded instructions. Free Internet filing options. More taxpayers can now
• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours shown in your prepare and e-file their individual income tax returns free
form instructions. using commercial tax preparation software accessible
through www.irs.gov or www.usa.gov. The IRS is partner-
ing with the tax software industry to offer free preparationBalance due. If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 15, and filing services to a significant number of taxpayers.2010, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. You Security and privacy certificate programs will assure taxcan make your payment electronically by scheduling an data is safe and secure. To see if you qualify for theseelectronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savings services, visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage at www.account or by credit card. irs.gov.
If you cannot use the free services, you can buy tax
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider
puter and office supply stores. You can also download
Many tax professionals can electronically file paperless software from the Internet or prepare and file your return
returns for their clients. You have two options. completely online by using tax preparation software avail-
able on the Internet.1. You can prepare your return, take it to an authorized
IRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit it
electronically to the IRS. Filing Through Employers and Financial
Institutions2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre-
pare your return and transmit it for you electronically. Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,
members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask yourYou will be asked to complete Form 8879, IRS e-file
employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as anSignature Authorization, to authorize the provider to enter
employee, member, or customer benefit.your self-selected PIN on your return.
Depending on the provider and the specific services
requested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorized Free Help With Your ReturnIRS e-file provider near you, go to www.irs.gov or look for
an ªAuthorized IRS e-file Providerº sign. Free help in preparing your return is available nationwide
from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-income
taxpayers, and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)
program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or older
Table 1-1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail.
Proof of acceptance • You receive an electronic acknowledgment within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund faster with Direct DepositÐin as few as 10 days.
Free Internet filing options • Use the IRS website www.irs.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file
services available at no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic payment • Convenient, safe, and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 15, 2010) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State filing • Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
with their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronic Penalty for underpayment of tax. If you did not pay
filing. enough income tax and self-employment tax for 2009 by
withholding or by making estimated tax payments, you
may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRSWhen Is My Tax Return Due? will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or you
can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax byForm 1040 for calendar year 2009 is due by April 15, 2010.
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay aIf you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your return
penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor-is due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of your
mation, see Publication 505.fiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penalties
and interest.
 If you cannot file your return on time, use Form 4868,
Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Self-Employment (SE) Tax
Individual Income Tax Return, to request an automatic
6-month extension. For calendar year taxpayers, this will Self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security and
extend the tax filing due date until October 15. Filing an Medicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-
extension does not extend the time to pay your taxes, only selves. It is similar to the social security and Medicare
the time to file the tax return. taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.
If you earned income as a statutory employee,
How Do I Pay Income Tax? you do not pay SE tax on that income.
CAUTION
!
Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay it
as you earn or receive income during the year. An em-
ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay. Social security coverage. Social security benefits areIf you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do not available to self-employed persons just as they are topay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimated wage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to yourtax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments if coverage under the social security system. Social securityyou expect to owe taxes, including self-employment tax coverage provides you with retirement benefits, disability(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file your benefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-return. Use Form 1040-ES to figure and pay the tax. If you care) benefits.do not have to make estimated tax payments, you can pay
any tax due when you file your return. For more information By not reporting all of your self-employment in-
on estimated tax, see Publication 505, Tax Withholding come, you could cause your social security bene-
and Estimated Tax. fits to be lower when you retire.
CAUTION
!
What are my payment options? You can pay your esti- How to become insured under social security. Youmated tax electronically using various options. If you pay must be insured under the social security system beforeelectronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040-ES you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-payment vouchers. These options include: sured if you have the required number of credits (also
called quarters of coverage), discussed next.1. Paying electronically through the Electronic Federal
Tax Payment System (EFTPS). Earning credits in 2009 and 2010. For 2009, you re-
ceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for each2. Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawal
$1,090 ($1,120 for 2010) of income subject to social secur-when you file Form 1040 electronically.
ity taxes. Therefore, for 2009, if you had income3. Paying by credit card over the phone or by Internet. (self-employment and wages) of $4,360 that was subject to
social security taxes, you received four credits ($4,360 ÷Other options include crediting an overpayment from your
$1,090).2009 return to your 2010 estimated tax, or mailing a check
For an explanation of the number of credits you mustor money order with a Form 1040-ES payment voucher.
have to be insured and the benefits available to you and
EFTPS your family under the social security program, consult your
nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.1. To enroll in EFTPS, go to www.eftps.gov or call
1-800-555-4477. Making false statements to get or to increase
social security benefits may subject you to penal-2. When you request a new EIN and you will have a tax ties.
CAUTION
!obligation, you are automatically enrolled in EFTPS.
3. Benefits of EFTPS: The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit for
posting self-employment income. Generally, the SSAa. The chance of an error in making your payments will give you credit only for self-employment income re-is reduced. ported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15
b. You receive immediate confirmation of every days after the tax year you earned the income. If you file
transaction. your tax return or report a change in your self-employment
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec- to help you determine whether an individual is an indepen-
ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSA dent contractor or an employee.
will not change its records to increase your If you incorrectly classify an employee as anself-employment income. independent contractor, you may be held liable
for employment taxes for that worker plus a pen-
CAUTION
!Who must pay self-employment tax. You must pay SE alty.tax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of the
An independent contractor is someone who isfollowing applies. 
self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold or
1. Your net earnings from self-employment (excluding pay any taxes on payments to an independent contractor. 
church employee income) were $400 or more.
2. You had church employee income of $108.28 or
more. Excise Taxes
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are This section identifies some of the excise taxes you may
and even if you are already receiving social se- have to pay and the forms you have to file if you do any of
curity or Medicare benefits. the following.
CAUTION
!
• Manufacture or sell certain products.
SE tax rate. The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
• Operate certain kinds of businesses.(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
• Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-Maximum earnings subject to SE tax. Only the first ucts.$106,800 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings
• Receive payment for certain services.in 2009 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social
security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,retirement (tier 1) tax. Excise Taxes.All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2009
are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare part Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Formof SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1) 720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-tax. eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
• Environmental taxes on the sale or use ofity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at
ozone-depleting chemicals and imported productsleast $106,800, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of
containing or manufactured with these chemicals.the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must
pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net • Communications and air transportation taxes.earnings.
• Fuel taxes.Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment
• Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,to income on line 27 of Form 1040. 
and tractors.
TIP
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a variety
More information. For information on methods of calcu- of different articles.
lating SE tax, see Chapter 10, Self-Employment Tax.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-
Employment Taxes ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable gross
weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on FormIf you have employees, you will need to file forms to report 2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For moreemployment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow- information, see the Instructions for Form 2290.ing items.
Depositing excise taxes. If you have to file a quarterly• Social security and Medicare taxes. excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit
• Federal income tax withholding. your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on
depositing excise taxes, see the Instructions for Form 720.• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax.
For more information, see Publication 15 (Circular E),
Employer's Tax Guide. That publication explains your tax Information Returnsresponsibilities as an employer.
To help you determine whether the people working for If you make or receive payments in your business, you
you are your employees, see Publication 15-A, Employer's may have to report them to the IRS on information returns.
Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication has information The IRS compares the payments shown on the information
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by:1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C or C-EZ2 15th day of 4th month after end of 
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040-ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 or 944 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 314.
8109 (to make deposits)3 See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W-2 (to employee) January 314.
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security Last day of February (March 31 if
Administration) filing electronically)4.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 January 314.
8109 (to make deposits)3 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $500.
Filing information returns for See Information Returns Forms 1099±to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically).
Other formsÐsee the General
Instructions for Certain Information
Returns (1098, 1099, 3921, 3922,
5498, and W-2G).
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, file by the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. For
more information, see Publication 509, Tax Calendars For use in 2010.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
4 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
returns with each person's income tax return to see if the • Royalty payments of $10 or more.
payments were included in income. You must give a copy • Payments to certain crew members by operators ofof each information return you are required to file to the fishing boats.recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be-
low, you may have to use other returns to report certain You also use Form 1099-MISC to report your sales of
kinds of payments or transactions. For more details on $5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resale
information returns and when you have to file them, see anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.
the General Instructions for Certain Information Returns
(1098, 1099, 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G). Form W-2. You must file Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-
ment, to report payments to your employees, such asForm 1099-MISC. Use Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income,Income, to report certain payments you make in your
social security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earnedbusiness. These payments include the following items.
income credit payments. For more information on what to• Payments of $600 or more for services performed report on Form W-2, see the Instructions for Forms W-2for your business by people not treated as your em- and W-3.ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,
accountants, or directors.
Penalties. The law provides for the following penalties if
• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rents you do not file Form 1099-MISC or Form W-2 or do notpaid to real estate agents. correctly report the information. For more information, see
the General Instructions for Certain Information Returns• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not for
services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows. (1098, 1099, 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G).
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note. The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you
ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax M File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go
out of business.
M File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or
exchange property used in your business or in which the business use of
certain section 179 or listed property drops to 50% or less.
M File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax M File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment taxes M File Form 941 (or Form 944) for the calendar quarter in which you make final
wage payments. Note. Do not forget to check the box and enter the date
final wages were paid on line 18 of Form 941 or line 17 of Form 944.
M File Form 940 for the calendar year in which final wages were paid. Note. Do
not forget to check box d, Final: Business closed or stopped paying wages,
under Type of Return.
Information returns M Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you
make final wage payments. Note. These forms are generally due by the due
date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
M File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note. These forms are generally due within
1 month after the due date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
M Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least
$600 for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in
which you go out of business.
M File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
• Failure to file information returns. This penalty ap- traveler's checks and money orders. Cash does not in-
clude a check drawn on an individual's personal accountplies if you do not file information returns by the due
(personal check). For more information, see Publicationdate, do not include all required information, or re-
1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re-port incorrect information.
ceived in a Trade or Business).• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This
Penalties. There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state-
ing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (orment to a payee by the required date, do not include
causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, orall required information, or report incorrect informa-
structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.tion.
Waiver of penalties. These penalties will not apply if
you can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause
and not willful neglect.
In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all 2.required information, or for including incorrect information,
on a de minimis (small) number of information returns if
you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returns Accounting Periodsare due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater of
10 or 1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you are and Methodsrequired to file for the year.)
Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash IntroductionPayments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,
if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac- You must figure your taxable income and file an income tax
tion, or two or more related business transactions. Cash return for an annual accounting period called a tax year.
includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in- Also, you must consistently use an accounting method that
cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier's and clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 11

Page 12 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Change in tax year. Generally, you must file Form 1128,Useful Items
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year, toYou may want to see:
request IRS approval to change your tax year. See the
Instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you qualify forPublication
an automatic approval request, a user fee is not required. If❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods you do not qualify for automatic approval, a ruling must be
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica- requested. See the instructions for Form 1128 for informa-
tions and forms. tion about user fees if you are requesting a ruling.
Accounting Periods Accounting Methods
When preparing a statement of income and expenses An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine
(generally your income tax return), you must use your when and how income and expenses are reported. Your
books and records for a specific interval of time called an accounting method includes not only the overall method of
accounting period. The annual accounting period for your accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment you
income tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of use for any material item.
the following tax years. You choose an accounting method for your business
when you file your first income tax return that includes a• A calendar tax year.
Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to• A fiscal tax year. change your accounting method, you must generally get
Unless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax year IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.
by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A
required tax year is a tax year required under the Internal Kinds of methods. Generally, you can use any of the
Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations. following accounting methods.
• Cash method.Calendar tax year. A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
months beginning January 1 and ending December 31. • An accrual method.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the • Special methods of accounting for certain items offollowing apply. income and expenses.
• You do not keep books. • Combination method using elements of two or more
• You have no annual accounting period. of the above.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal You must use the same accounting method to figureyear. your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
• Your use of the calendar tax year is required under must use an accounting method that clearly shows your
the Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regu- income.
lations.
Business and personal items. You can account for busi-
If you filed your first income tax return using the calendar ness and personal items under different accounting meth-
tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor, ods. For example, you can figure your business income
you must continue to use the calendar tax year unless you under an accrual method, even if you use the cash methodget IRS approval to change it or are otherwise allowed to to figure personal items.change it without IRS approval. For more information, see
Change in tax year, later. Two or more businesses. If you have two or more sepa-If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain rate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-your books and records and report your income and ex- counting method for each if the method clearly reflects thepenses for the period from January 1 through December income of each business. They are separate and distinct31 of each year. only if you maintain complete and separate books and
records for each business.Fiscal tax year. A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52-53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year that Cash Method
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on the
Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven-last day of a month.
tory use the cash method because they find it easier toIf you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain your
keep cash method records. However, if an inventory isbooks and records and report your income and expenses
necessary to account for your income, you must generallyusing the same tax year.
use an accrual method of accounting for sales andFor more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
purchases. For more information, see Inventories, later.52-53-week tax year, see Publication 538.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income Expenses
Under the cash method, include in your gross income all Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses in
the tax year in which you actually pay them. This includesitems of income you actually or constructively receive
business expenses for which you contest liability. How-during your tax year. If you receive property or services,
ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid inyou must include their fair market value in income.
advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.Example. On December 30, 2008, Mrs. Sycamore sent
you a check for interior decorating services you provided to Expenses paid in advance. You can deduct an expenseher. You received the check on January 2, 2009. You must you pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.include the amount of the check in income for 2009.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and youConstructive receipt. You have constructive receipt of pay $1,000 in 2009 for a business insurance policy effec-income when an amount is credited to your account or tive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 inmade available to you without restriction. You do not need 2009 and $500 in 2010.to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as Accrual Methodhaving received it when your agent received it.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generallyExample. Interest is credited to your bank account in report income in the year earned and deduct or capitalizeDecember 2009. You do not withdraw it or enter it into your expenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrualpassbook until 2010. You must include it in your gross method of accounting is to match income and expenses inincome for 2009. the correct year.
Delaying receipt of income. You cannot hold checks
or postpone taking possession of similar property from one IncomeÐGeneral Ruletax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
must report the income in the year the property is received Under an accrual method, you generally include an
or made available to you without restriction. amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en- curred and you can determine the amount with reasonable
titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De- accuracy.
cember 2009. She was told in December that her payment
was available. At her request, she was not paid until Example. You are a calendar year accrual method tax-
January 2010. She must include this payment in her 2009 payer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2009. You
income because it was constructively received in 2009. billed the customer in the first week of January 2010, but
you did not receive payment until February 2010. You mustChecks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the tax include the amount received for the computer in your 2009year is constructive receipt of income in that year, even if income.you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
year.
IncomeÐSpecial Rules
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
The following are special rules that apply to advance pay-cember 31, 2009, from a patient. She could not deposit the
ments, estimating income, and changing a paymentcheck in her business account until January 2, 2010. She
schedule for services.must include this fee in her income for 2009.
Debts paid by another person or canceled. If your Estimated income. If you include a reasonably estimated
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by your amount in gross income, and later determine the exact
amount is different, take the difference into account in thecreditors, you may have to report part or all of this debt
tax year in which you make the determination.relief as income. If you receive income in this way, you
constructively receive the income when the debt is can- Change in payment schedule for services. If you per-celed or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debt form services for a basic rate specified in a contract, youunder Kinds of Income in chapter 5. must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agree
to receive payments at a lower rate until you complete theRepayment of income. If you include an amount in in- services and then receive the difference.come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,
you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in which Advance payments for services. Generally, you report
you make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, a an advance payment for services to be performed in a later
special rule applies. For details about the special rule, see tax year as income in the year you receive the payment.
Repayments in chapter 11 of Publication 535, Business However, if you receive an advance payment for services
Expenses. you agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, you
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can elect to postpone including the advance payment in deduct the expense in 2009 because all events that fix the
fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liabilityincome until the next tax year. However, you cannot post-
could be reasonably determined, and economic perform-pone including any payment beyond that tax year.
ance occurred in that year.For more information, see Advance Payment for Serv-
Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.ices under Accrual Method in Publication 538. That publi-
In that case, you can deduct them in 2009 even if thecation also explains special rules for reporting the following
supplies are not delivered until 2010 (when economictypes of income.
performance occurs).• Advance payments for service agreements.
Keeping inventories. When the production, purchase, or• Prepaid rent. sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
business, you must generally take inventories into account
Advance payments for sales. Special rules apply to in- at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you must
cluding income from advance payments on agreements for account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-
future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima- crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.
rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of your For more information, see Inventories, later.
business. If the advance payments are for contracts involv- Special rule for related persons. You cannot deducting both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessary business expenses and interest owed to a related personto treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes a who uses the cash method of accounting until you makegift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treat the payment and the corresponding amount is includible inamounts that are due and payable as amounts you re- the related person's gross income. Determine the relation-ceived. ship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which theYou generally include an advance payment in income expense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If afor the tax year in which you receive it. However, you can deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-use an alternative method. For information about the alter- tinue to apply even if your relationship with the personnative method, see Publication 538. ends before the expense or interest is includible in the
gross income of that person.
Related persons include members of your immediateExpenses
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
deduct or capitalize a business expense when both the a list of other related persons, see section 267 of the
following apply. Internal Revenue Code.
1. The all-events test has been met. The test has been Combination Methodmet when:
You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,a. All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-
and special methods of accounting if the combinationity, and clearly shows your income and expenses and you use it
b. The liability can be determined with reasonable consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.
accuracy. • If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-
come, you must generally use an accrual method for2. Economic performance has occurred. purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories, 
later.) You can use the cash method for all otherEconomic performance. You generally cannot deduct or items of income and expenses.capitalize a business expense until economic performance
• If you use the cash method for figuring your income,occurs. If your expense is for property or services provided
you must use the cash method for reporting yourto you, or for your use of property, economic performance
expenses.occurs as the property or services are provided or as the
property is used. If your expense is for property or services • If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-you provide to others, economic performance occurs as penses, you must use an accrual method for figuringyou provide the property or services. An exception allows your income.certain recurring items to be treated as incurred during a
• If you use a combination method that includes thetax year even though economic performance has not oc-
cash method, treat that combination method as thecurred. For more information on economic performance,
cash method.see Economic Performance under Accrual Method in Pub-
lication 538.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use an Inventories
accrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies in
December 2009. You receive the supplies and the bill in Generally, if you produce, purchase, or sell merchandise in
December, but you pay the bill in January 2010. You can your business, you must keep an inventory and use the
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
accrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise. Changing accounting method. If you are a qualifying
taxpayer or qualifying small business taxpayer and want toHowever, the following taxpayers can use the cash method
change to the cash method or to account for inventoriableof accounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell mer-
items as non-incidental materials and supplies, you mustchandise. These taxpayers can also account for inventori-
file Form 3115 , Application for Change in Accountingable items as materials and supplies that are not incidental
Method.(discussed later).
More information.  For more information about the quali-1. A qualifying taxpayer under Revenue Procedure fying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. 2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. For more
2. A qualifying small business taxpayer under Revenue information about the qualifying small business taxpayer
exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002-28 in InternalProcedure 2002-28 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
Revenue Bulletin 2002-18.2002-18.
Items included in inventory. If you are required to ac-
count for inventories, include the following items whenQualifying taxpayer. You are a qualifying taxpayer if:
accounting for your inventory.• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior
• Merchandise or stock in trade.tax year ending on or after December 17, 1998, is $1
million or less. (Your average annual gross receipts • Raw materials.for a tax year is figured by adding the gross receipts
• Work in process.for that tax year and the 2 preceding tax years and
dividing by 3.) • Finished products.
• Your business is not a tax shelter, as defined under • Supplies that physically become a part of the item
section 448(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. intended for sale.
Qualifying small business taxpayer. You are a qualify- Valuing inventory. You must value your inventory at the
ing small business taxpayer if: beginning and end of each tax year to determine your cost
of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine the• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior value of your inventory, you need a method for identifyingtax year ending on or after December 31, 2000, is the items in your inventory and a method for valuing thesemore than $1 million but not more than $10 million. items.(Your average annual gross receipts for a tax year is Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for allfigured by adding the gross receipts for that tax year kinds of businesses. The method you use to value yourand the 2 preceding tax years and dividing the total inventory must conform to generally accepted accountingby 3.) principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflect
income. Your inventory practices must be consistent from• You are not prohibited from using the cash method
year to year.under section 448 of the Internal Revenue Code.
More information. For more information about invento-• Your principal business activity is an eligible busi-
ries, see Publication 538.ness (described in Publication 538 and Revenue
Procedure 2002-28).
Uniform Capitalization Rules
Business not owned or not in existence for 3 years. If Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalizeyou did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-year the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for productionperiod used in figuring your average annual gross receipts, or resale activities. Include these costs in the basis ofinclude the period of any predecessor. If your business has property you produce or acquire for resale, rather thannot been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base your claiming them as a current deduction. You recover theaverage on the period it has existed including any short tax costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goodsyears, annualizing the short tax year's gross receipts. sold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop-
erty.Materials and supplies that are not incidental. If you
Activities subject to the uniform capitalization rules.account for inventoriable items as materials and supplies
You may be subject to the uniform capitalization rules ifthat are not incidental, you will deduct the cost of the items
you do any of the following, unless the property is pro-you would otherwise include in inventory in the year you
duced for your use other than in a business or an activitysell the items, or the year you pay for them, whichever is carried on for profit.later. If you are a producer, you can use any reasonable
method to estimate the raw material in your work in pro- • Produce real or tangible personal property. For this
cess and finished goods on hand at the end of the year to purpose, tangible personal property includes a film,
determine the raw material used to produce finished goods sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop-
that were sold during the year. erty.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Acquire property for resale. change procedures. No user fee is required for an applica-
tion filed under an automatic change procedure generally
Exceptions. These rules do not apply to the following covered in Revenue Procedure 2002-9.
property. Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-
matic change. For more information, see the Instructions1. Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver- for Form 3115.age annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.
2. Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-
ing conditions.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the property are
$200,000 or less. 3.
b. You use the cash method of accounting and do
not account for inventories. For more information,
Dispositions of see Inventories, earlier.
Business Property
Special Methods
IntroductionThere are special methods of accounting for certain items
of income or expense. These include the following. If you dispose of business property, you may have a gain
or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in some• Amortization, discussed in chapter 8 of Publication
cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss that535, Business Expenses.
is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you have
• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 10 of Publication a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to
535. report the gain or loss.
• Depletion, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication 535.
Useful Items• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To
You may want to see:Depreciate Property.
• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In- Publicationstallment Sales.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Form (and Instructions)Change in
❏ 4797 Sales of Business PropertyAccounting Method
❏ Sch D (Form 1040) Capital Gains and Losses
Once you have set up your accounting method, you must
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-generally get IRS approval before you can change to tions and forms.another method. A change in your accounting method
includes a change in:
1. Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac- What Is a Dispositioncrual method, and
of Property?2. Your treatment of any material item.
To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application for A disposition of property includes the following transac-
Change in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approval tions.
to change an accounting method under either the auto- • You sell property for cash or other property.matic change procedures or the advance consent request
• You exchange property for other property.procedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For more
information, see the form instructions. • You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation
of a lease.
Automatic change procedures. Certain taxpayers can • You receive money for granting the exclusive use of
presume to have IRS approval to change their method of a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.
accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year for • You transfer property to satisfy a debt.which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), if
the taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automatic • You abandon property.
Page 16 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 17 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on
your mortgage or repossesses your property. How Do I Figure
• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, and a Gain or Loss?you receive property or money in payment.
• Your property is condemned, or disposed of under
the threat of condemnation, and you receive prop- Table 3-1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss
erty or money in payment.
IF your... THEN you have a...For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
Adjusted basis is more than thesee Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
amount realized Loss.details about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica-
tion 544. Amount realized is more than
the adjusted basis Gain.Nontaxable exchanges. Certain exchanges of property
are not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange is Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair marketnot recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gain value, and amount recognized are defined next. You needor loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwise to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.dispose of the property you receive.
Basis. The cost or purchase price of property is usually itsLike-kind exchanges. A like-kind exchange is the ex-
basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or otherchange of property for the same kind of property. It is the
disposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a
inheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you mustlike-kind exchange, the property traded and the property
use a basis other than its cost. For more information aboutreceived must be both of the following.
basis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.• Business or investment property.
Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of property is your• Like property. original cost or other basis plus certain additions, and
minus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-Report the exchange of like-kind property on Form alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information about ferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,like-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544. are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
Installment sales. An installment sale is a sale of prop-
erty where you receive at least one payment after the tax Amount realized. The amount you realize from a disposi-
year of the sale. If you finance the buyer's purchase of your tion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market
property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort- value of all property or services you receive. The amount
gage from a third party, you probably have an installment you realize also includes any of your liabilities that were
sale. assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the
For more information about installment sales, see Publi- property you transferred is subject, such as real estate
cation 537, Installment Sales. taxes or a mortgage.
Sale of a business. The sale of a business usually is not Fair market value. Fair market value is the price at whicha sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the business the property would change hands between a buyer and aare sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treated seller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having rea-as being sold separately for determining the treatment of sonable knowledge of all necessary facts.gain or loss.
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of a Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from a
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the sales disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss
price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included in
Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide this gross income. Recognized losses are deductible from
information. The buyer and seller should each attach Form gross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer-
8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in which tain exchanges of property is not recognized. See Nontax-
the sale occurred. able exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a loss
For more information about the sale of a business, see from the disposition of property held for personal use.
chapter 2 of Publication 544.
Is My Gain or Loss
Ordinary or Capital?
You must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary
or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure your
net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital
gain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property Page 17

Page 18 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or Dispositions of business property and depreciable
investment is a capital asset. property. Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, you
Certain property you use in your business is not a may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this Like-kind exchanges. Use Form 8824 , Like-Kind Ex-property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 andthe property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat Schedule D (Form 1040). the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and
losses are called section 1231 gains and losses. Installment sales. Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-
For more information about ordinary and capital gains come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and Schedule
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544. D (Form 1040). 
Casualties and thefts. Use Form 4684, Casualties andIs My Capital Gain or Loss Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. 
Short Term or Long Term?
Condemned property. Use Form 4797 . You may also
have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or loss
is long or short term depends on how long you own the
property before you dispose of it. The time you own prop-
erty before disposing of it is called the holding period.
4.Table 3-2. Do I Have a Short-Term or
Long-Term Gain or Loss?
General BusinessIF you hold the
property... THEN you have a... Credits
1 year or less Short-term capital gain or loss.
More than 1 year Long-term capital gain or loss. Introduction
For more information about short-term and long-term Your general business credit for the year consists of your
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544. carryforward of business credits from prior years plus the
total of your current year business credits. In addition, your
general business credit for the current year may be in-
creased later by the carryback of business credits fromWhere Do I Report later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.
Gains and Losses?
Useful Items
Report gains and losses from the following dispositions on You may want to see:
the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain
how to fill them out. Publication
❏ 954 Tax Incentives for Distressed Communities
Form (and Instructions)
❏ 3800 General Business Credit
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividuals
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-
tions and forms.
Business Credits
All of the following credits are part of the general business
credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown in
parentheses. You will also have to complete Form 3800.
Agricultural chemicals security credit (Form 8931).
This credit applies to qualified agricultural chemical secur-
ity expenses paid or incurred by eligible agricultural busi-
nesses. For more information, see Form 8931.
Page 18 Chapter 4 General Business Credits

Page 19 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alcohol and cellulosic biofuel fuels credit (Form 6478). costs of a new qualified defined benefit or defined contribu-
This credit consists of the alcohol mixture credit, alcohol tion plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simpli-
credit, small ethanol producer credit, and cellulosic biofuel fied employee pension. For more information, see
producer credit. For more information, see Form 6478. Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business
(SEP, Simple, and Qualified Plans).Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property credit (Form
Credit for affected Midwestern disaster area employ-8911). This credit applies to the cost of any qualified fuel
ers (Form 5884-A). This form relates to the employeevehicle refueling property you placed in service. For more
retention credit and employer housing credit. See the forminformation, see Form 8911.
for more information, including the timeframe applicableAlternative motor vehicle credit (Form 8910). This for the credits.credit consists of the following credits for certain vehicles
Disabled access credit (Form 8826). This credit is ayou placed in service. For more information, see Form
nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible small business that8910.
pays or incurs expenses to provide access to persons who• Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle credit. have disabilities. You must pay or incur the expenses to
enable your business to comply with the Americans with• Advanced lean burn technology motor vehicle credit.
Disabilities Act of 1990. For more information, see Form• Qualified hybrid motor vehicle credit. 8826.
• Qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle credit. Distilled spirits credit (Form 8906). This credit is avail-
able to distillers and importers of distilled spirits and eligi-• Qualified plug-in electric drive motor vehicle credit,
ble wholesalers of distilled spirits. For more information,for a vehicle converted, and then placed in service
see Form 8906.after February 17, 2009.
Empowerment zone and renewal community employ-
ment credit (Form 8844). You may qualify for this credit ifBiodiesel and renewable diesel fuels credit (Form
you have employees and are engaged in a business in an8864). This credit applies to certain fuel sold or used in
empowerment zone or renewal community for which theyour business. For more information, see Form 8864.
credit is available. For more information, see Form 8844Carbon dioxide sequestration credit (Form 8933). This and Publication 954.credit is for carbon dioxide which is captured at a qualified
Energy efficient appliance credit (Form 8909). Thisfacility and disposed of in a secure geological storage or
credit is available for manufacturers of eligible appliances.used in a qualified enhanced oil or natural gas recovery
For more information, see Form 8909.project. For more information, see Form 8933.
Energy efficient home credit (Form 8908). This credit isCredit for employer social security and Medicare taxes
available for eligible contractors of certain homes sold forpaid on certain employee tips (Form 8846). This credit
use as a residence. For more information, see Form 8908.is generally equal to your (employer's) portion of social
security and Medicare taxes paid on tips received by em- Indian employment credit (Form 8845). This credit ap-ployees of your food and beverage establishment where plies to qualified wages and health insurance costs youtipping is customary. The credit applies regardless of paid or incurred for qualified employees. For more informa-whether the food is consumed on or off your business tion, see Form 8845 and Publication 954.premises. For more information, see Form 8846.
Investment credit (Form 3468). The investment credit is
Credit for employer differential wage payments (Form the total of the following credits. For more information, see
8932). This credit provides certain small businesses with Form 3468.
an incentive to continue to pay wages to an employee
• Rehabilitation credit.performing services on active duty in the uniformed serv-
ices of the United States for a period of more than 30 days. • Energy credit.
For more information, see Form 8932.
• Qualifying advanced coal project credit.
Credit for employer-provided childcare facilities and • Qualifying gasification project credit.services (Form 8882). This credit applies to the qualified
expenses you paid for employee childcare and qualified • Qualifying advanced energy project credit.
expenses you paid for childcare resource and referral
services. For more information, see Form 8882. Low sulfur diesel fuel production credit (Form 8896).
Credit for increasing research activities (Form 6765). This credit is for the production of low sulfur diesel fuel by a
This credit is designed to encourage businesses to in- qualified small business. For more information, see Form
crease the amounts they spend on research and experi- 8896.
mental activities, including energy research. For more Low-income housing credit (Form 8586). This creditinformation, see Form 6765. generally applies to each new qualified low-income build-
Credit for small employer pension plan startup costs ing placed in service after 1986. For more information, see
(Form 8881). This credit applies to pension plan startup Form 8586.
Chapter 4 General Business Credits Page 19

Page 20 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mine rescue team training credit (Form 8923). This Alternative minimum tax (AMT). Although you may not
credit applies to training program costs you pay or incur for owe AMT, you may still need to figure your tentative mini-
certain mine rescue team employees. For more informa- mum tax on Form 6251 if you claim certain general busi-
tion, see Form 8923. ness credits. After you fill in Form 6251, attach it to your tax
return. 
New markets credit (Form 8874). This credit is for quali-
fied equity investments made in qualified community de-
velopment entities. For more information, see Form 8874.
Nonconventional source fuel credit (Form 8907). This 5.
credit is for qualified coke and coke gas you produced and
sold to an unrelated person during the tax year. For more
information, see Form 8907. Business Income
Orphan drug credit (Form 8820). This credit applies to
qualified expenses incurred in testing certain drugs for rare Introduction
diseases and conditions. For more information, see Form This chapter primarily explains business income and how8820. to account for it on your tax return, what items are not
considered income, and gives guidelines for selected oc-
Qualified plug-in electric drive motor vehicle credit cupations.
(Form 8936). This credit is for new qualified plug-in elec- If there is a connection between any income you receivetric drive motor vehicles placed in service during the tax and your business, the income is business income. Ayear. For more information, including information on what connection exists if it is clear that the payment of incomeis considered as a qualified plug-in electric drive motor would not have been made if you did not have the busi-vehicle, see Form 8936. ness.
You can have business income even if you are not
Qualified plug-in electric vehicle credit (Form 8834, involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Income
Part I only). This portion of the credit is for certain quali- from work you do on the side in addition to your regular job
fied plug-in electric vehicles. See Form 8834 for more can be business income.
information, including information on what is considered as You report most business income, such as income from
a qualified plug-in electric vehicle. selling your products or services, on Schedule C or C-EZ.
But you report the income from the sale of business as-
sets, such as land and office buildings, on other formsQualified railroad track maintenance credit (Form
instead of Schedule C or C-EZ. For information on selling8900). This credit applies with respect to qualified railroad
business assets, see chapter 3.track maintenance expenditures paid or incurred during
the tax year. For more information, see Form 8900. Nonemployee compensation. Business income
includes amounts you received in your business
that were properly shown on Forms 1099-MISC.Renewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal
TIP
This includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-production credit (Form 8835). This credit is for the sale
sation in box 7 of the form. You can find more informationof electricity, refined coal, or Indian coal produced in the
in the instructions on the back of the Form 1099-MISC youUnited States or U.S. possessions from qualified energy
received. resources at a qualified facility. For more information, see
Form 8835.
Work opportunity credit (Form 5884). This credit pro- Kinds of Income
vides businesses with an incentive to hire individuals from
targeted groups that have a particularly high unemploy- You must report on your tax return all income you receive
ment rate or other special employment needs. For more from your business unless it is excluded by law. In most
information, see Form 5884. cases, your business income will be in the form of cash,
checks, and credit card charges. But business income can
be in other forms, such as property or services. These and
other types of income are explained next.How To Claim the Credit
If you are a U.S. citizen who has business income
To claim a general business credit, you will first have to get from sources outside the United States (foreign
the forms you need to claim your current year business income), you must report that income on your tax
CAUTION
!
credits. return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If you
In addition to the credit form, you also need to file Form live outside the United States, you may be able to exclude
3800. part or all of your foreign-source business income. For
Page 20 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 21 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
details, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens agree to provide plumbing services to any member for a
and Resident Aliens Abroad. specified number of hours. Each member has access to a
directory that lists the members of the club and the serv-
ices available.Bartering for Property or Services Members contact each other directly and request serv-
ices to be performed. You are not required to provideBartering is an exchange of property or services. You must services unless requested by another member, but youinclude in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair can use as many of the offered services as you wishmarket value of property or services you receive in ex- without paying a fee.change for something else. If you exchange services with You must include the fair market value of any servicesanother person and you both have agreed ahead of time you receive from club members in your gross receiptson the value of the services, that value will be accepted as when you receive them even if you have not provided anythe fair market value unless the value can be shown to be services to club members.otherwise.
Information returns. If you are involved in a barteringExample 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per-
transaction, you may have to file either of the followingform legal services for a client, a small corporation. In
forms.payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in
the corporation. You must include the fair market value of • Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-
the shares in income. change Transactions. 
• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. Example 2. You are an artist and create a work of art to
compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of your For information about these forms, see the General In-
apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the structions for Certain Information Returns (1098, 1099,
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in- 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G).
clude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her
rental income.
Real Estate Rents
Example 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Both
If you are a real estate dealer who receives income fromyou and a house painter are members of a barter club, an
renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,organization that each year gives its members a directory
who provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,of members and the services each member provides.
report the rental income and expenses on Schedule C orMembers get in touch with other members directly and
C-EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind ofbargain for the value of the services to be performed.
owner described in the preceding sentence, report theIn return for accounting services you provided for the rental income and expenses on Schedule E. For morehouse painter's business, the house painter painted your information, see Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-home. You must include in gross receipts the fair market erty.value of the services you received from the house painter.
The house painter must include the fair market value of Real estate dealer. You are a real estate dealer if you areyour accounting services in his or her gross receipts. engaged in the business of selling real estate to customers
with the purpose of making a profit from those sales. RentExample 4. You are a member of a barter club that you receive from real estate held for sale to customers isuses credit units to credit or debit members' accounts for subject to SE tax. However, rent you receive from realgoods or services provided or received. As soon as units estate held for speculation or investment is not subject toare credited to your account, you can use them to buy SE tax.goods or services or sell or transfer the units to other
members.
Trailer park owner. Rental income from a trailer park isYou must include the value of credit units you received subject to SE tax if you are a self-employed trailer parkin your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units are owner who provides trailer lots and facilities and substan-credited to your account. tial services for the convenience of your tenants.
 You generally are considered to provide substantialThe dollar value of units received for services by an
services for tenants if they are primarily for the tenants'employee of the club, who can use the units in the same
convenience and normally are not provided to maintain themanner as other members, must be included in the em-
lots in a condition for occupancy. Services are substantial ifployee's gross income for the tax year in which received. It
the compensation for the services makes up a materialis wages subject to social security and Medicare taxes
part of the tenants' rental payments.(FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), and income
Examples of services that are not normally provided fortax withholding. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em-
the tenants' convenience include supervising and main-ployer's Tax Guide.
taining a recreational hall provided by the park, distributing
Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and use a monthly newsletter to tenants, operating a laundry facil-
the cash method of accounting. You join a barter club and ity, and helping tenants buy or sell their trailers.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Examples of services that are normally provided to Interest. Interest received on notes receivable that you
have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi-maintain the lots in a condition for tenant occupancy in-
ness income. Interest received on loans is business in-clude city sewerage, electrical connections, and roadways.
come if you are in the business of lending money.
Hotels, boarding houses, and apartments. Rental in- Uncollectible loans. If a loan payable to you becomescome you receive for the use or occupancy of hotels, uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrualboarding houses, or apartment houses is subject to SE tax method of accounting, you must include in gross incomeif you provide services for the occupants. interest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-
Generally, you are considered to provide services for ble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you
the occupants if the services are primarily for their conve- may be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts
nience and are not services normally provided with the in chapter 8.
rental of rooms for occupancy only. An example of a Unstated interest. If little or no interest is charged onservice that is not normally provided for the convenience of an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of eachthe occupants is maid service. However, providing heat payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest andand light, cleaning stairways and lobbies, and collecting Original Issue Discount (OID)  in Publication 537, Install-trash are services normally provided for the occupants' ment Sales.convenience.
Dividends. Generally, dividends are business income toPrepaid rent. Advance payments received under a lease dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-that does not put any restriction on their use or enjoyment tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-are income in the year you receive them. This is true no come. If you hold stock as a personal investmentmatter what accounting method or period you use. separately from your business activity, the dividends from
the stock are nonbusiness income.Lease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee for If you receive dividends from business insurance premi-granting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in your ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all orgross receipts in the year received. part of the dividend as business income on your return. To
find out how much you have to report, see Recovery ofLease cancellation payments. Report payments you re- items previously deducted under Other Income, later.ceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your gross
receipts in the year received.
Canceled Debt
Payments to third parties. If your lessee makes pay-
The following explains the general rule for including can-ments to someone else under an agreement to pay your celed debt in income and the exceptions to the generaldebts or obligations, include the payments in your gross rule.receipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common
example of this kind of income is a lessee's payment of
your property taxes on leased real property. General Rule
Settlement payments. Payments you receive in settle- Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other than
ment of a lessee's obligation to restore the leased property as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceled
amount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report theto its original condition are income in the amount that the
canceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredpayments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im-
the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,provements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-
report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.nected by the lessee.
Personal Property Rents Exceptions
If you are in the business of renting personal property The following discussion covers some exceptions to the
(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental general rule for canceled debt.
amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule C
or C-EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described in the Price reduced after purchase. If you owe a debt to the
preceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also be re- seller for property you bought and the seller reduces the
ceived for renting personal property. If you receive any of amount you owe, you generally do not have income from
those payments, include them in your gross receipts as the reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat
explained in that discussion. the amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-
ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Interest and Dividend Income
Deductible debt. You do not realize income from a can-
Interest and dividends may be considered business in- celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
come. have led to a deduction.
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You get accounting services for your busi- before that time, you must reduce its basis immediately
ness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi- before the disposition.
ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Your Cancellation of qualified real property businessaccountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the debt. Qualified real property business debt is debt (otheraccounting services. How you treat the canceled debt than qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi-depends on your method of accounting. tions.
• Cash method Ð You do not include the canceled
1. It was incurred or assumed in connection with realdebt in income because payment of the debt would
property used in a trade or business.have been deductible as a business expense.
2. It was secured by such real property.• Accrual method Ð You include the canceled debt in
income because the expense was deductible when 3. It was incurred or assumed at either of the followingyou incurred the debt. times.
For information on the cash and accrual methods of a. Before January 1, 1993.
accounting, see chapter 2. b. After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumed
to acquire, construct, or substantially improve the
real property.Exclusions
Do not include canceled debt in income in the following 4. It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.
situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982, Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted- ing of debt described in (3) earlier, but only to the extent itness. For more information, see Form 982.  does not exceed the debt being refinanced.
1. The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy case You cannot exclude more than either of the following
under title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank- amounts.
ruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.
1. The excess (if any) of:2. The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent.
You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you a. The outstanding principal of qualified real property
are insolvent. See Publication 908. business debt (immediately before the cancella-
tion), over3. The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to a
qualified person. See chapter 3 in Publication 225, b. The fair market value (immediately before the
Farmer's Tax Guide. cancellation) of the business real property that is
security for the debt, reduced by the outstanding4. The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi- principal amount of any other qualified real prop-ness debt. This situation is explained later. erty business debt secured by this property imme-
5. The canceled debt is qualified principal residence diately before the cancellation.
indebtedness which is discharged after 2006 and
before 2010. See Form 982. 2. The total adjusted bases of depreciable real property
held by you immediately before the cancellation.6. The discharge of certain indebtedness of a qualified
These adjusted bases are determined after any basisindividual because of Midwestern disasters. See
reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy, insol-Publication 4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpay-
vency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take intoers in the Midwestern Disaster Areas.
account depreciable real property acquired in con-
If a canceled debt is excluded from income because it templation of the cancellation.
takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-
tions 2 through 6 do not apply. If it takes place when you Election. To make this election, complete Form 982
are insolvent, the exclusions in situations 3 and 4 do not and attach it to your income tax return for the tax year in
apply to the extent you are insolvent. which the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by
the due date (including extensions). If you timely filed yourDebt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes any return for the year without making the election, you can stilldebt for which you are liable or which attaches to property make the election by filing an amended return within 6you hold. months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). For more information, see When To File in the formQualified real property business debt. You can elect to
instructions.exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
real property business debt. If you make the election, you
must reduce the basis of your depreciable real property by Other Income
the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginning
The following discussion explains how to treat other typesof your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel-
of business income you may receive.lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the property
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Restricted property. Restricted property is property that income, you must include with your return a computation
has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receive showing how you figured the exclusion.
restricted stock or other property for services performed,
Example. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in-the fair market value of the property in excess of your cost
come of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and otheris included in your income on Schedule C or C-EZ when
allowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personalthe restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to be
exemptions for a total of $7,300. He would not pay incometaxed in the year you receive the property. For more
tax even if he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, heinformation on including restricted property in income, see
will not report as income any part of the $300 he mayPublication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
recover in any future year.Gains and losses. Do not report on Schedule C or C-EZ
Exception for depreciation. This rule does not applya gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither
to depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rulesstock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers.
explained next.Instead, you must report these gains and losses on other
forms. For more information, see chapter 3.
Recapture of depreciation. In the following situations,
Promissory notes. Report promissory notes and other you have to recapture the depreciation deduction. This
evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange of means you include in income part or all of the depreciation
property that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale to you deducted in previous years.
customers on Schedule C or C-EZ. In general, you report
Listed property. If your business use of listed propertythem at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% orinterest) when you receive them.
less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the property
Lost income payments. If you reduce or stop your busi- in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia-
ness activities, report on Schedule C or C-EZ any payment tion deduction. You do this by including in income on
you receive for the lost income of your business from Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ-
insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C or ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Business
C-EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C.
the payment. For more information, see What is the Business-Use Re-
quirement? in chapter 5 of Publication 946, How To Depre-Damages. You must include in gross income compensa- ciate Property. That chapter explains how to determinetion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of the whether property is used more than 50% in your business.following injuries connected with your business.
Section 179 property. If you take a section 179 deduc-• Patent infringement. tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an
• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty. asset and before the end of the asset's recovery period the
percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must• Antitrust injury. recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
including in income on Schedule C part of the deductionEconomic injury. You may be entitled to a deduction you took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount toagainst the income if it compensates you for actual eco- include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 tonomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the following find out when you recapture the deduction.amounts.
Sale or exchange of depreciable property. If you sell• The amount you receive or accrue for damages in or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may havethe tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incur to treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation asin the tax year to recover that amount. ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-
• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de- tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-
ducted. tion, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Other
Dispositions of Assets.
Punitive damages. You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Kickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in Items That Are Not Income
your income on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, do not
In some cases the property or money you receive is notinclude them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a
income.related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of
goods sold.
Appreciation. Increases in value of your property are not
Recovery of items previously deducted. If you recover income until you realize the increases through a sale or
a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year, other taxable disposition.
include the recovery in income on Schedule C or C-EZ.
However, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to others
not reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandise
reduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from remains with you, the consignor, even after the consignee
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goods improvements are a payment of rent to you, then the
on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con- increase in value would be income.
signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is notshipped out on consignment is included in your inventory income.until it is sold.
Do not include merchandise you receive on consign- Sales tax. State and local sales taxes imposed on the
ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commission buyer, which you were required to collect and pay over to
on merchandise consigned to you in your income when state or local governments, are not income.
you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit or
commission, depending upon the method of accounting
you use. Guidelines for Selected
Construction allowances. If you enter into a lease after OccupationsAugust 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-
struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rent This section provides information to determine whetherreduction) from your landlord if you receive it under both your earnings should be reported on Schedule C (Formthe following conditions. 1040) or C-EZ (Form 1040).
• Under a short-term lease of retail space. Direct seller. You must report all income you receive as a
• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali- direct seller on Schedule C or C-EZ. This includes any of
fied long-term real property for use in your business the following.
at that retail space. • Income from salesÐpayments you receive from
customers for products they buy from you.Amount you can exclude. You can exclude the con-
struction allowance to the extent it does not exceed the • Commissions, bonuses, or percentages you receive
amount you spent for construction or improvements. for sales and the sales of others who work under
you.Short-term lease. A short-term lease is a lease (or
other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space for • Prizes, awards, and gifts you receive from your sell-
15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining ing business.
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. You must report this income regardless of whether it is
• Take into account options to renew when figuring reported to you on an information return.
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do not You are a direct seller if you meet all the followingtake into account any option to renew at fair market conditions.value determined at the time of renewal.
1. You are engaged in one of the following trades or• Two or more successive leases that are part of the
businesses.same transaction (or a series of related transactions)
for the same or substantially similar retail space are a. Selling or soliciting the sale of consumer productstreated as one lease. either in a home or other place that is not a per-
manent retail establishment, or to any buyer on aRetail space. Retail space is real property leased, oc- buy-sell basis or a deposit-commission basis forcupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your resale in a home or other place of business that isbusiness of selling tangible personal property or services not a permanent retail establishment.to the general public.
b. Delivering or distributing newspapers or shoppingQualified long-term real property. Qualified long-term news (including any services directly related toreal property is nonresidential real property that is part of, that trade or business).or otherwise present at, your retail space and that reverts
to the landlord when the lease ends. 2. Substantially all your pay (whether paid in cash or
Exchange of like-kind property. If you exchange your not) for services described above is directly related
business property or property you hold for investment to sales or other output (including performance of
solely for property of a like kind to be used in your business services) rather than to the number of hours worked.
or to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized. 3. Your services are performed under a written contractThis means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is not between you and the person for whom you performdeductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is the the services, and the contract provides that you willtrade-in of a business automobile for another business not be treated as an employee for federal tax pur-automobile. For more information, see Form 8824. poses.
Leasehold improvements. If a tenant erects buildings or
makes improvements to your property, the increase in the Executor or administrator. If you administer a deceased
value of the property due to the improvements is not person's estate, your fees are reported on Schedule C or
income to you. However, if the facts indicate that the C-EZ if you are one of the following:
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. A professional fiduciary. Newspaper carrier or distributor. You are a direct seller
and your earnings are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if2. A nonprofessional fiduciary (personal representative) all the following conditions apply.and both of the following apply.
• You are in the business of delivering or distributing
a. The estate includes an active trade or business in newspapers or shopping news (including directly re-
which you actively participate. lated services such as soliciting customers and col-
lecting receipts).b. Your fees are related to the operation of that trade
or business. • Substantially all your pay for these services directly
relates to your sales or other output rather than to
3. A nonprofessional fiduciary of a single estate that the number of hours you work.
requires extensive managerial activities on your part • You perform the services under a written contractfor a long period of time, provided these activities are that says you will not be treated as an employee forenough to be considered a trade or business. federal tax purposes.
 If the fees do not meet the above requirements, report
them on line 21 of Form 1040. This rule applies whether or not you hire others to help
you make deliveries. It also applies whether you buy the
papers from the publisher or are paid based on the numberFishing crew member.  If you are a member of the crew
of papers you deliver.that catches fish or other water life, your earnings are
reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if you meet all the require- Newspaper or magazine vendor. If you are 18 or olderments shown in chapter 10 under Fishing crew member. and you sell newspapers or magazines, your earnings are
reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all the following condi-Insurance agent, former. Termination payments you re- tions apply.ceive as a former self-employed insurance agent from an
• You sell newspapers or magazines to ultimate con-insurance company because of services you performed for
sumers.that company are not reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all
the following conditions are met. • You sell them at a fixed price.
• You received payments after your agreement to per- • Your earnings are based on the difference between
form services for the company ended. the sales price and your cost of goods sold.
• You did not perform any services for the company
This rule applies whether or not you are guaranteed aafter your service agreement ended and before the minimum amount of earnings. It also applies whether orend of the year in which you received the payment. not you receive credit for unsold newspapers or magazines
• You entered into a covenant not to compete against you return to your supplier.
the company for at least a 1-year period beginning Notary public. Fees you receive for services you performon the date your service agreement ended. as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ.
• The amount of the payments depended primarily on These payments are not subject to self-employment tax
policies sold by you or credited to your account dur- (see the instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).
ing the last year of your service agreement or the Public official. Public officials generally do not reportextent to which those policies remain in force for what they earn for serving in public office on Schedule C orsome period after your service agreement ended, or C-EZ. This rule applies to payments received by an electedboth. tax collector from state funds on the basis of a fixed
• The amount of the payment did not depend to any percentage of the taxes collected. Public office includes
any elective or appointive office of the United States or itsextent on length of service or overall earnings from
possessions, the District of Columbia, a state or its politicalservices performed for the company (regardless of
subdivisions, or a wholly owned instrumentality of any ofwhether eligibility for the payments depended on
these.length of service).
Public officials of state or local governments report their
fees on Schedule C or C-EZ if they are paid solely on a feeInsurance agent, retired. Income paid by an insurance basis and if their services are eligible for, but not coveredcompany to a retired self-employed insurance agent based by, social security under a federal-state agreement.on a percentage of commissions received before retire-
Real estate agent or direct seller. If you are a licensedment is reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. Also, renewal
real estate agent or a direct seller, your earnings arecommissions and deferred commissions for sales made
reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if both the following apply.before retirement are generally reported on Schedule C or
C-EZ. • Substantially all your pay for services as a real es-
However, renewal commissions paid to the survivor of tate agent or direct seller directly relates to your
an insurance agent are not reported on Schedule C or sales or other output rather than to the number of
C-EZ. hours you work.
Page 26 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 27 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You perform the services under a written contract your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice price
that says you will not be treated as an employee for of merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by the
federal tax purposes. average or estimated discounts received on the merchan-
dise.
Securities dealer. If you are a dealer in options or com- Trade discounts. These are reductions from list or cata-
modities, your gains and losses from dealing or trading in log prices and usually are not written into the invoice or
section 1256 contracts (regulated futures contracts, for- charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
eign currency contracts, nonequity options, dealer equity your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount as
options, and dealer securities futures contracts) or prop- the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more informa-
erty related to those contracts (such as stock used to tion, see Trade discounts in chapter 6.
hedge options) are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. For
Payment placed in escrow. If the buyer of your propertymore information, see sections 1256 and 1402(i).
places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do
Securities trader. You are a trader in securities if you are not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually or
engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for constructively receive it. However, upon completion of the
your own account. As a trader in securities, your gain or terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you will
loss from the disposition of securities is not reported on have taxable income, even if you do not accept the money
Schedule C or C-EZ. However, see Securities dealer , until the next year.
earlier, for an exception that applies to section 1256 con-
Sales returns and allowances. Credits you allow cus-tracts. For more information about securities traders, see
tomers for returned merchandise and any other al-Publication 550, Investment Income and Expenses.
lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.
Accounting for Your Income Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-
crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differs vance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-
tion discusses some of the more common differences that Insurance proceeds. If you receive insurance or another
may affect business transactions. type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you must
Figure your business income on the basis of a tax year subtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.
and according to your regular method of accounting (see You cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty or
chapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producing theft loss.
factor in your business, you usually have to use inventories For information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-
to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are not tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.
allowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-
tories, see chapter 2.
Income paid to a third party. All income you earn is
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income
paid to a third party. 6.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental
How To Figureagreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son.
The amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cash discounts. These are amounts the seller permits
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.
For income tax purposes, you can use either of the follow- Introduction
ing two methods to account for cash discounts.
If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost of
goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-1. Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line
ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for
tory at the beginning and end of each tax year.Personal Use in chapter 6).
This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,2. Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac- wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-count. ness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.
You must use the chosen method every year for all your This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-
purchase discounts. ness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,
If you use the second method, the credit balance in the or painter. However, if you work in a personal service
account at the end of your tax year is business income. business and also sell or charge for the materials and
Under this method, you do not reduce the cost of goods supplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-
sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing plies to you.
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 27

Page 28 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you must account for an inventory in your busi- A special rule applies to certain donations of food inven-
ness, you must generally use an accrual method tory. See Food Inventory  in Publication 526, Charitable
of accounting for your purchases and sales. For Contributions.
CAUTION
!
more information, see chapter 2.
Example 1. You are a calendar year taxpayer who uses
an accrual method of accounting. In 2009 you contributed
property from inventory to a church. It had a fair market
Figuring Cost of Goods Sold value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2008
properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition ofon Schedule C Lines 35 the property, and in 2008, you properly deducted $50 of
administrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-Through 42 erty as business expenses. The charitable contribution
allowed for 2009 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is theFigure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35 through amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold the42 of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of theare explained in the discussion that follows. gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining gross
income for 2009 must not include the $400. You remove35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last
year's closing inventory, attach explanation ....... . that amount from opening inventory for 2009.
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal
use .................................. . Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-
uted property in 2009 at a cost of $400, you would include37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to
yourself ............................... . the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goods
38 Materials and supplies ..................... . sold for 2009 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
other expenses attributable to the property for that year.39 Other costs ............................. .
You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-40 Add lines 35 through 39 .................... .
duction for the contributed property.41 Inventory at end of year .................... .
42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Line 36Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4 ........ .
Purchases Less Cost of Items
Withdrawn for Personal UseLine 35
Inventory at Beginning of Year If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you
bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, this
If you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost of includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased for
merchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that you manufacture into a finished product.
will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro-
ducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work in Trade discounts. The differences between the stated
process, finished goods, and materials and supplies used prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them are
in manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2). called trade discounts. You must use the prices you pay
(not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closing
Do not show the discount amount separately as an item ininventory of the year before. You must explain any differ-
gross income.ence in a schedule attached to your return.
An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car in
Donation of inventory. If you contribute inventory (prop- inventory reduced by any manufacturer's rebate that rep-
erty that you sell in the course of your business), the resents a trade discount.
amount you can claim as a contribution deduction is the
smaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed it Cash discounts. Cash discounts are amounts your sup-
or its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any cost pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices for
incurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you would prompt payments. There are two methods of accounting
otherwise include in your opening inventory for the year of for cash discounts. You can either credit them to a sepa-
the contribution. You must remove the amount of your rate discount account or deduct them from total purchases
contribution deduction from your opening inventory. It is for the year. Whichever method you use, you must be
not part of the cost of goods sold. consistent. If you want to change your method of figuring
inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application forIf the cost of donated inventory is not included in your
Change in Accounting Method. For more information, seeopening inventory, the inventory's basis is zero and you
Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2.cannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat the
inventory's cost as you would ordinarily treat it under your If you credit cash discounts to a separate account, you
method of accounting. For example, include the purchase must include this credit balance in your business income at
price of inventory bought and donated in the same year in the end of the tax year. If you use this method, do not
the cost of goods sold for that year. reduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 29 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Purchase returns and allowances. You must deduct all Line 39
returns and allowances from your total purchases during Other Coststhe year.
Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing orMerchandise withdrawn from sale. If you withdraw mer- mining process that you charge to your cost of goods soldchandise for your personal or family use, you must exclude are as follows.this cost from the total amount of merchandise you bought
for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac- Containers. Containers and packages that are an integral
count with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per- part of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
sonal use. You must also charge the amount to your goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
drawing account. tured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
A drawing account is a separate account you should Freight-in. Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawkeep to record the business income you withdraw to pay materials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-for personal and family expenses. As stated above, you dise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
Overhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-sonal or family use. This account is also known as a
penses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-ªwithdrawals accountº or ªpersonal account.º
ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The
overhead expenses you have as direct and necessaryLine 37 expenses of the manufacturing operation are included inCost of Labor your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
Line 40only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer-
chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do not Add Lines 35 through 39
have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of thegoods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop-
goods available for sale during the year.erly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both the
direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product. Line 41
Inventory at End of YearDirect labor. Direct labor costs are the wages you pay to
those employees who spend all their time working directly Subtract the value of your closing inventory (including, ason the product being manufactured. They also include a appropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materialspart of the wages you pay to employees who work directly and supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) fromon the product part time if you can determine that part of line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known astheir wages. closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory will
usually become the beginning inventory of your next taxIndirect labor. Indirect labor costs are the wages you pay year.to employees who perform a general factory function that
does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of Line 42
the manufacturing process. Cost of Goods Sold
Other labor. Other labor costs not properly chargeable to When you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at the
the cost of goods sold can be deducted as selling or end of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,
administrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of labor the remainder is your cost of goods sold during the tax
costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold are year.
the direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costs
treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
7.Line 38
Materials and Supplies
Figuring Gross ProfitMaterials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals,
used in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process Introductionare treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
business expense when you use them. Business ex- After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
penses are discussed in chapter 8. ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 29

Page 30 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter- If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on you
mine gross profit before you can deduct any business as the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8. include the amount collected in gross receipts.
If you are filing Schedule C-EZ, your gross profit is your If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
gross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained later posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or local
under Additions to Gross Profit. governments, you generally do not include these amounts
in income.
Businesses that sell products. If you are filing Schedule Inventory at beginning of year. Compare this figure withC, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts. last year's ending inventory. The two amounts shouldFigure net receipts (line 3) on Schedule C by subtracting usually be the same.any returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts
(line 1). Returns and allowances include cash or credit Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-refunds you make to customers, rebates, and other al- sonal use (use them yourself, provide them to your family,lowances off the actual sales price. or give them as personal gifts, etc.) be sure to removeNext, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from net them from the cost of goods sold. For details on how toreceipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from your adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise withdrawnbusiness. from sale in chapter 6.
Businesses that sell services. You do not have to figure Inventory at end of year. Check to make sure your pro-
the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-
income-producing factor for your business. Your gross dures should ensure all items have been included in
profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts inventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.
minus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most Use inventory forms and adding machine tapes as the
professions and businesses that sell services rather than only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-
products can figure gross profit directly from net receipts in able at office supply stores. These forms have columns for
this way. recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value of
each inventory item. Each page has space to record who
Illustration. This illustration of the gross profit section of made the physical count, who priced the items, who made
the income statement of a retail business shows how gross the extensions, and who proofread the calculations. These
profit is figured. forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record to
Income Statement support its validity.Year Ended December 31, 2009 Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.
Gross receipts .............................. . $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances .................. . 14,940
Net receipts ............................... . $385,060 Testing GrossMinus: Cost of goods sold ...................... . 288,140
Gross profit ............................... . $96,920
Profit AccuracyThe cost of goods sold for this business is figured as
follows:
If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can check
Inventory at beginning of year .................. . $37,845 the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide gross
Plus: Purchases ................... . $285,900 profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measuresMinus: Items withdrawn for personal use ... . 2,650 283,250 the average spread between the merchandise cost ofGoods available for sale ...................... . $321,095
goods sold and the selling price.Minus: Inventory at end of year ................. . 32,955
Cost of goods sold ......................... . $288,140 Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Little or no difference between these two percentages
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
difference between these percentages may show that youItems To Check did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason forConsider the following items before figuring your gross the difference.profit.
Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willGross receipts. At the end of each business day, make
realize a gross profit of 331/3% on its sales. The net receiptssure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown onreceipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cash
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isregisters to keep track of receipts. You should also use a
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year'sfor your business.
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts
Sales tax collected. Check to make sure your records ($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-
show the correct sales tax collected. centage of 331/3%.
Page 30 Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit

Page 31 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A business bad debt is generally one that comes from
operating your trade or business. You may be able toAdditions to Gross Profit
deduct business bad debts as an expense on your busi-
ness tax return.If your business has income from a source other than its
regular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of
Business bad debt. A business bad debt is a loss fromSchedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross
the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following.business income. If you use Schedule C-EZ, include the
income on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples include 1. Created or acquired in your business.income from an interest-bearing checking account, income
from scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts. 2. Closely related to your business when it became
partly or totally worthless.
A debt is closely related to your business if your primary
motive for incurring the debt is a business reason.
Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to8.
suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and
services customers have not paid for are shown in your
books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. IfBusiness Expenses
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts or
notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
debt.Introduction
You can take a bad debt deduction for theseYou can deduct the costs of running your business. These accounts and notes receivable only if the amountcosts are known as business expenses. These are costs you were owed was included in your gross in-
CAUTION
!you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goods come either for the year the deduction is claimed or for asold but can deduct in the current year. prior year.To be deductible, a business expense must be both
ordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that is Accrual method. If you use an accrual method of ac-
common and accepted in your field of business. A neces- counting, you normally report income as you earn it. You
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for your can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-
business. An expense does not have to be indispensable ble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-
to be considered necessary. come.
For more information about the general rules for deduct- Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-ing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535, ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-Business Expenses. ment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amounts
If you have an expense that is partly for business owed to you that you have not received and cannot collect
and partly personal, separate the personal part if you never included those amounts in income.
from the business part. The personal part is not
CAUTION
!
deductible. More information. For more information about business
bad debts, see chapter 10 in Publication 535.
Useful Items Nonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-You may want to see: business bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-
tal losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For morePublication information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Publication
550, Investment Income and Expenses.❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
❏ 535 Business Expenses
Car and Truck Expenses❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
If you use your car or truck in your business, you may beSee chapter 12  for information about getting publica-
able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining yourtions and forms.
vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of local
transportation and traveling away from home overnight on
business.Bad Debts
You may qualify for a tax credit for qualified
plug-in electric vehicles, qualified plug-in electricIf someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have
drive motor vehicles, and alternative motor vehi-a bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts, business bad
TIP
cles you place in service during the year. Alternative motordebts and nonbusiness bad debts.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
vehicles include qualified fuel cell motor vehicles, ad- Methods for Deductingvanced lean burn technology motor vehicles, qualified hy- Car and Truck Expensesbrid motor vehicles, and qualified alternative fuel motor
vehicles. See Form 8834 (Part I only), Form 8936, and For local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck,Form 8910 for more information. you generally can use one of the following methods to
figure your expenses.Local transportation expenses. Local transportation ex-
penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all the • Standard mileage rate.
following. • Actual expenses.
• Getting from one workplace to another in the course
of your business or profession when you are travel- Standard mileage rate. You may be able to use theing within the city or general area that is your tax standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs ofhome. Tax home is defined later. operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for business
• Visiting clients or customers. purposes. For 2009, the standard mileage rate is 55 cents
per mile.• Going to a business meeting away from your regular
workplace. If you choose to use the standard mileage rate for
a year, you cannot deduct your actual expenses• Getting from your home to a temporary workplace for that year except for business-related parking
CAUTION
!when you have one or more regular places of work. fees and tolls.These temporary workplaces can be either within the
area of your tax home or outside that area. Choosing the standard mileage rate. If you want to
use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,Local business transportation does not include expenses
you must choose to use it in the first year the car isyou have while traveling away from home overnight. Those
available for use in your business. In later years, you canexpenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis-
choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actualcussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment.
expenses.However, if you use your car while traveling away from
home overnight, use the rules in this section to figure your If you use the standard mileage rate for a car you lease,
car expense deduction. you must choose to use it for the entire lease period
(including renewals).Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home. Standard mileage rate not allowed. You cannot use
It includes the entire city or general area in which your the standard mileage rate if you:
business or work is located.
1. Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
Example. You operate a printing business out of rented 2. Operate five or more cars at the same time,office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to
3. Claimed a depreciation deduction using any methodyour customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip
other than straight line, for example, ACRS ortransportation between your customers and your print
MACRS,shop.
4. Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car or
truck between your home and your main or regu- 5. Claimed the special depreciation allowance on thelar workplace. These costs are personal commut-
CAUTION
! car,ing expenses.
6. Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, or
Office in the home. Your workplace can be your home 7. Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-if you have an office in your home that qualifies as your bursement.principal place of business. For more information, see
Business Use of Your Home, later. Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using the stan-
dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedExample. You are a graphics designer. You operate parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park youryour business out of your home. Your home qualifies as car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingyour principal place of business. You occasionally have to expenses.)drive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You
can deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be-
Actual expenses. If you do not choose to use the stan-tween your home and your clients.
dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actual
car or truck expenses.
If you qualify to use both methods, figure your
deduction both ways to see which gives you a
larger deduction.
TIP
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Actual car expenses include the costs of the following from natural causes. You never can depreciate the
items. cost of land because land does not wear out, be-
come obsolete, or get used up.
Depreciation Lease payments Registration
Garage rent Licenses Repairs • It must not be excepted property. This includes prop-
Gas Oil Tires erty placed in service and disposed of in the sameInsurance Parking fees Tolls year.
If you use your vehicle for both business and personal
purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi- Repairs.  You cannot depreciate repairs and replace-ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses ments that do not increase the value of your property,based on the miles driven for each purpose. make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You can
deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 ofExample. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop. Schedule C-EZ.You drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000
miles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000 Depreciation method. The method for depreciating mostmiles were for personal use. You can claim only 80% business and investment property placed in service after(16,000 ÷  20,000) of the cost of operating your van as a 1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recoverybusiness expense. System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-
cation 946.More information. For more information about the rules
for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463. Section 179 deduction. You can elect to deduct a limited
amount of the cost of certain depreciable property in the
Reimbursing Your Employees year you place the property in service. This deduction is
known as the ªsection 179 deduction.º The maximumfor Expenses amount you can elect to deduct during 2009 is generally
$250,000 (higher limits apply to certain property).  ThisYou generally can deduct the amount you reimburse your
limit is generally reduced by the amount by which the costemployees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse-
of the property placed in service during the tax year ex-ment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it
ceeds $800,000. The total amount of depreciation (includ-depend in part on whether you reimburse the expenses
ing the section 179 deduction) you can take for aunder an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For
passenger automobile you use in your business and firstdetails, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. That chapter
place in service in 2009 is $2,960. Special rules apply toexplains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tells
trucks and vans. For more information, see Publicationyou whether to report the reimbursement on your em-
946. It explains what property qualifies for the deduction,ployee's Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
what limits apply to the deduction, and when and how to
recapture the deduction.
Depreciation Your section 179 election for the cost of any sport
utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehicles is
If property you acquire to use in your business is expected limited to $25,000. For more information, see the
CAUTION
!
to last more than one year, you generally cannot deduct Instructions for Form 4562 or Publication 946.
the entire cost as a business expense in the year you
acquire it. You must spread the cost over more than one Listed property. You must follow special rules and re-
tax year and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C. cordkeeping requirements when depreciating listed prop-
This method of deducting the cost of business property is erty. Listed property is any of the following.
called depreciation. • Most passenger automobiles.The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa-
tion about depreciation in Publication 946. • Most other property used for transportation.
• Any property of a type generally used for entertain-What property can be depreciated? You can depreciate
ment, recreation, or amusement.property if it meets all the following requirements.
• Certain computers and related peripheral equipment.• It must be property you own.
• Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommunica-• It must be used in business or held to produce in-
tions equipment).come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex-
plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use in
For more information about listed property, see Publica-your business.
tion 946.
• It must have a useful life that extends substantially
beyond the year it is placed in service. Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-
tion, if you are claiming any of the following.• It must have a determinable useful life, which means
that it must be something that wears out, decays, • Depreciation on property placed in service during the
gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value current tax year.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A section 179 deduction. • The use of a car.
• Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of • Flights on airplanes.
when it was placed in service). • Discounts on property or services.
• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.If you have to use Form 4562, you must file
• Tickets to entertainment or sporting events.Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.
CAUTION
!
Employee benefit programs include the following.
• Accident and health plans.
• Adoption assistance.Employees' Pay
• Cafeteria plans.You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give
your employees for the services they perform for your • Dependent care assistance.
business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services. • Educational assistance.To be deductible, your employees' pay must be an
• Group-term life insurance coverage.ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or
incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both • Welfare benefit funds.the following tests.
You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you• The pay must be reasonable.
provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost• The pay must be for services performed. falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or
other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as aChapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these
rent or lease expense. If you own the property, includerequirements.
your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal deduction or a depreciation deduction.withdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro-
You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringeprietor, you are not an employee of the business.
benefits you provide from your employees'If you had employees during the year, you must wages. For more information about fringe bene-
TIPuse Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ. fits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15-B,
CAUTION
!
Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.
Kinds of pay. Some of the ways you may provide pay to Insuranceyour employees are listed below. For an explanation of
each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535. You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-
ing kinds of insurance related to your business. • Awards.
• Bonuses. 1. Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
• Education expenses. 2. Credit insurance that covers losses from business
bad debts.• Fringe benefits (discussed later).
3. Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee ployees, including long-term care insurance.to repay if they are for personal services actually
performed. 4. Liability insurance.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for 5. Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-
services. bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or
damage to patients or clients.• Reimbursements for employee business expenses.
6. Workers' compensation insurance set by state law• Sick pay. that covers any claims for bodily injuries or
• Vacation pay. job-related diseases suffered by employees in your
business, regardless of fault.
Fringe benefits. A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the 7. Contributions to a state unemployment insuranceperformance of services. The following are examples of fund are deductible as taxes if they are consideredfringe benefits. taxes under state law.
• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.
• Meals and lodging.
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8. Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead of the policy are not taxed as income even if they are
expenses you have during long periods of disability used to liquidate the debt.
caused by your injury or sickness.
Self-employed health insurance deduction. You may9. Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles
be able to deduct the amount you paid for medical andused in your business for liability, damages, and
dental insurance and qualified long-term care insuranceother losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per-
for you and your family.sonal use, deduct only the part of the insurance pre-
mium that applies to the business use of the vehicle. How to figure the deduction. Generally, you can useIf you use the standard mileage rate to figure your the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure yourcar expenses, you cannot deduct any car insurance deduction. However, if any of the following apply, you mustpremiums. use the worksheet in chapter 6 of Publication 535.
10. Life insurance covering your employees if you are • You have more than one source of income subject tonot directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the self-employment tax.contract.
• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (relating to11. Business interruption insurance that pays for lost foreign earned income).profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or
• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-termother cause.
care insurance to figure the deduction.
Nondeductible premiums. You cannot deduct premiums
on the following kinds of insurance. Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct expense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create anamounts credited to a reserve set up for asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond theself-insurance. This applies even if you cannot get end of the current tax year.business insurance coverage for certain business
risks. However, your actual losses may be deducti- Example. In 2009, you signed a 3-year insurance con-ble. For more information, see Publication 547, Cas- tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2009, 2010,ualties, Disasters, and Thefts. and 2011 when you signed the contract, you can only
2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for a deduct the premium for 2009 on your 2009 tax return. You
policy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick- can deduct in 2010 and 2011 the premium allocable to
ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ- those years.
ous list.
More information. For more information about deducting3. Certain life insurance and annuities. insurance, see chapter 6 in Publication 535.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance
policy covering you, an employee, or any person Interest
with a financial interest in your business if you are
directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy. You can generally deduct as a business expense all inter-
You are included among possible beneficiaries of est you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts related
the policy if the policy owner is obligated to repay to your business. Interest relates to your business if you
a loan from you using the proceeds of the policy. use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. It
A person has a financial interest in your business does not matter what type of property secures the loan.
if the person is an owner or part owner of the You can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of the
business or has lent money to the business. following requirements.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen- • You are legally liable for that debt.
erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life • Both you and the lender intend that the debt beinsurance policy, endowment contract, or annuity repaid.contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
• You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to
tionship.whom the policy covers.
You cannot deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the interest4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policy
you paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business andon your life or on the life of another person with a
part personal, you must divide the interest between thefinancial interest in your business to get or protect a
personal part and the business part.business loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as a
business expense. Nor can you deduct the premiums
Example. In 2009, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.as interest on business loans or as an expense of
During 2009, you used the car 60% for business and 40%financing loans. In the event of death, the proceeds
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for personal purposes. You are claiming actual expenses can deduct contributions you make to the plan for your
on the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% ×  $600) for employees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole
2009 on Schedule C or C-EZ. The remaining interest of proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to the
$240 is a nondeductible personal expense. plan for yourself on line 28 of Form 1040. You can also
deduct trustees' fees if contributions to the plan do not
More information. For more information about deducting cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally tax
interest, see chapter 4 in Publication 535. That chapter free until you or your employees receive distributions from
explains the following items. the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50%
of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin a• Interest you can deduct. new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan
• Interest you cannot deduct. (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-
ployee pension.• How to allocate interest between personal and busi- Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-ness use. ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These
• When to deduct interest. amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax free
until your employees receive distributions from the plan.• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This For more information on retirement plans for small busi-is generally a loan on which no interest is charged or ness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallon which interest is charged at a rate below the Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).applicable federal rate.)
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored ways
to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and Professional Fees
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses Rent Expense
directly related to operating your business are deductible
on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, you usually cannot Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you do
deduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. Add not own. In general, you can deduct rent as a business
them to the basis of the property. expense only if the rent is for property you use in your
If the fees include payments for work of a personal business. If you have or will receive equity in or title to the
nature (such as making a will), you can take a business property, you cannot deduct the rent.
deduction only for the part of the fee related to your
Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental deductionbusiness. The personal part of legal fees for producing or
for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-collecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or for
bleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Renttax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if
paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the sameyou itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi-
amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the samecation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-
Tax preparation fees. You can deduct on Schedule C ured as a percentage of gross receipts.
or C-EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax return Related persons include members of your immediate
relating to your business as a sole proprietor or statutory family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
employee. You can deduct the remaining cost on Schedule half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
A (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. a list of the other related persons, see section 267 of the
You can also deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the amount Internal Revenue Code.
you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficiencies for
Rent on your home. If you rent your home and use part ofyour business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee.
it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more information, seePension Plans Business Use of Your Home, later.
You can set up and maintain the following small business Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid in your busi-
retirement plans for yourself and your employees. ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you pay
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount that• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans.
applies to your use of the rented property during the tax
• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ- year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over
ees) plans. the period to which it applies.
• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans). More information. For more information about rent, see
chapter 3 in Publication 535.SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. You
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property is a deductible business expense, you can deductTaxes the tax as part of that service or cost. If the property is
merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of theYou can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ various federal, cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, addstate, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to your the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For informationbusiness. on the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis of
Assets.Income taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ a
state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net in- Do not deduct state and local sales taxes im-come) directly attributable to your business. You can de- posed on the buyer that you must collect and payduct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A over to the state or local government. Do not
CAUTION
!(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deduct include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.federal income tax.
Employment taxes. You can deduct the social security, Excise taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ all
Medicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes you excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses of
paid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment carrying on your business. Excise taxes are discussed
taxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also briefly in chapter 1.
deduct payments you made as an employer to a state
unemployment compensation fund or to a state disability Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other
benefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes. motor fuels you use in your business are usually included
as part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes asSelf-employment tax. You can deduct one-half of your a separate item.self-employment tax on line 27 of Form 1040. You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federalSelf-employment tax is discussed in chapters 1 and 10.
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. For
Personal property tax. You can deduct on Schedule C or more information, see Publication 510, Excise Taxes.
C-EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government on
personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use Travel, Meals,property within a state or local area.
and EntertainmentExample. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000
business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to This section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for their tainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C orcity registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city per- C-EZ.sonal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They are
claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used the Travel expenses. These are the ordinary and necessarycar 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, or expenses of traveling away from home for your business.$196, as a business expense. You are traveling away from home if both the following
conditions are met.Real estate taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or
C-EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
1. Your duties require you to be away from the generalproperty. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallyor foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public
longer than an ordinary day's work.welfare. The taxing authority must base the taxes on the
assessed value of the real estate and charge them uni- 2. You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands
formly against all property under its jurisdiction. of your work while away from home.
For more information about real estate taxes, see chap-
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-ter 5 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rules
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.for deducting the following items.
It includes the entire city or general area in which your
• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks, business is located. See Publication 463 for more informa-
streets, water mains, and sewer lines. tion.
The following is a brief discussion of the expenses you• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property
can deduct.during the year.
Transportation. You can deduct the cost of travel by• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method of
airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and youraccounting and choose to accrue real estate tax
business destination.related to a definite period ratably over that period.
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine. You can deduct
fares for these and other types of transportation betweenSales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or on
the airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotelthe purchase or use of property as part of the cost of the
and your work location away from home.service or property. If the service or the cost or use of the
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(Note. The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details
about these rules, see Publication 463.) 
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, customer, or employee
if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the associated test.
Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide entertainment,
amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a customer or client.
• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your field of business,
trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not necessarily
required, for your business.
Tests to be met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other specific
business benefit.
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business discussion.
Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you are claiming
the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost of Entertainment expenses. You may be able to deduct
sending baggage and sample or display material between business-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
your regular and temporary work locations. a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you can
deduct only 50% of these expenses.Car or truck. You can deduct the costs of operating and The following are examples of entertainment expenses.maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from home
on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan- • Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the-
dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truck aters, or sporting events.
Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. If • Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to businessyou rent a car while away from home on business, you can customers or their families.deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listedMeals and lodging. You can deduct the cost of meals in Table 8-1. For details about these rules, see Publicationand lodging if your business trip is overnight or long 463.enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct only Reimbursing your employees for expenses. You gen-50% of your meal expenses. erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
Cleaning. You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning and ees for travel and entertainment expenses. The
laundry while on your business trip. reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which you
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse theTelephone. You can deduct the cost of business calls expenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountablewhile on your business trip, including business communi- plan. For details, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. Thatcation by fax machine or other communication devices. chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plans
Tips. You can deduct the tips you pay for any expense and tells you whether to report the reimbursement on your
in this list. employee's Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
More information. For more information about travel
expenses, see Publication 463.
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Principal place of business. You can have more than
one business location, including your home, for a singleBusiness Use trade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for
the business use of your home under the principal place ofof Your Home
business test, your home must be your principal place of
business for that business. To determine your principalTo deduct expenses related to the part of your home used
place of business, you must consider all the facts andfor business, you must meet specific requirements. Even
circumstances.then, your deduction may be limited.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place ofTo qualify to claim expenses for business use of your
business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet thehome, you must meet the following tests.
following requirements.
1. Your use of the business part of your home must be:
• You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
a. Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive tive or management activities of your business.
use , later), • You have no other fixed location where you conduct
b. Regular, substantial administrative or management activities
of your business.c. For your business, and
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-2. The business part of your home must be one of the larly for your business, but your home office does notfollowing: qualify as your principal place of business based on the
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-a. Your principal place of business (defined later),
ness based on the following factors.
b. A place where you meet or deal with patients,
• The relative importance of the activities performed atclients, or customers in the normal course of your
each location.business, or
• If the relative importance factor does not determinec. A separate structure (not attached to your home)
your principal place of business, you can also con-you use in connection with your business.
sider the time spent at each location.
If, after considering your business locations, your homeExclusive use. To qualify under the exclusive use test, cannot be identified as your principal place of business,you must use a specific area of your home only for your you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, fortrade or business. The area used for business can be a other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, seeroom or other separately identifiable space. The space Publication 587.does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition.
You do not meet the requirements of the exclusive use Deduction limit. If your gross income from the businesstest if you use the area in question both for business and use of your home equals or exceeds your total businessfor personal purposes. expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all your
business expenses related to the use of your home. If yourExample. You are an attorney and use a den in your gross income from the business use is less than your totalhome to write legal briefs and prepare clients' tax returns. business expenses, your deduction for certain expensesYour family also uses the den for recreation. The den is not for the business use of your home is limited.used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim a
Your deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,business deduction for its use.
such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-Exceptions to exclusive use. You do not have to meet ation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to thethe exclusive use test if you use part of your home in either gross income from the business use of your home minusof the following ways. the sum of the following.
1. For the storage of inventory or product samples. 1. The business part of expenses you could deduct
even if you did not use your home for business (such2. As a daycare facility.
as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualtyFor an explanation of these exceptions, see Publication and theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by Day- ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).care Providers).
2. The business expenses that relate to the business
activity in the home (for example, business phone,Regular use. To qualify under the regular use test, you supplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not tomust use a specific area of your home for business on a the use of the home itself.continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your business
use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if you Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half of
do not use that area for any other purpose. your self-employment tax.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 39

Page 40 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your • Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental
Home, to figure your deduction. agency or instrumentality because you broke the
law.More information. For more information on deducting
expenses for the business use of your home, see Publica- • Personal, living, and family expenses.
tion 587. • Political contributions.
• Repairs that add to the value of your property or
significantly increase its life.Other Expenses
You Can Deduct
You may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deduct
them. 9.
• Advertising.
• Bank fees.
Figuring Net Profit• Donations to business organizations.
or Loss• Education expenses.
• Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction ex-
penses.
Introduction• Environmental cleanup costs.
After figuring your business income and expenses, you are
• Impairment-related expenses. ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.
You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-• Interview expense allowances.
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,
• Licenses and regulatory fees. the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-
come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more• Moving machinery.
than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually
• Outplacement services. can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.
But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance or
briefly explains two of those situations. Other situationsnonperformance of a contract.
that may limit your loss are explained in the Instructions for
• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficient Schedule C, line G and line 32.
operating condition.
If you have more than one business, you must
• Repayments of income. figure your net profit or loss for each business on
a separate Schedule C.
CAUTION
!• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications.
• Supplies and materials.
• Utilities.
Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
If your deductions for the year are more than your income
for the year (line 41 of your Form 1040 is a negativeExpenses You Cannot Deduct
number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You
You usually cannot deduct the following as business ex- can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
penses. For more information, see Publication 535. another year or years.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL• Bribes and kickbacks.
include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the• Charitable contributions. following.
• Demolition expenses or losses. • Your trade or business.
• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport- • Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employeeing, airline, and hotel clubs. business expenses).
• Lobbying expenses. • A casualty or theft.
• Moving expenses.
• Rental property.
Page 40 Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or Loss

Page 41 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A loss from operating a business is the most common If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
reason for an NOL. ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at
least $106,800, do not pay the 12.4% social security part ofFor details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper-
the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you mustating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It
pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your netexplains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claim
earnings.an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.
Special Rules and Exceptions
Not-for-Profit Activities
Aliens. Generally, resident aliens must payIf you do not carry on your business to make a profit, there self-employment tax under the same rules that apply tois a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a U.S. citizens. Nonresident aliens are not subject to SE tax.loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities you However, residents of the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico,do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Is-under this limit. lands, or American Samoa, are subject to self-employmentFor details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1 tax, as they are considered U.S. residents forin Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex- self-employment tax purposes. For more information onplains how to determine whether your activity is carried on aliens, see Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.to make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss you
Child employed by parent. You are not subject to SE taxcan deduct.
if you are under age 18 and you are working for your father
or mother.
Church employee.  If you work for a church or a qualified
church-controlled organization (other than as a minister or
member of a religious order) that elected an exemption10. from social security and Medicare taxes, you are subject to
SE tax if you receive $108.28 or more in wages from the
church or organization. For more information, see Publica-Self-Employment (SE)
tion 517, Social Security and Other Information for Mem-
bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.Tax
Fishing crew member. If you are a member of the crew
on a boat that catches fish or other water life, your earningsThe SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are
are subject to SE tax if all the following conditions apply.and even if you are already receiving social se-
curity and Medicare benefits.
CAUTION
! 1. You do not get any pay for the work except your
share of the catch or a share of the proceeds from
the sale of the catch, unless the pay meets all the
following conditions.Who Must Pay SE Tax?
a. The pay is not more than $100 per trip.Generally, you must pay SE tax and file Schedule SE
(Form 1040) if your net earnings from self-employment b. The pay is received only if there is a minimum
were $400 or more. Use Schedule SE to figure net earn- catch.
ings from self-employment. c. The pay is solely for additional duties (such as
mate, engineer, or cook) for which additional cashSole proprietor or independent contractor. If you are
pay is traditional in the fishing industry.self-employed as a sole proprietor or independent contrac-
tor, you generally use Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040) to
2. You get a share of the catch or a share of the pro-figure your earnings subject to SE tax.
ceeds from the sale of the catch.
SE tax rate.  The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3% 3. Your share depends on the amount of the catch.(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
4. The boat's operating crew normally numbers fewer
Maximum earnings subject to self-employment tax. than 10 individuals. (An operating crew is considered
Only the first $106,800 of your combined wages, tips, and as normally made up of fewer than 10 if the average
net earnings in 2009 is subject to any combination of the size of the crew on trips made during the last four
12.4% social security part of SE tax, social security tax, or calendar quarters is fewer than 10.)
railroad retirement (tier 1) tax.
All of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in Notary public. Fees you receive for services you perform
2009 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ but
part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement are not subject to self-employment tax (see the Instruc-
(tier 1) tax. tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 41

Page 42 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
State or local government employee. You are subject to nor held primarily for sale to customers. It does not matter
SE tax if you are an employee of a state or local govern- whether the disposition is a sale, exchange, or an involun-
ment, are paid solely on a fee basis, and your services are tary conversion.
not covered under a federal-state social security agree-
ment.
Lost Income Payments
Foreign government or international organization em- If you are self-employed and reduce or stop your business
ployee. You are subject to SE tax if both the following activities, any payment you receive from insurance or otherconditions are true. sources for the lost business income is included in earn-
ings subject to SE tax. If you are not working when you1. You are a U.S. citizen employed in the United States,
receive the payment, it still relates to your business and isPuerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Common-
included in earnings subject to SE tax, even though yourwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Virgin
business is temporarily inactive.Islands by:
a. A foreign government, Figuring Earnings Subject to SE Tax
b. A wholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-
ernment, or Methods for Figuring Net Earnings
c. An international organization.
There are three ways to figure your net earnings from
self-employment.2. Your employer is not required to withhold social se-
curity and Medicare taxes from your wages. 1. The regular method.
2. The nonfarm optional method.
U.S. citizen or resident alien residing abroad.  If you
3. The farm optional method.are a self-employed U.S. citizen or resident alien living
outside the United States, in most cases you must pay SE You must use the regular method unless you are eligible
tax. Do not reduce your foreign earnings from to use one or both of the optional methods.self-employment by your foreign earned income exclusion.
Exception.  The United States has social security Why use an optional method?  You may want to use the
agreements with many countries to eliminate double taxa- optional methods (discussed later) when you have a loss
tion under two social security systems. Under these agree- or a small net profit and any one of the following applies.ments, you generally must only pay social security and
• You want to receive credit for social security benefitMedicare taxes to the country in which you live. The coun-
coverage.try to which you must pay the tax will issue a certificate
which serves as proof of exemption from social security tax • You incurred child or dependent care expenses forin the other country. which you could claim a credit. (An optional methodFor more information, see the Instructions for Schedule may increase your earned income, which could in-SE (Form 1040). crease your credit.)
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (AnMore Than One Business optional method may increase your earned income,
which could increase your credit.)If you have earnings subject to SE tax from more than one
trade, business, or profession, you must combine the net • You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (An
profit (or loss) from each to determine your total earnings optional method may increase your earned income,
subject to SE tax. A loss from one business reduces your which could increase your credit.)profit from another business.
Effects of using an optional method. Using an optional
Community Property Income method could increase your SE tax. Paying more SE tax
could result in your getting higher benefits when you retire.If any of the income from a trade or business, other than a
If you use either or both optional methods, you mustpartnership, is community property income under state
figure and pay the SE tax due under these methods even iflaw, it is included in the earnings subject to SE tax of the
you would have had a smaller tax or no tax using thespouse carrying on the trade or business.
regular method.
The optional methods may be used only to figure yourGain or Loss SE tax. To figure your income tax, include your actual
earnings in gross income, regardless of which method youDo not include in earnings subject to SE tax a gain or loss
use to determine SE tax.from the disposition of property that is neither stock in trade
Page 42 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 43 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Regular Method Table 10-1. Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
Multiply your total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% IF your gross nonfarm THEN your net earnings
(.9235) to get your net earnings under the regular method. income is ... are equal to ...
See Short Schedule SE, line 4, or Long Schedule SE, line $6,540 or less Two-thirds of your gross4a. nonfarm income.Net earnings figured using the regular method are also
More than $6,540 $4,360called actual net earnings.
Nonfarm Optional Method Actual net earnings. Your actual net earnings are
92.35% of your total earnings subject to SE tax (that is,Use the nonfarm optional method only for earnings that do multiply total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235)not come from farming. You may use this method if you to get actual net earnings). Actual net earnings aremeet all the following tests. equivalent to net earnings figured using the regular
method.1. You are self-employed on a regular basis. This
means that your actual net earnings from
Optional net earnings less than actual net earnings.self-employment were $400 or more in at least 2 of
You cannot use this method to report an amount less thanthe 3 tax years before the one for which you use this
your actual net earnings from self-employment.method. The net earnings can be from either farm or
nonfarm earnings or both.
Gross nonfarm income of $6,540 or less. The following2. You have used this method less than 5 years. (There examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when grossis a 5-year lifetime limit.) The years do not have to be nonfarm income is $6,540 or less.one after another.
3. Your net nonfarm profits were: Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,721 and
less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. Ann
a. Less than $4,721, and Green runs a craft business. Her actual net earnings from
self-employment were $800 in 2007 and $900 in 2008. Sheb. Less than 72.189% of your gross nonfarm in-
meets the test for being self-employed on a regular basis.come.
She has used the nonfarm optional method less than 5
years. Her gross income and net profit in 2009 are as
follows:Net nonfarm profits. Net nonfarm profit generally is the
total of the amounts from: Gross nonfarm income .................. . $5,400
Net nonfarm profit ...................... . $1,200• Line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040),
Ann's actual net earnings for 2009 are $1,108 ($1,200 ×• Line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
.9235). Because her net profit is less than $4,721 and less• Box 14, code A, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from than 72.189% of her gross income, she can use the non-nonfarm partnerships), and farm optional method to figure net earnings of $3,600 (2/3 ×
$5,400). Because these net earnings are higher than her• Box 9, code J1, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B).
actual net earnings, she can report net earnings of $3,600
for 2009.However, you may need to adjust the amount reported
on Schedule K-1 if you are a general partner or if it is a loss.
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,721 but
not less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. As-Gross nonfarm income. Your gross nonfarm income sume that in Example 1 Ann's gross income is $1,000 andgenerally is the total of the amounts from: her net profit is $800. She must use the regular method to
figure her net earnings. She cannot use the nonfarm op-• Line 7, Schedule C (Form 1040),
tional method because her net profit is not less than• Line 1, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), 72.189% of her gross income.
• Box 14, code C, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As-nonfarm partnerships), and
sume that in Example 1 Ann has a net loss of $700. She• Box 9, code J2, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B). can use the nonfarm optional method and report $3,600 (2/3
×  $5,400) as her net earnings.
Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
Example 4. Nonfarm net earnings less than $400.
If you meet the three tests explained earlier, use the Assume that in Example 1 Ann has gross income of $525
following table to figure your net earnings from and a net profit of $175. In this situation, she would not pay
self-employment under the nonfarm optional method. any SE tax under either the regular method or the nonfarm
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 43

Page 44 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
optional method because her net earnings under both no more than $4,360 as your combined net earnings from
self-employment.methods are less than $400.
Example. You are a self-employed farmer. You alsoGross nonfarm income of more than $6,540. The fol-
operate a retail grocery store. Your gross income, actuallowing examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when
net earnings from self-employment, and optional farm andgross nonfarm income is more than $6,540.
optional nonfarm net earnings from self-employment are
shown in Table 10-2.Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,721 and
less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. John
White runs an appliance repair shop. His actual net earn- Table 10-2. ExampleÐFarm and Nonfarm
ings from self-employment were $10,500 in 2007 and Earnings
$9,500 in 2008. He meets the test for being self-employed
on a regular basis. He has used the nonfarm optional Income and
method less than 5 years. His gross income and net profit Earnings Farm Nonfarm
in 2009 are as follows: Gross income $3,000 $6,000
Gross nonfarm income .................. . $12,000 Actual net earnings  $900  $500
Net nonfarm profit ...................... . $1,200 Optional net
earnings (2/3 of grossJohn's actual net earnings for 2009 are $1,108 ($1,200
income)  $2,000 $4,000×  .9235). Because his net profit is less than $4,721 and
less than 72.189% of his gross income, he can use the
nonfarm optional method to figure net earnings of $4,360. Table 10-3 shows four methods or combinations of
Because these net earnings are higher than his actual net methods you can use to figure net earnings from
earnings, he can report net earnings of $4,360 for 2009. self-employment using the farm and nonfarm gross in-
come and actual net earnings shown in Table 10-2.
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit not less than $4,721. • Method 1. Using the regular method for both farmAssume that in Example 1 John's net profit is $5,400. He and nonfarm income.must use the regular method. He cannot use the nonfarm
optional method because his net nonfarm profit is not less • Method 2. Using the optional method for farm in-
than $4,721. come and the regular method for nonfarm income.
• Method 3. Using the regular method for farm incomeExample 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As- and the optional method for nonfarm income.sume that in Example 1 John has a net loss of $700. He
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $4,360 as • Method 4. Using the optional method for both farm
his net earnings from self-employment. and nonfarm income.
Note. Actual net earnings is the same as net earnings
Farm Optional Method figured using the regular method.
Use the farm optional method only for earnings from a Table 10-3. ExampleÐNet Earningsfarming business. See Publication 225 for information
about this method.
Net
Earnings 1 2 3 4Using Both Optional Methods
ActualIf you have both farm and nonfarm earnings, you may be  farm $ 900 $ 900able to use both optional methods to determine your net
earnings from self-employment. Optional To figure your net earnings using both optional meth-  farm $ 2,000 $ 2,000ods, you must:
Actual• Figure your farm and nonfarm net earnings sepa-
nonfarm $ 500 $ 500rately under each method. Do not combine farm
earnings with nonfarm earnings to figure your net
Optionalearnings under either method. nonfarm $4,000 $4,000
• Add the net earnings figured under each method to
arrive at your total net earnings from Amount
self-employment. you can
report: $1,400 $2,500 $4,900 $4,360*You can report less than your total actual farm and non-
farm net earnings but not less than actual nonfarm net *Limited to $4,360 because you used both optional methods.earnings. If you use both optional methods, you can report
Page 44 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 45 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fiscal Year Filer
If you use a tax year other than the calendar year, you must 11.
use the tax rate and maximum earnings limit in effect at the
beginning of your tax year. Even if the tax rate or maximum
Your Rightsearnings limit changes during your tax year, continue to
use the same rate and limit throughout your tax year.
as a Taxpayer
The first part of this chapter explains some of your mostReporting Self-Employment important rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains
the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.Tax
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure and report your SE
tax. Then enter the SE tax on line 56 of Form 1040 and Declaration of
attach Schedule SE to Form 1040.
Taxpayer RightsMost taxpayers can use Section AÐShort Schedule SE
to figure their SE tax. However, certain taxpayers must use
Section BÐLong Schedule SE. Protection of your rights. IRS employees will explain
and protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout yourIf you have to pay SE tax, you must file Form
contact with us.1040 (with Schedule SE attached) even if you do
not otherwise have to file a federal income tax
CAUTION
!
Privacy and confidentiality. The IRS will not disclose toreturn.
anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
by law. You have the right to know why we are asking youJoint return. Even if you file a joint return, you cannot file
for information, how we will use it, and what happens if youa joint Schedule SE. This is true whether one spouse or
do not provide requested information.both spouses have earnings subject to SE tax. If both of
you have earnings subject to SE tax, each of you must
Professional and courteous service. If you believe thatcomplete a separate Schedule SE. However, if one spouse
an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,uses the Short Schedule SE and the other spouse has to
fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that em-use the Long Schedule SE, both can use the same form.
ployee's supervisor. If the supervisor's response is notAttach both schedules to the joint return.
satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for yourMore than one business. If you have more than one area or the center where you file your return.trade or business, you must combine the net profit (or loss)
from each business to figure your SE tax. A loss from one Representation. You can either represent yourself or,
business will reduce your profit from another business. File with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-
one Schedule SE showing the earnings from resent you in your place. Your representative must be a
self-employment, but file a separate Schedule C, C-EZ, or person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as an
F for each business. attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. If
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,
Example. You are the sole proprietor of two separate then we must stop and reschedule the interview in most
businesses. You operate a restaurant that made a net cases.
profit of $25,000. You also have a cabinetmaking business You can have someone accompany you at an interview.
that had a net loss of $500. You must file a Schedule C for You can make sound recordings of any meetings with our
the restaurant showing your net profit of $25,000 and examination, appeal, or collection personnel, provided you
another Schedule C for the cabinetmaking business show- tell us in writing 10 days before the meeting.
ing your net loss of $500. You file Schedule SE showing
total earnings subject to SE tax of $24,500. Payment of only the correct amount of tax. You are
responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax due
under the law Ðno more, no less. If you cannot pay all of
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthly
installment payments.
Help with unresolved tax problems. The Taxpayer Ad-
vocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-
fully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayer
Advocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-
cant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For more
information, call toll free 1-877-777-4778 (1-800-829-4059
for TTY/TDD) or write to the Taxpayer Advocate at the IRS
office that last contacted you.
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 45

Page 46 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appeals and judicial review. If you disagree with us proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact us
about the amount of your tax liability or certain collection as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinue
actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office to the examination.
review your case. You can also ask a court to review your Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner's pro-case. posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office
Relief from certain penalties and interest. The IRS will of the IRS. Most differences can be settled without expen-
waive penalties when allowed by law if you can show you sive and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights
acted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor- are explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appeal
rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest that Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don't Agree,
is the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRS and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
employee. Rights, and Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagree
with its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.Examinations, Appeals,
District Court where you live. If you take your case to court,
the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if youCollections, and Refunds
kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If theExaminations (audits). We accept most taxpayers' re- court agrees with you on most issues in your case andturns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it for finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may beexamination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest. able to recover some of your administrative and litigationThe inquiry or examination may or may not result in more costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costs unlesstax. We may close your case without change; or, you may you tried to resolve your case administratively, includingreceive a refund. going through the appeals system, and you gave us theThe process of selecting a return for examination usu- information necessary to resolve the case.ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computer
programs to identify returns that may have incorrect Collections. Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro-
amounts. These programs may be based on information cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regarding
returns, such as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies of past payment of federal taxes. It describes:
examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli- • What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what toance projects. Second, we use information from outside do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you thinksources that indicates that a return may have incorrect your bill is wrong. It also covers making installmentamounts. These sources may include newspapers, public payments, delaying collection action, and submittingrecords, and individuals. If we determine that the informa- an offer in compromise.tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a
return for examination. • IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing a
Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal lien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, and
Rights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and release of property.
procedures that we follow in examinations. The following
sections give an overview of how we conduct examina- Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail in
tions. Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
By mail. We handle many examinations and inquiries Innocent spouse relief. Generally, both you and yourby mail. We will send you a letter with either a request for spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for payingmore information or a reason why we believe a change to the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on youryour return may be needed. You can respond by mail or joint return. To seek relief from any liability related to youryou can request a personal interview with an examiner. If spouse (or former spouse), you must file a claim on Formyou mail us the requested information or provide an expla- 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. Form 8857nation, we may or may not agree with you, and we will generally must be filed within 2 years from the IRS's firstexplain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi- attempt to collect the tax from you after July 22, 1998, suchtate to write to us about anything you do not understand. as by applying your refund from one year to the joint
liability. For more information, see Publication 971, Inno-By interview. If we notify you that we will conduct your
cent Spouse Relief, Form 8857, and the Instructions forexamination through a personal interview, or you request
Form 8857. such an interview, you have the right to ask that the
examination take place at a reasonable time and place that Refunds. You can file a claim for refund if you think youis convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examiner paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim withinproposes any changes to your return, he or she will explain 3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with these years from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.changes, you can meet with the examiner's supervisor. The law generally provides for interest on your refund if it is
Repeat examinations. If we examined your return for not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or
the same items in either of the 2 previous years and claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns,
Page 46 Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Page 47 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa- tax specialists. Workshop topics vary from a general over-
tion on refunds. view of taxes to more specific topics such as recordkeep-
If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you ing and retirement plans. Although most are free, some
must file within 3 years from the date the return was due workshops have fees associated with them. Any fees
(including extensions) to get that refund. charged for a workshop are paid to the sponsoring organi-
zation, not the IRS.
For more information, visit www.irs.gov/businesses/
small.
Subscribe to e-news for small businesses. Join the12. e-News for Small Businesses mailing list to receive up-
dates, reminders, and other information useful to small
business owners and self employed individuals. Visit theHow To Get 
website at www.irs.gov/businesses/small and click on
More Information ªSubscribe to e-News.º
Free tax services. To find out what services are avail-This section describes the help the IRS and other federal
agencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi- able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services.
nesses. It contains a list of free tax publications and describes other
free tax information services, including tax education and
assistance programs and a list of TeleTax topics.
Accessible versions of IRS published products areInternal Revenue Service
available on request in a variety of alternative formats for
people with disabilities.You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa- Internet. You can access the IRS website attion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to
tax help.
• E-file your return. Find out about commercial taxContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Taxpayer
preparation and e-file services available free to eligi-Advocate Service (TAS) is an independent organization
ble taxpayers.within the IRS whose employees assist taxpayers who are
experiencing economic harm, who are seeking help in • Check the status of your 2009 refund. Go to www.resolving tax problems that have not been resolved irs.gov and click on Where's My Refund. Wait atthrough normal channels, or who believe that an IRS least 72 hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt ofsystem or procedure is not working as it should. your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing aYou can contact the TAS by calling the TAS toll-free paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with your return,case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electronically).1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligible for assistance. Have your 2009 tax return available so you canYou can also call or write to your local taxpayer advocate, provide your social security number, your filing sta-whose phone number and address are listed in your local tus, and the exact whole dollar amount of your re-telephone directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer fund.Advocate Service Ð Your Voice at the IRS. You can file
Form 911, Request for Taxpayer Advocate Service Assis- • Download forms, instructions, and publications.
tance (And Application for Taxpayer Assistance Order), or • Order IRS products online.ask an IRS employee to complete it on your behalf. For
more information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. • Research your tax questions online.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). LITCs are in- • Search publications online by topic or keyword.
dependent organizations that provide low income taxpay- • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published iners with representation in federal tax controversies with the the last few years.IRS for free or for a nominal charge. The clinics also
provide tax education and outreach for taxpayers with • Figure your withholding allowances using the with-
limited English proficiency or who speak English as a holding calculator online at www.irs.gov/individuals.
second language. Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed using our Al-Clinic List, provides information on clinics in your area. It is ternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant.available at www.irs.gov or at your local IRS office.
• Sign up to receive local and national tax news bySmall business workshops. Small business workshops email.are designed to help the small business owner understand
• Get information on starting and operating a smalland fulfill their federal tax responsibilities. Workshops are
business.sponsored and presented by IRS partners who are federal
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 47

Page 48 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Phone. Many services are available by phone. stores have a collection of products available to print
from a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs.
Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter-
nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re-
1-800-829-3676 to order current-year forms, instruc- search purposes.
tions, and publications, and prior-year forms and in- • Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayerstructions. You should receive your order within 10 Assistance Center every business day for personal,days. face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS
letters, request adjustments to your tax account, or• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax
help you set up a payment plan. If you need toquestions at 1-800-829-1040.
resolve a tax problem, have questions about how the• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help tax law applies to your individual tax return, or yousolving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax- are more comfortable talking with someone in per-payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explain son, visit your local Taxpayer Assistance CenterIRS letters, request adjustments to your account, or where you can spread out your records and talk withhelp you set up a payment plan. Call your local an IRS representative face-to-face. No appointmentTaxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. To is necessaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you can callfind the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or your local Center and leave a message requestinglook in the phone book under United States Govern- an appointment to resolve a tax account issue. Ament, Internal Revenue Service. representative will call you back within 2 business
days to schedule an in-person appointment at your• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/
convenience. If you have an ongoing, complex taxTDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax
account problem or a special need, such as a disa-questions or to order forms and publications.
bility, an appointment can be requested. All other• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to issues will be handled without an appointment. Topre-recorded messages covering various tax topics. find the number of your local office, go to www.irs.
gov/localcontacts or look in the phone book under• Refund information. To check the status of your
United States Government, Internal Revenue Serv-2009 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 during business
ice.hours or 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund infor-
mation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week). Wait at least
72 hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt of your Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper tions, and publications to the address below. You
return. If you filed Form 8379 with your return, wait should receive a response within 10 days after
14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electronically). Have your request is received.
your 2009 tax return available so you can provide
your social security number, your filing status, and Internal Revenue Service
the exact whole dollar amount of your refund. Re- 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
funds are sent out weekly on Fridays. If you check Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
the status of your refund and are not given the date
DVD for tax products. You can order Publicationit will be issued, please wait until the next week
1796, IRS Tax Products DVD, and obtain:before checking back.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To • Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.
ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and
• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.professional answers, we use several methods to evaluate
the quality of our telephone services. One method is for a • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
second IRS representative to listen in on or record random
• Tax law frequently asked questions.telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to complete
a short survey at the end of the call. • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-
tem.
Walk-in. Many products and services are avail- • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the U.S. Code.able on a walk-in basis.
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices, • Internal Revenue Bulletins.
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms, • Toll-free and email technical support.instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-
braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county • The DVD is released twice during the year.
government offices, credit unions, and office supply ± The first release will ship the beginning of January
Page 48 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 49 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010. Phone.  Call the SBA Answer Desk at
± The final release will ship the beginning of March 1-800-UASK-SBA (1-800-827-5722) for general
2010. information about programs available to assist
small business owners.
Purchase the DVD from National Technical Information
Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small BusinessService (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no han-
Development Center or Business Informationdling fee) or call 1-877-CDFORMS (1-877-233-6767) toll
Center to request assistance with your small
free to buy the DVD for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).
business. To find the location nearest you, visit the SBA
website or call the SBA Answer Desk.
Small Business Administration
Other Federal AgenciesThe Small Business Administration (SBA) offers training
and educational programs, counseling services, financial
Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-programs, and contract assistance for small business own-
phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a variety
able from the Superintendent of Documents at theof business topics. The following briefly describes assis-
Government Printing Office. You can get information andtance provided by the SBA.
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs).
Internet. You can visit the GPO website at www.SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv-
access.gpo.gov.ices to current and prospective small business owners who
cannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help is
available when beginning, improving, or expanding a small
business.
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.
Business Information Centers (BICs). BICs offer a
small business reference library, management video
tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business. Superintendent of Documents
BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals who U.S. Government Printing Office
are in business or are interested in starting a business can P.O. Box 979050
use BICs as often as they wish at no charge. St. Louis, MO 63917-9000
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE). Phone. Call the GPO toll-free at 1-866-512-1800SCORE provides small business counseling and training or at 202-512-1800 from the Washington, DCto current and prospective small business owners. SCORE area.
is made up of current and former business people who
offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,
manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offers
a variety of small business workshops.
Internet. You can visit the SBA website at www.
sba.gov. While visiting the SBA website, you can
find a variety of information of interest to small
business owners.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 49

Page 50 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Changing accounting Qualified hybrid motor vehicleA
method ........................ . 15 credit ........................ . 19Accounting method:
Qualified plug-in electric driveCharitable contributions ....... . 40Accrual .................... . 13, 31
motor vehicle ............ . 19, 20Child employed by parent ...... . 41Automatic procedures ......... . 16
Qualified plug-in electric vehicleCash ....................... . 12, 31 Claim for refund ................ . 46
credit ........................ . 20Change in ..................... . 16 Collection of tax ................ . 46 Qualified railroad trackCombination ................... . 14 Combination method of maintenance ................ . 20Special ........................ . 16 accounting .................... . 14 Refined coal ................... . 20Accounting periods ............ . 12 Comments on publication ....... . 3 Renewable electricity .......... . 20Accrual method: Condemned property ........... . 18 Research activities ............ . 19Income - general rule .......... . 13 Consignments .................. . 24 Small employer pension planIncome - special rules ......... . 13 Construction allowances ....... . 25 startup costs ................ . 19Of accounting .................. . 13 Cost of goods sold ............. . 27 Taxes paid on certain employeeAdjusted basis .................. . 17 Credit: tips .......................... . 19Administrator ................... . 25 Advanced lean burn technology Work opportunity .............. . 20Agricultural chemicals security motor vehicle credit ......... . 19credit .......................... . 18 Affected Midwestern disaster area DAlcohol and cellulosic biofuel fuels employers ................... . 19
Damages ........................ . 24credit .......................... . 19 Agricultural chemicals
Debt:Alternative fuel vehicle refueling security ...................... . 18
Bad ............................ . 31property credit ................ . 19 Alcohol and cellulosic biofuel
Canceled ...................... . 22Alternative minimum tax ....... . 20 fuels ......................... . 19
Qualified real propertyAlternative fuel vehicle refuelingAlternative motor vehicle
business .................... . 23property ..................... . 19credit .......................... . 19
Refund offset against ........... . 6Alternative motor vehicle ...... . 19Appeal rights ................... . 46
Deduction limit................... . 3Biodiesel fuels ................. . 19Appreciation .................... . 24
Carbon dioxide Definitions:Audits ........................... . 46 sequestration ................ . 19 Accounting methods ........... . 12Automobile  (See Car expenses) Diesel fuels, renewable ........ . 19 Accounting periods ............ . 12
Disabled access ............... . 19 Barter .......................... . 21
Distilled spirits ................. . 19 Basis .......................... . 17B
Employer differential wage Business bad debt ............. . 31Bad debts ....................... . 31
payments .................... . 19 Calendar tax year .............. . 12Barter income ................... . 21
Employer-provided Cash discount ............. . 27, 28Basis of property ............... . 17 childcare .................... . 19 Disposition of property ......... . 16Biodiesel and renewable diesel Empowerment zone Drawing account ............... . 29fuels credit .................... . 19 employment ................. . 19 Entertainment expenses ....... . 38Bribes ........................... . 40 Energy efficient appliance ..... . 19 Fair market value .............. . 17Business expenses ............. . 31 Energy efficient home ......... . 19 Fiscal tax year ................. . 12Business income ............... . 20 How to claim ................... . 20 Fringe benefit .................. . 34
Business use of your home .... . 39 Indian coal ..................... . 20 Local transportation
Indian employment ............ . 19 expenses .................... . 32
Investment ..................... . 19 Necessary expense............ . 31C Low sulfur diesel fuel Net operating loss ............. . 40Canceled debt .................. . 22 production ................... . 19 Nonbusiness bad debt ......... . 31Cancellation of qualified real Low-income housing ........... . 19 Ordinary expense .............. . 31property business debt ...... . 23 Mine rescue team training ..... . 20 Principal place of business .... . 39Capital gain or loss ............. . 17 New markets .................. . 20 Qualified long-term real
Car expenses ............... . 31, 32 Nonconventional source property ..................... . 25
Carbon dioxide sequestration fuel .......................... . 20 Qualified real property business
credit .......................... . 19 Orphan drug ................... . 20 debt ......................... . 23
Cash discount .............. . 27, 28 Qualified alternative fuel motor Rent ........................... . 36
Cash method: vehicle credit ................ . 19 Restricted property ............ . 23
Expenses ...................... . 13 Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle Retail space ................... . 25
Income ........................ . 13 credit ........................ . 19 Self-employment (SE) tax ...... . 8
Page 50 Publication 334 (2009)

Page 51 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Definitions: (Cont.) Legal and professional fees ... . 36 8820 (orphan drug credit) ...... . 20
Sole proprietor .................. . 2 Meals .......................... . 37 8824 (like-kind exchange) .... . 17,
Tax home ...................... . 32 18Nondeductible ................. . 40
Trade discount ............. . 27, 28 8826 (disabled accessOther .......................... . 40
Travel expenses ............... . 37 credit) ....................... . 19Pension plans ................. . 36
8829 (business in home) ...... . 40Rent ........................... . 36Depreciation:
8834 (qualified plug-in electricTaxes .......................... . 37Deduction...................... . 33
vehicle) ...................... . 20Travel .......................... . 37Listed property ................. . 33
8835 (renewable electricity, coalTruck .......................... . 31Depreciation, recapture ........ . 24
credit) ....................... . 20Direct seller ................. . 25, 26
8844 (empowerment zoneDisabled access credit ......... . 19 F credit) ....................... . 19Disposition of property: Fair market value ............... . 17 8845 (Indian employmentBusiness property ............. . 16 Filing business taxes ............ . 5 credit) ....................... . 19Installment sale ............ . 17, 18 Fishing crew member ...... . 26, 41 8846 (credit for social security onLike-kind exchange .... . 17, 18, 25 Form: tip income) .................. . 19Nontaxable exchange ......... . 17 720 (excise tax return) .......... . 9 8857 (innocent spouse) ........ . 46Sale of a business ............. . 17 940 (unemployment tax) ....... . 10 8864 (biodiesel/renewable dieselDistilled spirits credit ........... . 19 941 (quarterly employment credit) ....................... . 19Dividend income ................ . 22 tax) .......................... . 10 8874 (new markets credit) ..... . 20Donation of inventory .......... . 28 944 (annual employment 8879 (self-selected PIN) ........ . 7Drawing account ................ . 29 tax) .......................... . 10 8881 (pension plan startup costs
Due date of return ............... . 8 982 (discharge of credit) ....................... . 19
indebtedness) ............... . 23 8882 (employer-provided childcare
1040 (tax return) ............ . 6, 10 credit) ....................... . 19E 1040-ES (estimated tax) .... . 8, 10 8886 (transaction statement) ... . 4Economic injury ................ . 24 1040-V (voucher) ............... . 7 8896 (low sulfur diesel fuele-file .............................. . 6 1099-B (barter) ................ . 21 production credit) ............ . 19EFTPS ............................ . 8 1099-MISC 8900 (railroad track maintenance
Electronic filing .................. . 6 (miscellaneous) ......... . 10, 21 credit) ....................... . 20
Employee ........................ . 6 1128 (change tax year) ........ . 12 8906 (distilled spirits credit) .... . 19
Employee benefit programs .... . 34 2210 (underpayment of estimated 8907 (nonconventional fuel
Employees' pay ................. . 34 tax) ........................... . 8 credit) ....................... . 20
2290 (excise tax for heavy 8908 (energy efficient homeEmployer identification number
trucks) ........................ . 9 credit) ....................... . 19(EIN) ............................ . 5
3115 (change accounting 8909 (appliance credit) ........ . 19Employment taxes:
method) ..................... . 16 8910 (alternative vehicleAbout ........................... . 9
3468 (investment credit) ....... . 19 credit) ................... . 19, 32Deduction for .................. . 37
3800 (general business 8911 (alternative fuel refuelingEmpowerment zone employment
credit) ....................... . 18 property credit) .............. . 19credit .......................... . 19
4562 (depreciation) ............ . 33 8923 (mine rescue teamEnergy efficient appliance 4684 (casualty and theft) ...... . 18 training) ..................... . 20credit .......................... . 19 4797 (sale of business 8931 (agricultural chemicalsEnergy efficient home credit ... . 19 property) ................ . 18, 24 security) ..................... . 18Entertainment expenses  (See 4868 (extension) ................ . 8 8932 (employer differential wageTravel expenses) 5884 (work opportunity payments) ................... . 19Escrow, payments placed in ... . 27 credit) ....................... . 20 8933 (carbon dioxide sequestrationEstimated tax .................... . 8 5884-A (affected Midwestern credit) ....................... . 19
Examinations (audits) .......... . 46 disaster area employers) .... . 19 8936 (qualified plug-in electric drive
Excise taxes: 6251 (alternative minimum motor vehicle) ............... . 20
About ........................... . 9 tax) ...................... . 18, 20 Final ........................... . 11
Deduction for .................. . 37 6252 (installment sale) ......... . 18 Information returns ............ . 10
Executor ........................ . 25 6478 (alcohol and cellulosic biofuel Schedule C (sole proprietor) .... . 6,
fuels) ........................ . 19Expenses ....................... . 31 10
6765 (research activitiesBad debts...................... . 31 Schedule C-EZ (sole
credit) ....................... . 19Car ............................ . 31 proprietor) .................... . 6
8109 (deposit coupon) ......... . 10Depreciation ................... . 33 Schedule SE (self-employment
8300 (cash payments overEmployees' pay ................ . 34 tax) ....................... . 9, 10
$10,000) .................... . 11Entertainment.................. . 37 SS-4 (application for EIN) ....... . 5
8586 (low-income housingHome, business use ........... . 39 SS-5 (application for SSN) ...... . 5
credit) ....................... . 19Insurance ...................... . 34 W-2 (report wages) ............ . 10
8594 (asset acquisition) ....... . 17Interest ........................ . 35 W-3 (transmittal of W-2) ....... . 10
Publication 334 (2009) Page 51

Page 52 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form: (Cont.) Information returns .............. . 9 Newspaper or magazine
W-4 (employee withholding) .... . 6 vendor ........................ . 26Information, How to get
W-7 (application for ITIN) ....... . 5 more .......................... . 47 Nonbusiness bad debt ......... . 31
W-9 (request for TIN) ........... . 6 Innocent spouse relief .......... . 46 Nonconventional source fuel
When to file .................... . 10 credit .......................... . 20Installment sales ................ . 17
Which to file ................... . 10 Nondeductible insuranceInsurance:
Fringe benefits .................. . 34 premiums ..................... . 35Expense ....................... . 34
Fuel taxes ....................... . 37 Nondeductible premiums ...... . 35 Nonemployee
Prepayment ................... . 35 compensation ................ . 20
Proceeds ...................... . 27 Nontaxable exchanges ......... . 17G Self-employed health .......... . 35 Not income:Gains and losses ............... . 24 Insurance agent: Appreciation ................... . 24General business credits ....... . 18 Former......................... . 26 Consignments ................. . 24Gross profit: Retired......................... . 26 Constructions allowances ...... . 25Accuracy ...................... . 30 Interest: Exchange of like-kindAdditions to .................... . 31 Expenses ...................... . 35 property ..................... . 25Guidelines for selected Income ........................ . 22 Leasehold improvements ...... . 25occupations  (See also Loans .......................... . 25Inventories ...................... . 14Occupations, selected) ........ . 25 Sales tax ...................... . 25Investment credit ............... . 19
Notary public ............... . 26, 41
H Not-for-profit activities ......... . 41KHealth insurance, deduction for Kickbacks ................... . 24, 40self-employed ................ . 35 OHome, business use of ......... . 39 Occupations, selected:LHotels, boarding houses, and Administrator .................. . 25Lease bonus .................... . 22apartments ................... . 22 Direct seller ................ . 25, 26Lease cancellationHusband and wife business ..... . 2 Executor ....................... . 25payments ..................... . 22
Fishing crew member .......... . 26Legal fees ....................... . 36
Insurance agent, former ....... . 26I Like-kind exchanges ....... . 17, 25 Insurance agent, retired ....... . 26Identification numbers .......... . 5 Limited liability company ....... . 2 Newspaper carrier orIncome  (See also Not Listed property ................. . 24 distributor ................... . 26income) ........................ . 24 Lobbying expense .............. . 40 Newspaper or magazineAccounting for your ............ . 27 Local transportation vendor ....................... . 26Barter .......................... . 21 expenses ..................... . 32 Notary public .................. . 26Business ....................... . 20 Lodging ......................... . 38 Public official .................. . 26Damages ...................... . 24 Long-term capital gain or Real estate agent .............. . 26Gains and losses .............. . 24 loss ........................... . 18 Securities dealer ............... . 27Kickbacks...................... . 24
Lost income payments ......... . 24 Securities trader ............... . 27Kinds of income ............... . 20
Low sulfur diesel fuel production Office in the home  (See alsoLost income payments ......... . 24
credit .......................... . 19 Business use of your home) ... . 32Other .......................... . 23
Low-income housing credit .... . 19Paid to a third party ............ . 27 Optional methods, using
Personal property rent ......... . 22 both ........................... . 44
Promissory notes .............. . 24 Ordinary gain or loss ........... . 17M
Recapture of depreciation ..... . 24 Orphan drug credit ............. . 20Meals  (See Travel expenses)Recovery of items previously Methods for figuring netdeducted .................... . 24 earnings ...................... . 42 PRental ..................... . 21, 22 Mileage rate for vehicles ....... . 32 Parking fees .................... . 32Restricted property ............ . 24 Mine rescue team training Partners, husband and wife ..... . 2Income tax: credit .......................... . 20 Pay, kinds of .................... . 34About ........................... . 6 Motor vehicle, alternativeDeduction for .................. . 37 Paying:credit .......................... . 19How to pay ..................... . 8 Business taxes ................. . 5
Underpayment penalty .......... . 8 Income tax ...................... . 8
NIncome tax return, who must Payments to third parties ...... . 22
file .............................. . 6 Net operating losses ........... . 40 Penalties and fines ............. . 40
Independent contractor ... . 2, 9, 41 Net profit or loss ................ . 40 Penalty:
Indian employment credit ...... . 19 New markets credit ............. . 20 Failure to file Form 8300 ....... . 11
Failure to file informationIndividual taxpayer identification Newspaper carrier or
returns ...................... . 10number (ITIN) .................. . 5 distributor .................... . 26
Page 52 Publication 334 (2009)

Page 53 of 53 of Publication 334 14:21 - 19-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalty: (Cont.) Sales of assets ................. . 16 Small Business
Failure to furnish correct payee Administration ................ . 49Sales tax ........................ . 37
statements .................. . 10 Social security coverage ........ . 8Schedule C ....................... . 6
Underpayment of tax ........... . 8 Social security number (SSN) ... . 5Schedule C-EZ ................... . 6
Waiver of ...................... . 11 Sole proprietor ............... . 2, 41Schedule SE (Form 1040) ....... . 9
Pension plans ................... . 36 Sport utility vehicle ............. . 33Schedule SE, filing
Personal property tax .......... . 37 requirement ................... . 45 Standard mileage rate .......... . 32
Prepaid expense: For 2009 ........................ . 3SE tax:
Extends useful life ............. . 35 For 2010 ........................ . 4About ........................... . 8
Rent ........................... . 36 Aliens .......................... . 41 Statutory employee .............. . 2
Professional fees ............... . 36 Child employed by parent ...... . 41 Suggestions for publication .... . 3
Promissory notes ............... . 24 Church employee .............. . 41 SUV .............................. . 33
Public official ................... . 26 Community property income ... . 42
Deduction for .................. . 37Punitive damages............... . 24 TEarning credits ................. . 8 Tax home ................... . 32, 37Effects of using an optionalQ Tax preparation fees............ . 36method ...................... . 42Qualified plug-in electric drive Tax refund:Farm optional method ......... . 44motor vehicle credit .......... . 20 Claim for ....................... . 46Fiscal year filer ................ . 45Qualified plug-in electric vehicle Offset against debts ............ . 6Fishing crew member .......... . 41credit .......................... . 20 Tax return:Gain or loss .................... . 42Qualified railroad track How to file ...................... . 6Government employee ........ . 42maintenance credit ........... . 20 Who must file ................... . 6Joint return .................... . 45
Qualified real property business Tax year ......................... . 12Lost income payments ......... . 42
debt ........................... . 23 Calendar ....................... . 12Maximum earnings:
Change in ..................... . 12For 2009 ................... . 3, 9
Fiscal .......................... . 12R For 2010 ..................... . 4
Taxes:Subject to ................... . 41Real estate:
Deduction for .................. . 37Methods for figuring netAgent .......................... . 26
Employment ................ . 9, 37earnings ..................... . 42Dealer ......................... . 21
Excise ...................... . 9, 37More than one business ... . 42, 45Rent ........................... . 21
Fuel............................ . 37Nonfarm optional method ...... . 43Taxes .......................... . 37
Income ..................... . 6, 37Notary public .................. . 41Recovery of items previously
Paid on certain employeeOptional methods:deducted ...................... . 24
tips .......................... . 19Farm ........................ . 44Refund:
Personal property .............. . 37Nonfarm ..................... . 43Inquiries ........................ . 6
Real estate .................... . 37Rate ........................... . 41Offsets against debts ........... . 6
Sales .......................... . 37Regular method ............... . 43Related persons: Self-employment............ . 8, 37Residing abroad ............... . 42Unreasonable rent ............. . 36 Special rules and Taxpayer rights ................. . 45Renewable electricity, refined coal, exceptions ................... . 41 Third parties, Payments to ..... . 22and Indian coal production Tax rate ........................ . 9 Tolls ............................. . 32credit .......................... . 20 Time limit for posting income ... . 8 Trade discount .............. . 27, 28Rent expense ................... . 36 Who must pay ................. . 41 Trade or business ............... . 2Rental income .................. . 21 Why use an optional Trailer park owner .............. . 21Repayment of income .......... . 13 method ...................... . 42 Transportation expenses ....... . 32Reportable transaction disclosure Section 179 ...................... . 3 Travel expenses ................ . 37statement ...................... . 4 Deduction...................... . 33
Reporting self-employment Property ....................... . 24
tax ............................. . 45 USecurities:
Research credit ................. . 19 Underpayment of tax penalty ... . 8Dealer ......................... . 27
Restricted property ............. . 24 Uniform capitalization rules .... . 15Trader ......................... . 27
Retirement plans  (See Pension Self-employed health insurance
plans) deduction ..................... . 35 W
Self-employment tax  (See SE tax) Wages ........................... . 34
S Settlement payments ........... . 22 Work opportunity credit ........ . 20
Salaries ......................... . 34 Short-term capital gain or
■loss ........................... . 18Sale of a business .............. . 17
Signature, electronic ............ . 6Sale of property  (See also
Disposition of property) ........ . 16
Publication 334 (2009) Page 53