Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P535.cvt (28-Nov-2003) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\PKTere00\documents\Epicfiles\p535_shell_03.sgm
Page 1 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 ContentsCat. No. 15065Z
Introduction..................... 1Department
of the Important Changes for 2003......... 2BusinessTreasury
Internal Important Changes for 2004......... 2
Revenue Expenses
Important Reminders.............. 2Service
1. Deducting Business
Expenses ................... 2For use in preparing
2. Employees’ Pay............... 6
2003 Returns 3. Retirement Plans.............. 8
4. Rent Expense................. 15
5. Interest..................... 17
6. Taxes ...................... 23
7. Insurance ................... 24
8. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize................... 27
9. Amortization................. 33
10. Depletion.................... 40
11. Business Bad Debts............ 45
12. Electric and Clean-Fuel
Vehicles .................... 47
13. Other Expenses............... 51
14. How To Get Tax Help........... 58
Index.......................... 60
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov.
Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
ject line.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:BGet forms and other information 1111 Constitution Ave. NW
faster and easier by: Washington, DC 20224
Internet • www.irs.gov or FTP • ftp.irs.gov We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine) clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.

Page 2 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
help bring these children home by looking at theImportant ChangesImportant Changes photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST
(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child.for 2004for 2003
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile-The following items highlight some changes in
age rate for the cost of operating your car, van,the tax law for 2003. pickup, or panel truck in 2004 is 37.5 cents a
mile for all business miles. See chapter 13.Elective deferrals.The limit on elective defer-
rals increases to $12,000 for tax years begin- 1.Meal expense deduction subject to “hours ofning in 2003 and then increases $1,000 each taxservice” limits.In 2004, this deduction in-
year thereafter until it reaches $15,000 in 2006.creases to 70% of the reimbursed meals your
These new limits will apply for participants inemployees consume while they are subject to
SARSEPs, 401(k) plans (excluding SIMPLE the Department of Transportation’s “hours ofDeducting
service” limits. See chapter 13.plans), and deferred compensation plans of
state or local governments and tax-exempt or- Businessganizations. The $15,000 figure is subject to
cost-of-living increases after 2006.
Important Reminders ExpensesCatch-up contributions. A plan can permit
participants who are age 50 or over at the end ofQualified environmental cleanup (remedia-the calendar year to also make catch-up contri-tion) costs.The deduction for qualified envi-Introductionbutions. The catch-up contribution limit for 2003ronmental cleanup (remediation) costs has
is $2,000. This limit increases by $1,000 eachbeen extended to include costs you pay or incurThis chapter covers the general rules for deduct-
year thereafter until it reaches $5,000 in 2006.before 2004. After December 31, 2003, theseing business expenses. Business expenses are
The limit is subject to cost-of-living increases costs must be capitalized. See chapter 8.the costs of carrying on a trade or business.
after 2006. The catch-up contribution a partici- These expenses are usually deductible if theMarginal production of oil and gas.Thepant can make for a year cannot exceed the business is operated to make a profit.suspension of the taxable income limit on per-lesser of the following amounts. centage depletion from the marginal productionTopicsof oil and natural gas has been extended to tax• The catch-up contribution limit. This chapter discusses:years beginning before 2004. For more informa-
tion on marginal production, see section 613A(c)• The excess of the participant’s compensa-
• What you can deductof the Internal Revenue Code.tion over the elective deferrals that are not
catch-up contributions. • How much you can deductAlternative minimum tax.Individuals, corpo-
rations, estates, and trusts who claim depletionSee chapter 3. • When to deduct
deductions may be liable for alternative mini-• Not-for-profit activitiesSIMPLE plan salary reduction contributions.mum tax.
The limit on salary reduction contributions to aFor more information on alternative mini-
SIMPLE plan increases to $8,000 beginning inmum tax, see the following sources. Useful Items
2003 and then increases $1,000 each tax year You may want to see:If you are: See:thereafter until it reaches $10,000 in 2005. The
$10,000 figure is subject to adjustment after PublicationAn individual The instructions for Form
2005 for cost-of-living increases. 6251, Alternative Minimum ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small BusinessTax—Individuals.Catch-up contributions. A SIMPLE plan
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carcan permit participants who are age 50 or overA corporation Form 4626, Alternative ExpensesMinimum Tax—at the end of the calendar year to make catch-up
Corporations. ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomecontributions. The catch-up contribution limit for
2003 is $1,000. This limit increases by $500An estate or trust Form 1041, U.S. Income ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
each year thereafter until it reaches $2,500 in Tax Return for Estates ❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) forand Trusts, and its2006. The limit is subject to cost-of-living in- Individuals, Estates, and Trustsinstructions.creases after 2006. The catch-up contributions a
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsparticipant can make for a year cannot exceed
See chapter 10.the lesser of the following amounts. ❏ 542 Corporations
Maximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction. ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts• The catch-up contribution limit. The maximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction and
❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home• The excess of the participant’s compensa-qualified electric vehicle credit were scheduled
(Including Use by Daycareto be 25% lower for 2002 and both were sched-tion over the salary reduction contributions
Providers)uled to be phased out completely by 2005. Thethat are not catch-up contributions.
full deduction and credit are now allowed for❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk RulesSee chapter 3. qualified property placed in service in 2002 and
❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest2003. The phaseout of the deduction and theHealth insurance deduction for the self-em- Deductioncredit will begin in 2004, and no deduction orployed. Beginning in 2003, the self-employedcredit will be allowed for property placed in serv-❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertyhealth insurance deduction percentage in-ice after 2006. See chapter 12.
creases to 100%. See chapter 7.
Form (and Instructions)Photographs of missing children.The Inter-
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductionsage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
pickup, or panel truck in 2003 is 36 cents a mile ❏ 5213 Election To Postponedren. Photographs of missing children selected
for all business miles. See chapter 13. by the Center may appear in this publication on Determination as To Whether the
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Presumption Applies That an Business AssetsCapital Expenses
Activity Is Engaged in for Profit
The cost of any asset you use in your businessYou must capitalize, rather than deduct, some
is a capital expense. There are many differentSee chapter 14 for information about gettingcosts. These costs are a part of your investment
kinds of business assets, such as land, build-publications and forms. in your business and are called “capital ex-ings, machinery, furniture, trucks, patents, andpenses.” There are, in general, three types offranchise rights. You must capitalize the full costcosts you capitalize. of the asset, including freight and installation
charges.1) Going into business.What Can I Deduct? If you produce certain property for use in
2) Business assets. your trade or business, capitalize the productionTo be deductible, a business expense must be costs under the uniform capitalization rules. See3) Improvements.both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex- section 1.263A–2 of the regulations for informa-pense is one that is common and accepted in tion on those rules.your trade or business. A necessary expense is Recovery. Although you generally cannotone that is helpful and appropriate for your tradetake a current deduction for a capital expense,or business. An expense does not have to beyou may be able to take deductions for theImprovementsindispensable to be considered necessary.amount you spend through depreciation, amorti-
It is important to separate business ex- The costs of making improvements to a busi-zation, or depletion. These allow you to deductpenses from the following expenses. ness asset are capital expenses if the improve-part of your cost each year over a number ofments add to the value of the asset, appreciablyyears. In this way you are able to “recover” your• The expenses used to figure the cost of lengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to acapital expense. See Amortization (chapter 9)goods sold. different use. You can deduct repairs that keepand Depletion (chapter 10) in this publication.your property in a normal efficient operating con-• Capital expenses. For information on depreciation, see Publicationdition as a business expense.946.• Personal expenses. Improvements include new electric wiring, a
new roof, a new floor, new plumbing, bricking up
windows to strengthen a wall, and lighting im-If you have an expense that is partly for
Going Into Business provements.business and partly personal, separate
the personal part from the businessThe costs of getting started in business, before
TIP
Restoration plan.Capitalize the cost of re-part. you actually begin business operations, are cap-conditioning, improving, or altering your prop-ital expenses. These costs may include ex-erty as part of a general restoration plan to makepenses for advertising, travel, or wages forCost of Goods Sold it suitable for your business. This applies even iftraining employees. some of the work would by itself be classified asIf your business manufactures products or repairs.purchases them for resale, some of your ex-If you go into business.When you go into
penses may be included in figuring cost of goodsbusiness, treat all costs you had to get yourReplacements. You cannot deduct the cost of
sold. You deduct cost of goods sold from yourbusiness started as capital expenses. a replacement that stops deterioration and adds
gross receipts to figure your gross profit for the to the life of your property. Capitalize that costUsually you recover costs for a particular
year. If you use an expense to figure the cost of and depreciate it.asset through depreciation. Generally, you can-
goods sold, you cannot deduct it again as a Treat as repairs amounts paid to replacenot recover other costs until you sell the busi-
business expense. parts of a machine that only keep it in a normalness or otherwise go out of business. However,
operating condition. However, if your equipmentThe following are types of expenses that goyou can choose to amortize certain costs for
has a major overhaul, capitalize and depreciateinto figuring cost of goods sold. setting up your business. See Going Into Busi-
the expense.ness in chapter 9 for more information on busi-• The cost of products or raw materials, in-ness start-up costs.cluding the cost of having them shipped to
you. Capital or Deductible ExpensesIf you do not go into business.If you are an
• The cost of storing the products you sell.individual and your attempt to go into business isTo help you distinguish between capital and
not successful, the expenses you had in trying to• Direct labor costs (including contributions deductible expenses, several different items are
establish yourself in business fall into two cate-to pension or annuity plans) for workers discussed below.
gories.who produce the products.
Business motor vehicles.You usually capi-
• Factory overhead expenses. 1) The costs you had before making a deci-talize the cost of a motor vehicle you buy to use
sion to acquire or begin a specific busi- in your business. You can recover its cost
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you through annual deductions for depreciation.ness. These costs are personal and
must capitalize the direct costs and part of the There are dollar limits on the depreciationnondeductible. They include any costs in-indirect costs for production or resale activities. you can claim each year on passenger automo-curred during a general search for, or pre-Indirect costs include rent, interest, taxes, stor- biles used in your business. See Publicationliminary investigation of, a business orage, purchasing, processing, repackaging, han- 463.investment possibility.dling, and administrative costs. This rule does Repairs you make to your business vehicle2) The costs you had in your attempt to ac-not apply to personal property you acquire for are deductible expenses. However, amountsquire or begin a specific business. Theseresale if your average annual gross receipts (or you pay to recondition and overhaul a businesscosts are capital expenses and you canthose of your predecessor) for the preceding 3 vehicle are capital expenses.deduct them as a capital loss.tax years are not more than $10 million.
Roads and driveways. The costs of buildingFor more information, see the following If you are a corporation and your attempt toa private road on your business property and thesources. go into a new trade or business is not success-cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-ful, you may be able to deduct all investigatory• Cost of goods sold—chapter 6 of Publica- crete one are capital expenses you may be ablecosts as a loss.tion 334. to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a privateThe costs of any assets acquired during yourroad on your business property is a deductible• Inventories—Publication 538. unsuccessful attempt to go into business are aexpense.part of your basis in the assets. You cannot take• Uniform capitalization rules—section
a deduction for these costs. You will recover the263A of the Internal Revenue Code and Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rules
costs of these assets when you dispose of them.the related regulations. apply, amounts spent for tools used in your
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business are deductible expenses if the tools Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively services. It is not what you would have paid in
have a life expectancy of less than 1 year. and regularly for your business, but your home cash.
office does not qualify as your principal place of Similarly, if you pay a business expense in
Machinery parts.Unless the uniform capitali-business based on the previous rules, you de- goods or other property, you can deduct only the
zation rules apply, the cost of replacingtermine your principal place of business based amount the property costs you. If these costs are
short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in goodon the following factors. included in the cost of goods sold, do not deduct
working condition and not add to its life is a them as a business expense.• The relative importance of the activitiesdeductible expense.
performed at each location. Limits on losses.If your deductions for anHeating equipment. The cost of changing investment or business activity are more than• If the relative importance factor does notfrom one heating system to another is a capital the income it brings in, you have a net loss.determine your principal place of busi-expense. There may be limits on how much, if any, of theness, you also can consider the time spent
loss you can use to offset income from otherat each location.Personal Expenses sources.
For more information, see Publication 587.Not-for-profit limits.If you do not carry onGenerally, you cannot deduct personal, living, or
your business activity with the intention of mak-family expenses. However, if you have an ex-Business use of your car.If you use your caring a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offsetpense for something that is used partly for busi-in your business, you can deduct car expenses.other income. See Not-for-Profit Activities, later.ness and partly for personal purposes, divideIf you use your car for both business and per-the total cost between the business and per- At-risk limits.Generally, a deductible losssonal purposes, you must divide your expensessonal parts. You can deduct as a business ex- from a trade or business or other income-pro-based on mileage. Only your expenses for thepense only the business part. ducing activity is limited to the investment youmiles you drove the car for business are deducti-For example, if you borrow money and use have “at risk” in the activity. You are “at risk” inble as business expenses.70% of it for business and the other 30% for a any activity for the following items.You can deduct actual car expenses, whichfamily vacation, generally you can deduct as ainclude depreciation (or lease payments), gasbusiness expense only 70% of the interest you 1) The money and adjusted basis of propertyand oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, andpay on the loan. The remaining 30% is personal you contribute to the activity.registration fees. Instead of figuring the busi-interest that is not deductible. See chapter 5 forness part of these actual expenses, you may be2) Amounts you borrow for use in the activityinformation on deducting interest and the alloca-able to use the standard mileage rate to figureif:tion rules. your deduction. For 2003, the standard mileage
a) You are personally liable for repay-rate is 36 cents a mile for all business milesBusiness use of your home.If you use part ment, ordriven.of your home for business, you may be able to
If you are self-employed, you can also de-deduct expenses for the business use of your b) You pledge property (other than prop-
duct the business part of interest on your carhome. These expenses may include mortgage erty used in the activity) as security for
loan, state and local personal property tax on theinterest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre- the loan.
car, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not youciation.
claim the standard mileage rate. You can useTo qualify to claim expenses for the business For more information, see Publication 925.
the nonbusiness part of the personal propertyuse of your home, you must meet the following Passive activities.Generally, you are in atax to determine your deduction for taxes ontests. passive activity if you have a trade or businessSchedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize your
activity in which you do not materially participate1) The business part of your home must bedeductions.
during the year, or a rental activity. In general,used exclusively and regularly for your For more information on car expenses anddeductions for losses from passive activitiestrade or business. the rules for using the standard mileage rate,only offset your income from passive activities.see Publication 463.2) The business part of your home must be You cannot use any excess deductions to offsetone of the following. your other income. In addition, passive activity
credits can only offset the tax on net passivea) Your principal place of business. income. Any excess loss or credits are carriedHow Muchb) A place where you meet or deal with over to later years. For more information, see
patients, clients, or customers in the Publication 925.Can I Deduct?normal course of your trade or busi- Net operating loss.If your deductions areness. You cannot deduct more for a business expensemore than your income for the year, you may
c) A separate structure (not attached tothan the amount you actually spend. There ishave a “net operating loss.” You can use a net
your home) you use in connection withusually no other limit on how much you canoperating loss to lower your taxes in other years.
your trade or business. deduct if the amount is reasonable. However, ifSee Publication 536 for more information. See
your deductions are large enough to produce aPublication 542 for information about net operat-
You generally do not have to meet the exclu-net business loss for the year, the tax loss maying losses of corporations.
sive use test for the part of your home that yoube limited.
regularly use in either of the following ways.
Recovery of amount deducted. If you re-• For the storage of inventory or productcover part of an expense in the same tax year forWhen Can Isamples. which you would have claimed a deduction, re-
• As a daycare facility. duce your expense deduction by the amount ofDeduct an Expense?
the recovery. If you have a recovery in a later
Your home office qualifies as your principalyear, include the recovered amount in income.When you deduct an expense depends on your
place of business if you meet the following re-However, if part of the deduction for the expenseaccounting method. An accounting method is a
quirements. did not reduce your tax, you do not have toset of rules used to determine when and how
include all the recovery in income. Exclude theincome and expenses are reported. The two• You use the office exclusively and regu-part that did not reduce your tax. basic methods are the cash method and anlarly for administrative or management ac-For more information on recoveries and theaccrual method.tivities of your trade or business. tax benefit rule, see Publication 525. For more information on accounting meth-
• You have no other fixed location where ods, see Publication 538.
Payments in kind. If you provide services toyou conduct substantial administrative or
pay a business expense, the amount you canmanagement activities of your trade or Cash method. Under the cash method of ac-
deduct is the amount you spend to provide thebusiness. counting, you generally deduct business ex-
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
penses in the tax year you actually paid them, method of accounting, you must pay the ex- can rely on this presumption in every case, un-
even if you incurred them in an earlier year. pense before you can deduct it. The deduction less the IRS shows it is not valid.
by an accrual method payer is allowed when theUsing the presumption later.If you are start-Accrual method. Under an accrual method ofcorresponding amount is includible in income bying an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) yearsaccounting, you generally deduct business ex-the related cash method payee. See Related showing a profit, you may want to elect to havepenses when both of the following apply. Persons in Publication 538. the presumption made after you have the 5 (or
1) The all-events test has been met. The test 7) years of experience allowed by the test.
is met when: You can choose to do this by filing Form
5213. Filing this form postpones any determina-a) All events have occurred that fix theNot-for-Profit Activitiestion that your activity is not carried on for profitfact of liability, and until 5 (or 7) years have passed since youIf you do not carry on your business or invest-started the activity.b) The liability can be determined withment activity to make a profit, there is a limit onThe benefit gained by making this choice isreasonable accuracy. the deductions you can take. You cannot use athat the IRS will not immediately questionloss from the activity to offset other income.whether your activity is engaged in for profit.2) Economic performance has occurred. Activities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sportAccordingly, it will not restrict your deductions.or recreation, come under this limit. So does anRather, you will gain time to earn a profit in 3 (orEconomic performance. You generally investment activity intended only to produce tax2) out of the first 5 (or 7) years you carry on thecannot deduct or capitalize a business expenselosses for the investors. activity. If you show 3 (or 2) years of profit at theuntil economic performance occurs. If your ex-The limit on not-for-profit losses applies toend of this period, your deductions are not lim-pense is for property or services provided to you,individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and Sited under these rules. If you do not have 3 (or 2)or for your use of property, economic perform-corporations. It does not apply to corporationsyears of profit, the limit can be applied retroac-ance occurs as the property or services areother than S corporations. tively to any year in the 5-year (or 7-year) periodprovided, or the property is used. If your ex-In determining whether you are carrying onwith a loss.pense is for property or services you provide toan activity for profit, all the facts are taken intoFiling Form 5213 automatically extends theothers, economic performance occurs as youaccount. No one factor alone is decisive. Amongperiod of limitations on any year in the 5-year (orprovide the property or services. the factors to consider are whether: 7-year) period to 2 years after the due date of
Example. Your tax year is the calendar the return for the last year of the period. The1) You carry on the activity in a businesslikeyear. In December 2003, the Field Plumbing period is extended only for deductions of themanner,Company did some repair work at your place of activity and any related deductions that might be
2) The time and effort you put into the activitybusiness and sent you a bill for $150. You paid it affected.
indicate you intend to make it profitable,by check in January 2004. If you use an accrual You must file Form 5213 within 3 yearsmethod of accounting, deduct the $150 on your3) You depend on income from the activity for after the due date of your return for thetax return for 2003 because all events occurredyour livelihood, year in which you first carried on the
TIP
to fix the fact of liability, the liability can be activity, or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiv-4) Your losses are due to circumstances be-determined, and economic performance oc- ing written notice from the Internal Revenueyond your control (or are normal in thecurred in that year. If you use the cash method of Service proposing to disallow deductions attrib-start-up phase of your type of business),accounting, you can deduct the expense on your utable to the activity.2004 return. 5) You change your methods of operation in
an attempt to improve profitability,Prepayment. You generally cannot deduct Limit onexpenses in advance, even if you pay them in6) You, or your advisors, have the knowledgeDeductions and Lossesadvance. This rule applies to both the cash andneeded to carry on the activity as a suc-accrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,cessful business, If your activity is not carried on for profit, takeprepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex- deductions only in the following order, only to the7) You were successful in making a profit inpense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, extent stated in the three categories, and, if yousimilar activities in the past,create an asset with a useful life extending sub- are an individual, only if you itemize them onstantially beyond the end of the current tax year.8) The activity makes a profit in some years,Schedule A (Form 1040).
and how much profit it makes, andExample. In 2003, you sign a 10-year lease Category 1. Deductions you can take for per-
9) You can expect to make a future profitand immediately pay your rent for the first 3 sonal as well as for business activities are al-
from the appreciation of the assets used inyears. Even though you paid the rent for 2003, lowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness
the activity.2004, and 2005, you can deduct only the rent for deductions, such as those for home mortgage
2003 on your current tax return. You can deduct interest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong in
on your 2004 and 2005 tax returns the rent forPresumption of profit.An activity is pre-this category. Deduct them on the appropriate
those years. sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profitlines of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can de-
in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including theduct a casualty loss on property you own forContested liability.Under the cash method, current year. Activities that consist primarily ofpersonal use only to the extent it is more thanyou can deduct a contested liability only in thebreeding, training, showing, or racing horses are$100 and all these losses are more than 10% ofyear you pay the liability. Under an accrualpresumed carried on for profit if they produced ayour adjusted gross income. See Publicationmethod, you can deduct contested liabilities,profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ-547 for more information on casualty losses. Forsuch as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses-ing the current year. The activity must be sub-the limits that apply to mortgage interest, seesion income, war profits, and excess profitsstantially the same for each year within thisPublication 936.taxes), in the tax year you pay the liability (orperiod. You have a profit when the gross incometransfer money or other property to satisfy the Category 2. Deductions that do not result infrom an activity is more than the deductions forobligation) or in the tax year you settle the con- an adjustment to the basis of property are al-it.test. However, to take the deduction in the year lowed next, but only to the extent your grossIf a taxpayer dies before the end of theof payment or transfer, you must meet certain income from the activity is more than the deduc-5-year (or 7-year) period, the period ends on theconditions. See Contested Liability in Publica- tions you take (or could take) under the firstdate of the taxpayer’s death.tion 538 for more information. category. Most business deductions, such asIf your business or investment activitythose for advertising, insurance premiums, in-Related person. Under an accrual method of passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, pre-terest, utilities, wages, etc., belong in this cate-accounting, you generally deduct expensessume it is carried on for profit. This means thegory.when you incur them, even if you have not paid limits discussed here will not apply. You can
them. However, if you and the person you owe take all your business deductions from the activ-Category 3. Business deductions that de-
are related and the person uses the cash ity, even for the years that you have a loss. You crease the basis of property are allowed last, but
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
only to the extent the gross income from the Topics• The degree of organizational and eco-activity is more than deductions you take (or This chapter discusses:nomic interrelationship of various under-could take) under the first two categories. Thetakings. • Tests for deducting paydeductions for depreciation, amortization, and
• The business purpose that is (or might be)the part of a casualty loss an individual could not • Kinds of paydeduct in category (1) belong in this category.served by carrying on the various under-
Where more than one asset is involved, dividetakings separately or together in a busi-
Useful Itemsdepreciation and these other deductions propor-ness or investment setting.
You may want to see:tionally among those assets. • The similarity of various undertakings.
Individuals must claim the amounts in Publicationcategories (2) and (3) as miscellane- The IRS will generally accept your characteri-
ous deductions on Schedule A (Formzation of several undertakings as one activity, or❏ 15 Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guide
TIP
1040). They are subject to the more than one activity, if supported by facts and❏ 15–A Employer’s Supplemental Tax2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-circumstances. Guidecation 529 for information on this limit. If you are carrying on two or more dif-❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringeferent activities, keep the deductions BenefitsExample. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profit and income from each one separate.
TIP
activity. The income and expenses of the activityFigure separately whether each is a See chapter 14 for information about gettingare as follows. not-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit onpublications and forms.deductions and losses separately for each activ-Gross income................. $3,200 ity that is not for profit.
Minus expenses:
Real estate taxes........ $700
Tests forHome mortgage interest.... 9 0 0
Insurance............. 4 0 0
Deducting PayUtilities............... 7 0 0
Maintenance ........... 2 0 0
To be deductible, your employees’ pay must beDepreciation on an automobile 600
2. an ordinary and necessary expense and youDepreciation on a machine . . 200 3,700
must pay or incur it in the tax year. These and
other requirements that apply to all businessLoss ....................... $ 500
expenses are explained in chapter 1.
In addition, the pay must meet both the fol-Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, theEmployees’ Pay
lowing tests.gross income she earned from the activity. The
limit is reached in category (3), as follows. • Test 1. The pay must be reasonable.
Limit on deduction.............. $3,200 • Test 2. The pay must be for servicesIntroduction
performed.Category 1: Taxes and interest $1,600 You can generally deduct the pay you give your
Category 2: Insurance, utilities, If these tests are met, the form or method ofemployees for the services they perform for yourand maintenance.......... 1,300 2,900 figuring the pay does not affect its deductibility.business. The pay may be in cash, property, or
For example, bonuses and commissions basedAvailable for Category 3......... $ 300 services. It may include wages, salaries, vaca-
on sales or earnings and paid under an agree-tion allowances, bonuses, commissions, and
ment made before the services were performedThe $300 for depreciation is divided betweenfringe benefits. This chapter provides informa-are generally deductible.the automobile and machine as follows. tion about deductions allowed for various kinds
of pay. Employee-shareholder salaries.If a corpo-$600 depreciation for thex $300 = $225 For information about determining who is anration pays an employee who is also a share-$800 automobile
employee and about employment taxes on yourholder a salary that is unreasonably high
employees’ pay, see Publication 15, Circular E,considering the services actually performed, the$200 depreciation for the Employer’s Tax Guide, Publication 15–A,x $300 = $75 excessive part of the salary may be treated as a$800 machine Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide, and Publi- constructive distribution of earnings to the
cation 15–B, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringeemployee-shareholder. For more information onThe basis of each asset is reduced accord-
Benefits. For information about deducting em-corporate distributions to shareholders, seeingly.
Publication 542, Corporations.ployment taxes paid on your employees’ pay,The $1,600 for category (1) is deductible in
see chapter 6.full on the appropriate lines for taxes and interest
Test 1—Reasonableon Schedule A (Form 1040). Ida deducts the You can claim the following employ-
remaining $1,600 (the total of categories (2) andment credits if you hire individuals whoDetermine the reasonableness of pay by the(3)) as other miscellaneous deductions on meet certain requirements.
TIP
facts. Generally, reasonable pay is the amountSchedule A (Form 1040) subject to the • Empowerment zone and renewal commu- that like enterprises ordinarily would pay for the2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.
nity employment credit. services under similar circumstances.
You must be able to prove the pay is reason-Partnerships and S corporations.If a part- • Indian employment credit. able. Base this test on the circumstances thatnership or S corporation carries on a • New York Liberty Zone business em- exist when you contract for the services, notnot-for-profit activity, these limits apply at the those existing when the reasonableness isployee credit.partnership or S corporation level. They are re- questioned. If the pay is excessive, you canflected in the individual shareholder’s or • Welfare-to-work credit. deduct only the part that is reasonable.partner’s distributive shares. • Work opportunity credit.
Factors to consider.To determine if pay is
However, you must reduce your deduction forMore than one activity.If you have several reasonable, consider the following items and
employee wages by the amount of any employ-undertakings, each may be a separate activity or any other pertinent facts.
ment credits you claim. For more informationseveral undertakings may be one activity. The • The duties performed by the employee.about these credits, see Publication 954, Taxfollowing are the most significant facts and cir-
cumstances in making this determination. Incentives for Distressed Communities. • The volume of business handled.
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay

Page 7 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The character and amount of responsibil-Safety achievement award.An award will Education Expenses
not qualify as a safety achievement award ifity.
either of the following applies. If you pay or reimburse education expenses for• The complexities of your business. an employee, you can deduct the payments.
1) It is given to a manager, administrator,• The amount of time required. Deduct the payments on the “employee benefit
clerical employee, or other professionalprograms” line of your tax return or business• The general cost of living in the locality.employee. schedule if they are part of a qualified educa-
• The ability and achievements of the indi- tional assistance program. For information on2) During the tax year, more than 10% ofvidual employee performing the service. educational assistance programs, see Educa-your employees, excluding those listed intional Assistance in section 2 of Publication(1), have already received a safety• The pay compared with the gross and net 15–B.achievement award (other than one of veryincome of the business, as well as with
small value).distributions to shareholders if the busi-
Fringe Benefitsness is a corporation.
Deduction limit.Your deduction for the• Your policy regarding pay for all your em- A fringe benefit is a form of pay provided to anycost of employee achievement awards given toployees. person for the performance of services by thatany one employee during the tax year is limitedperson. The following are examples of fringeto the following amounts.• The history of pay for each employee. benefits.
• $400 for awards that are not qualified plan• Benefits under employee benefit pro-Individual pay.You must base the test of awards. grams.whether an individual’s pay is reasonable on• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual-each individual’s pay and the service performed, • Meals and lodging.ified plan awards.not on the total amount paid to all officers or all • Use of a car.employees. For example, even if the totalDeduct achievement awards as a nonwage
• Flights on airplanes.amount you pay to your officers is reasonable,business expense on your return or business
you cannot deduct the part of an individualschedule. • Discounts on property or services.officer’s pay that is not reasonable based on theA qualified plan award is an achievement • Memberships in country clubs or other so-items listed above. award given as part of an established writtencial clubs.plan or program that does not favor highly com-
Test 2—For Services • Tickets to entertainment or sportingpensated employees as to eligibility or benefits.
events.Performed A highly compensated employee for 2003 is
an employee who meets either of the following
You must be able to prove the payment was You can generally deduct the cost of fringetests.
made for services actually performed. benefits you provide on your tax return or busi-
ness schedule in whatever category the cost1) The employee was a 5% owner at any
falls. For example, if you allow an employee totime during the year or the preceding year.
use a car or other property you lease, deduct the
2) The employee received more than cost of the lease as a rent or lease expense. IfKinds of Pay $90,000 in pay for the preceding year.you own the property, include your deduction for
its cost or other basis as a section 179 deductionYou can choose to ignore test (2) if the em-Some of the ways you may provide pay to your
or a depreciation deduction.ployee was not also in the top 20% of employeesemployees are discussed next.
ranked by pay for the preceding year. You may not owe employment taxes
An award is not a qualified plan award if theon the value of the fringe benefits youAwards
average cost of all the employee achievement provide to an employee. See Publica-
TIP
You can generally deduct amounts you pay toawards given during the tax year (that would betion 15–B.
your employees as awards, whether paid inqualified plan awards except for this limit) is
cash or property. (For awards paid in property,more than $400. To figure this average cost, doEmployee benefit programs.Employee ben-
see Property, later.) If you give property to annot take into account awards of very small value.efit programs include the following.
employee as an employee achievement award, You may not owe employment taxes • Accident and health plans.your deduction may be limited. on the value of achievement awards • Adoption assistance.you provide to an employee. See Publi-
TIP
Achievement awards. An achievement cation 15–B. • Cafeteria plans.award is an item of tangible personal property
• Dependent care assistance.that meets all the following requirements.
Bonuses • Educational assistance.• It is given to an employee for length of
service or safety achievement. You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an• Group-term life insurance coverage.
employee if you intended the bonus as addi-• It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres- • Welfare benefit funds.tional pay for services, not as a gift, and theentation. services were actually performed. However, the
You can generally deduct amounts you spend• It is awarded under conditions and circum-total bonuses, salaries, and other pay must be
on employee benefit programs on the “em-stances that do not create a significantreasonable for the services performed. If the
ployee benefit programs” line of your tax returnlikelihood of disguised pay. bonus is paid in property, see Property, later.
or business schedule. However, you may de-
duct certain costs on other lines. For example, ifLength-of-service award.An award will Gifts of nominal value.If, to promote em-you provide dependent care by operating a de-not qualify as a length-of-service award if eitherployee goodwill, you distribute turkeys, hams, orpendent care facility for your employees, deductof the following applies. other merchandise of nominal value to your em-your costs in whatever categories they fall (de-ployees at holidays, you can deduct the cost of• The employee receives the award during preciation, utilities, salaries, etc.).these items as a nonwage business expense.his or her first 5 years of employment.Your deduction for de minimis gifts of food orGroup-term life insurance coverage.You
drink are not subject to the 50% deduction limit• The employee received another cannot deduct the cost of group-term life insur-
that generally applies to meals. For more infor-length-of-service award (other than one of ance coverage if you are directly or indirectly the
mation on this deduction limit, see Meals andvery small value) during the same year or beneficiary of the policy. See Nondeductible
lodging, later.in any of the prior 4 years. Premiums in chapter 7.
Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Welfare benefit funds.A welfare benefit • Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platform meal and entertainment expenses is usually lim-
fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangement or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska. ited to 50% of the payment.
having the effect of a plan) that provides welfare This includes meals you furnish at a sup-If you make the payment under an account-
benefits to your employees, independent con- port camp that is near and integral to anable plan, deduct it in the category of the ex-
tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefits oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.pense paid. For example, if you pay an
are any benefits other than deferred compensa- employee for travel expenses incurred on your
tion or transfers of restricted property. behalf, deduct this payment as a travel expense
Loans or Advances on your tax return or business schedule. See theYour deduction for contributions to a welfare
instructions for the form you file for informationbenefit fund is limited to the fund’s qualified costYou generally can deduct as wages a loan oron which lines to use.for the tax year. If your contributions to the fundadvance you make to an employee that you doare more than its qualified cost, you can carry If you make the payment under a nonac-not expect the employee to repay if it is forthe excess over to the next tax year. countable plan, deduct it as wages on your taxpersonal services actually performed. The totalreturn or business schedule.Generally, the fund’s qualified cost is themust be reasonable when you add the loan orSee Travel, Meals, and Entertainment intotal of the following amounts, reduced by theadvance to the employee’s other pay. However,chapter 13 for more information about deductingafter-tax income of the fund. if the employee performs no services, treat thereimbursements and an explanation of account-amount you advanced to the employee as a• The cost you would have been able to able and nonaccountable plans.loan, which you cannot deduct unless it be-deduct using the cash method of account-
comes a bad debt. For information on the deduc-ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.
Sick Paytion for bad debts, see chapter 11.• The contributions added to a reserve ac-
count that are needed to fund claims in-Below-market interest rate loans.On cer- You can deduct amounts you pay to your em-
curred but not paid as of the end of the tain loans you make to an employee or share-ployees for sickness and injury, including
year for supplemental unemployment ben- holder, you are treated as having receivedlump-sum amounts, as wages. However, your
efits, severance pay, or disability, medical, interest income and as having paid compensa-deduction is limited to amounts not compen-
or life insurance benefits. tion or dividends equal to that interest. See sated by insurance or other means.
Below-Market Loans in chapter 5 for more infor-
For more information, see sections 419(c) andmation. Vacation Pay
419A of the Internal Revenue Code and the
related regulations. Vacation pay is an amount you pay to an em-Property
ployee while the employee is on vacation. It
Meals and lodging. You can usually deductIf you transfer property (including your includes an amount you pay an employee for
the cost of furnishing meals and lodging to yourcompany’s stock) to an employee as paymentunused vacation leave. Vacation pay does not
employees. However, you can generally deductfor services, you can generally deduct it asinclude any sick pay or holiday pay.
only 50% of the cost of furnishing meals.wages. The amount you can deduct is its fairYou can deduct vacation pay only in your tax
Deduct the cost on your tax return or busi-market value on the date of the transfer minusyear in which the employee actually receives it.
ness schedule in whatever category the ex-any amount the employee paid for the property.This rule applies regardless of whether you use
pense falls. For example, if you operate a You can claim the deduction only for the taxthe cash method or an accrual method of ac-
restaurant, deduct the cost of the meals youyear in which your employee includes the counting.
furnish to your employees as part of the cost ofproperty’s value in income. Your employee is
goods sold. If you operate a nursing home,deemed to have included the value in income if
motel, or rental property, deduct the cost ofyou report it on Form W–2 in a timely manner.
furnishing lodging to an employee as expenses You treat the deductible amount as received
for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation,in exchange for the property, and you must rec-
etc. ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer.
3.Your gain or loss is the difference between theDeduction limit on meals.You can gener- fair market value of the property and its adjustedally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishingbasis on the date of transfer.meals to your employees. However, you can
deduct the full cost of the following meals. A corporation recognizes no gain orRetirement
loss when it pays for services with its• Meals whose value you include in an own stock.CAUTION
!
employee’s wages. For more information, Plans
see section 2 in Publication 15–B. These rules also apply to property trans-
ferred to an independent contractor, generally• Meals that qualify as a de minimis fringereported on Form 1099–MISC.benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi- Important Changescation 15–B. This generally includes Restricted property. If the property you
meals you furnish to employees at yourtransfer for services is subject to restrictions thatfor 2003
place of business if more than half ofaffect its value, you generally cannot deduct it
these employees are provided the mealsand do not report gain or loss until it is substan-Elective deferrals.The limit on elective defer-for your convenience. tially vested in the recipient. However, if therals increases to $12,000 for tax years begin-
recipient pays for the property, you must reportning in 2003 and then increases $1,000 each tax• Meals you furnish to your employees atany gain at the time of the transfer up to theyear thereafter until it reaches $15,000 in 2006.the work site when you operate a restau-amount paid. These new limits will apply for participants inrant or catering service. “Substantially vested” means the property isSARSEPs, 401(k) plans (excluding SIMPLE• Meals you furnish to your employees asnot subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. Theplans), and deferred compensation plans ofpart of the expense of providing recrea-recipient is not likely to have to give up his or herstate or local governments and tax-exempt or-tional or social activities, such as a com-rights in the property in the future. ganizations. The $15,000 figure is subject topany picnic. cost-of-living increases after 2006.
Reimbursements• Meals you are required by federal law to Catch-up contributions. A plan can permit
furnish to crew members of certain com- participants who are age 50 or over at the end offor Business Expenses
mercial vessels (or would be required to the calendar year to also make catch-up contri-
furnish if the vessels were operated at You can generally deduct the amount you pay or butions. The catch-up contribution limit for 2003
sea). This does not include meals you fur- reimburse employees for business expenses is $2,000. This limit increases by $1,000 each
nish on vessels primarily providing luxury they incur for you for items such as travel and year thereafter until it reaches $5,000 in 2006.
water transportation. entertainment. However, your deduction forThe limit is subject to cost-of-living increases
Page 8 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 9 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
after 2006. The catch-up contribution a partici-• Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs) pensation over $200,000 when you figure your
pant can make for a year cannot exceed the contribution limit for that employee.
lesser of the following amounts.
Useful Items More than one plan.If you also contribute to a
• The catch-up contribution limit. You may want to see: defined contribution retirement plan (defined
later), annual additions to all a participant’s ac-• The excess of the participant’s compensa-
Publication counts are limited to the lesser of $40,000 ortion over the elective deferrals that are not
100% of the participant’s compensation. Whencatch-up contributions. ❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Small you figure this limit, you must add your contribu-
Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and tions to all defined contribution plans. A SEP isSIMPLE plan salary reduction contributions. Qualified Plans) considered a defined contribution plan for thisThe limit on salary reduction contributions to a limit.❏ 590 Individual Retirement ArrangementsSIMPLE plan increases to $8,000 beginning in
(IRAs)2003 and then increases $1,000 each tax year Contributions for yourself.The annual limits
thereafter until it reaches $10,000 in 2005. The on your contributions to a common-lawForm (and Instructions)$10,000 figure is subject to adjustment after employee’s SEP-IRA also apply to contributions
2005 for cost-of-living increases. you make to your own SEP-IRA.❏ W–2 Wage and Tax StatementCatch-up contributions. A SIMPLE plan
❏ 5304–SIMPLE Savings Incentive Matchcan permit participants who are age 50 or over Deduction LimitPlan for Employees of Smallat the end of the calendar year to make catch-up
Employers (SIMPLE)—Not for Usecontributions. The catch-up contribution limit for The most you can deduct for employer contribu-With a Designated Financial2003 is $1,000. This limit increases by $500 tions (other than elective deferrals) for aInstitutioneach year thereafter until it reaches $2,500 in common-law employee is 25% of the compen-
2006. The limit is subject to cost-of-living in- sation (limited to $200,000 per participant) paid❏ 5305–SIMPLE Savings Incentive Matchcreases after 2006. The catch-up contributions a to him or her during the year from the businessPlan for Employees of Smallparticipant can make for a year cannot exceed that has the plan, not to exceed $40,000 perEmployers (SIMPLE)—for Usethe lesser of the following amounts. participant.With a Designated Financial
Institution• The catch-up contribution limit. Deduction of contributions for yourself.
When figuring the deduction for employer contri-• The excess of the participant’s compensa-See chapter 14 for information about gettingbutions made to your own SEP-IRA, compensa-tion over the salary reduction contributionspublications and forms. tion is your net earnings from self-employmentthat are not catch-up contributions.
minus the following amounts.
1) The deduction for one-half of your self-em-
Simplified Employee ployment tax.
Introduction 2) The deduction for contributions to yourPension (SEP) own SEP-IRA.This chapter discusses retirement plans you can
set up and maintain for yourself and your em-A simplified employee pension (SEP) is a writtenThe deduction for contributions to your ownployees. Retirement plans are savings plansplan that allows you to make deductible contri-SEP-IRA and your net earnings depend on eachthat offer you tax advantages to set aside moneybutions toward your own and your employees’other. For this reason, you determine the deduc-for your own and your employees’ retirement.retirement without getting involved in more com-tion for contributions to your own SEP-IRA indi-In general, a sole proprietor or a partner isplex retirement plans. A corporation also canrectly by reducing the contribution rate called fortreated as an employee for retirement plan pur-have a SEP and make deductible contributionsin your plan. Use Worksheet 3–A, shown underposes. toward its employees’ retirement. However, cer-Qualified Plan, later, to figure the rate.
SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer youtain advantages available to qualified plans,
and your employees a tax favored way to save SEP and defined contribution plan.If yousuch as the special tax treatment that may apply
for retirement. You can deduct contributions you also contributed to a qualified defined contribu-to lump-sum distributions, do not apply to SEPs.
make to the plan for your employees. If you are a tion plan, you must reduce the 25% deductionUnder a SEP, you make the contributions to
sole proprietor, you can deduct contributions limit for that plan by the allowable deduction fora traditional individual retirement arrangement
you make to the plan for yourself. You can also contributions to the SEP-IRAs of those partici-(called a SEP-IRA) set up for each eligible em-
deduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the plan pating in both the SEP plan and the definedployee.
do not cover them. Earnings on the contributions contribution plan.SEP-IRAs are set up for, at a minimum, eachare generally tax free until you or your employ-eligible employee. A SEP-IRA may have to beSEP and another qualified plan.If you alsoees receive distributions from the plan. set up for a leased employee, but need not becontributed to any other type of qualified plan,Under certain plans, employees can haveset up for an excludable employee. For moretreat the SEP as a separate profit-sharing (de-you contribute limited amounts of their information, see Publication 560. fined contribution) plan when applying the over-before-tax pay to a plan. These amounts (and
all 25% deduction limit described in sectionthe earnings on them) are generally tax free untilForm 5305–SEP. You may be able to use 404(h)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.your employees receive distributions from theForm 5305–SEP, Simplified Employee Pen-
plan. If your SEP contribution is more thansion—Individual Retirement Accounts Contri-
In general, individuals who are employed or the deduction limit (nondeductible con-bution Agreement, in setting up your SEP.
self-employed can also set up and contribute to tribution), you can carry over and de-
TIP
individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). duct the difference in later years. However, theContribution Limits
contribution carryover, when combined with the
Topics contribution for the later year, is subject to theContributions you make for 2003 to a
deduction limit for that year.This chapter discusses: common-law employee’s SEP-IRA are limited to
the lesser of $40,000 or 25% of the employee’s
Employee contributions. Employees can• Simplified employee pension (SEP) planscompensation. Compensation generally does
also make contributions of up to $3,000 (ornot include your contributions to the SEP, but• SIMPLE (Savings incentive match plan for $4,000 if they are 50 or older) for 2003 to theirdoes include certain elective deferrals unlessemployees) retirement plans SEP-IRAs independent of the employer’s SEPyou choose not to include them.
• Qualified plans (also called H.R. 10 plans contributions. However, the employee’s deduc-
or Keogh plans when covering self-em-Annual compensation limit. You generally tion for IRA contributions may be reduced or
ployed individuals) cannot consider the part of an employee’s com- eliminated because the employee is covered by
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 9

Page 10 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
an employer retirement plan (the SEP plan). Catch-up contributions are not subject to the
See Publication 590 for details. limit discussed under Limit on elective deferrals, SIMPLEearlier.
Salary Reduction Retirement Plans
Deduction limit and elective deferrals.Simplified Employee
A Savings Incentive Match Plan for EmployeesCompensation, as discussed earlier, under De-Pension (SARSEP) (SIMPLE plan) is a written arrangement thatduction Limit, includes elective deferrals. Elec-
provides you and your employees with a simpli-tive deferrals are no longer subject to thisAn employer is no longer allowed to set fied way to make contributions to provide retire-deduction limit. However, the combined deduc-up a SARSEP. However, participants ment income. Under a SIMPLE plan, employeestion for a participant’s elective deferrals, andin a SARSEP set up before 1997 (in- can choose to make salary reduction contribu-CAUTION
!
other SEP contributions, cannot exceedcluding employees hired after 1996) can con- tions to the plan rather than receiving these$40,000.tinue to have their employer contribute part of amounts as part of their regular pay. In addition,
their pay to the plan. you will contribute matching or nonelective con-
tributions.Employment taxes. Elective deferrals thatA SARSEP is a SEP set up before 1997 that
meet the ADP test are not subject to income taxSIMPLE plans can only be maintained on aincluded a salary reduction arrangement. Under
in the year of deferral, but they are included incalendar-year basis.the arrangement, employees can choose to
wages for social security, Medicare, and federalhave you contribute part of their pay to their A SIMPLE plan can be set up in either of the
unemployment (FUTA) tax.SEP-IRAs rather than receive it in cash. This following ways.
contribution is called an elective deferral be-
• Using SIMPLE IRAs (SIMPLE IRA plan).cause employees choose (elect) to set aside theReporting SEP Contributions
money and the tax on the money is deferred until • As part of a 401(k) plan (SIMPLE 401(k)on Form W–2
it is distributed. plan).
Your contributions to an employee’s SEP-IRAThis choice is available only if all the follow- See Publication 560 for information on SIMPLEare excluded from the employee’s income. Doing requirements are met. 401(k) plans.not include these contributions in your
• The SARSEP was set up before 1997. employee’s wages on Form W–2 for income, Many financial institutions will help yousocial security, or Medicare tax purposes. How- set up a SIMPLE plan.• At least 50% of the eligible employeesever, your SEP contributions under a salary re-choose the salary reduction arrangement.
TIP
duction arrangement are included in your
• You had 25 or fewer eligible employeesemployee’s wages for social security and Medi-
(or employees who would have been eligi-care tax purposes only.
ble if you had maintained a SEP) at any SIMPLE IRA Plan
time during the preceding year. Example. Jim’s salary reduction arrange-
A SIMPLE IRA plan is a retirement plan thatment calls for 10% of his salary to be contributed• Each eligible highly compensated uses SIMPLE IRAs for each eligible employee.by his employer as an elective deferral to Jim’semployee’s deferral percentage each year Under a SIMPLE IRA plan, a SIMPLE IRA mustSEP-IRA. Jim’s salary for the year is $30,000is no more than 125% of the average be set up for each eligible employee. For the(before reduction for the deferral). The employerdeferral percentage (ADP) of all nonhighly definition of an eligible employee, see Who Candid not choose to treat deferrals as compensa-compensated employees eligible to partici- Participate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?, next.tion under the arrangement. To figure the defer-pate (the ADP test). See Publication 560ral, the employer multiplies Jim’s salary offor the definition of a highly compensated$30,000 by 9.0909%, the reduced rate Who Can Set Upemployee and information on how to figureequivalent of 10%, to get the deferral ofa SIMPLE IRA Plan?the deferral percentage. $2,727.27. (This method is the same one you,
as a self-employed person, use to figure theYou can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan if you meet
Limit on elective deferrals.In general, thecontributions you make on your own behalf. Seeboth the following requirements.
total income an employee can defer under aWorksheet 3–A, under Qualified Plan, later.)
• You meet the employee limit.SARSEP and certain other elective deferral ar-On Jim’s Form W–2, his employer showsrangements for 2003 is limited to the lesser of • You do not maintain another qualified plantotal wages of $27,272.73 ($30,000 −$12,000 or 25% of the employee’s compensa- unless the other plan is for collective bar-$2,727.27), social security wages of $30,000,tion (as defined in Publication 560). This limit gaining employees.and Medicare wages of $30,000. Jim reportsapplies only to amounts that reduce the $27,272.73 as wages on his individual incomeemployee’s pay, not to any contributions fromtax return. Employee limit. You can set up a SIMPLEemployer funds. IRA plan only if you had 100 or fewer employeesIf his employer does not make the choice
who received $5,000 or more in compensationexplained above, Jim’s deferral would be $3,000
Catch-up contributions.A SEP can permit from you for the preceding year. Under this rule,($30,000 x 10%). In this case, the employer
participants who are age 50 or older at the end you must take into account all employees em-uses the rate called for under the arrangement
of the calendar year to make catch-up contribu- ployed at any time during the calendar year(not the reduced rate) to figure the deferral and
tions. The catch-up contribution limit for 2003 is regardless of whether they are eligible to partici-the ADP test. On Jim’s Form W–2, the employer
pate. Employees include self-employed individ-$2,000 ($3,000 for 2004). Elective deferrals areshows total wages of $27,000 ($30,000 −
uals who received earned income and leasednot treated as catch-up contributions for 2003$3,000), social security wages of $30,000, and
employees.until they exceed the limit discussed earlierMedicare wages of $30,000. Jim reports
under Limit on elective deferrals, the SARSEP Once you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan, you$27,000 as wages on his return.
ADP test (see Publication 560), or the plan limit must continue to meet the 100-employee limitIn either case, the maximum deductible con-(if any). However, the catch-up contribution a each year you maintain the plan.tribution would be $6,000 ($30,000 x 20%).participant can make for a year cannot exceed Grace period for employers who cease tothe lesser of the following amounts. meet the 100-employee limit.If you maintainMore information. For more information onthe SIMPLE IRA plan for at least 1 year and you• The catch-up contribution limit. employer withholding requirements, see Publi-cease to meet the 100-employee limit in a latercation 15.• The excess of the participant’s compensa- year, you will be treated as meeting it for the 2
tion over the elective deferrals that are not For more information on SEPs, see Publica-calendar years immediately following the calen-
catch-up contributions. tion 560. dar year for which you last met it.
Page 10 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 11 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A different rule applies if you do not meet thesection 403(b) annuity contract. If you arenot affect the amount an individual can contrib-
100-employee limit because of an acquisition, self-employed, compensation is your net earn-ute to a Roth IRA.
disposition, or similar transaction. Under thisings from self-employment (line 4 of Short Deadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA.Arule, the SIMPLE IRA plan will be treated as Schedule SE (Form 1040)) before subtractingSIMPLE IRA must be set up for an employeemeeting the 100-employee limit for the year of any contributions made to the SIMPLE IRA planbefore the first date by which a contribution isthe transaction and the 2 following years if both for yourself. required to be deposited into the employee’sthe following conditions are satisfied. IRA. See Time limits for contributing funds, later,
• Coverage under the plan has not signifi- under Contribution Limits.How To Set Up a SIMPLE IRA Plancantly changed during the grace period.
You can use Form 5304–SIMPLE  or Form• The SIMPLE IRA plan would have contin- Notification Requirement5305–SIMPLE  to set up a SIMPLE IRA plan.ued to qualify after the transaction if you
Each form is a model savings incentive matchhad remained a separate employer. If you adopt a SIMPLE IRA plan, you must notifyplan for employees (SIMPLE) plan document.each employee of the following informationWhich form you use depends on whether youbefore the beginning of the election period.The grace period for acquisitions, dis-select a financial institution or your employees
positions, and similar transactions alsoselect the institution that will receive the contri-• The employee’s opportunity to make orapplies if, because of these types ofbutions.
CAUTION
!
change a salary reduction choice under atransactions, you do not meet the rules ex-Use Form 5304–SIMPLE if you allow each SIMPLE IRA plan.plained under Other qualified plan, next, or Who plan participant to select the financial institution
• Your choice to make either reducedCan Participate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?, later. for receiving his or her SIMPLE IRA plan contri-
matching contributions or nonelective con-butions. Use Form 5305–SIMPLE if you requireOther qualified plan.The SIMPLE IRA plan tributions (discussed later).that all contributions under the SIMPLE IRA plangenerally must be the only retirement plan tobe deposited initially at a designated financial• A summary description and the location ofwhich you make contributions, or benefits ac-institution. the plan. The financial institution shouldcrue, for service in any year beginning with theThe SIMPLE IRA plan is adopted when you provide you with this information.year the SIMPLE IRA plan becomes effective.(and the designated financial institution, if any)
• Written notice that his or her balance canhave completed all appropriate boxes andException. If you maintain a qualified plan be transferred without cost or penalty ifblanks on the form and you have signed it. Keepfor collective bargaining employees, you are
you use a designated financial institution.the original form. Do not file it with the IRS.permitted to maintain a SIMPLE IRA plan for
other employees. Other uses of the forms. If you set up a
Election period.The election period is gener-SIMPLE IRA plan using Form 5304–SIMPLE or
ally the 60-day period immediately precedingForm 5305–SIMPLE, you can use the form toWho Can Participate January 1 of a calendar year (November 2 tosatisfy other requirements, including the follow-in a SIMPLE IRA Plan? December 31 of the preceding calendar year).ing.
However, the dates of this period are modified if
• Meeting employer notification require-you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan in mid-year (forEligible employee.Any employee who re- ments for the SIMPLE IRA plan. Page 3 ofexample, on July 1) or if the 60-day period fallsceived at least $5,000 in compensation duringForm 5304–SIMPLE and Page 3 of Form before the first day an employee becomes eligi-any 2 years preceding the current calendar year5305–SIMPLE contain a Model Notifica-and is reasonably expected to receive at least ble to participate in the SIMPLE IRA plan.tion to Eligible Employees that provides$5,000 during the current calendar year is eligi- A SIMPLE IRA plan can provide longer peri-the necessary information to the em-ble to participate. The term employee  includes ods for permitting employees to enter into salaryployee.a self-employed individual who received earned reduction agreements or to modify prior agree-
income. • Maintaining the SIMPLE IRA plan recordsments. For example, a SIMPLE IRA plan can
You can use less restrictive eligibility require-and proving you set up a SIMPLE IRA provide a 90-day election period instead of the
ments (but not more restrictive ones) by elimi-plan for employees. 60-day period. Similarly, in addition to the
nating or reducing the prior year compensation 60-day period, a SIMPLE IRA plan can provide
requirements, the current year compensation quarterly election periods during the 30 daysDeadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA plan.requirements, or both. For example, you can before each calendar quarter, other than the firstYou can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan effective onallow participation for employees who received quarter of each year.any date from January 1 thru October 1 of aat least $3,000 in compensation during any pre-year, provided you did not previously maintain aceding calendar year. However, you cannot im-SIMPLE IRA plan. This requirement does notpose any other conditions on participating in a Contribution Limitsapply if you are a new employer that comes intoSIMPLE IRA plan. existence after October 1 of the year theContributions are made up of salary reductionSIMPLE IRA plan is set up and you set up aExcludable employees. The following em- contributions and employer contributions. You,SIMPLE IRA plan as soon as administrativelyployees do not need to be covered under a as the employer, must make either matchingfeasible after your business comes into exis-SIMPLE IRA plan. contributions or nonelective contributions, dis-tence. If you previously maintained a SIMPLEcussed later. No other contributions can be• Employees who are covered by a union IRA plan, you can set up a SIMPLE IRA planmade to the SIMPLE IRA plan. These contribu-agreement and whose retirement benefitseffective only on January 1 of a year. A SIMPLEtions, which you can deduct, must be madewere bargained for in good faith by theIRA plan cannot have an effective date that istimely. See Time limits for contributing funds,employees’ union and you. before the date you actually adopt the plan.later.
• Nonresident alien employees who have Setting up a SIMPLE IRA.SIMPLE IRAs arereceived no U.S. source wages, salaries, Salary reduction contributions.The amountthe individual retirement accounts or annuitiesor other personal services compensation the employee chooses to have you contribute tointo which the contributions are deposited. Afrom you. a SIMPLE IRA on his or her behalf cannot beSIMPLE IRA must be set up for each eligible
more than $8,000 for 2003 ($9,000 for 2004).employee. Forms 5305–S, SIMPLE Individual
These contributions must be expressed as aCompensation. Compensation for employ- Retirement Trust Account, and 5305–SA,
percentage of the employee’s compensation un-ees is the total wages required to be reported onSIMPLE Individual Retirement Custodial Ac-
less you permit the employee to express themForm W–2. Compensation also includes the count, are model trust and custodial account
as a specific dollar amount. You cannot placesalary reduction contributions made under this documents the participant and the trustee (or
restrictions on the contribution amount (such asplan, compensation deferred under a section custodian) can use for this purpose.
limiting the contribution percentage), except to457 plan, and the employees’ elective deferrals A SIMPLE IRA cannot be designated as a
comply with the $8,000 limit.under a section 401(k) plan, a SARSEP, or a Roth IRA. Contributions to a SIMPLE IRA will
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 11

Page 12 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If an employee is a participant in any other contribute 10% of her salary. You make a 2%Tax Treatment of Contributions
employer plan during the year and has electivenonelective contribution. Both of you are under
You can deduct your contributions and your em-salary reductions or deferred compensationage 50. The total contributions you can make forployees can exclude these contributions fromunder those plans, the salary reduction contribu-her are $4,320, figured as follows. their gross income. SIMPLE IRA contributionstions under a SIMPLE IRA plan also are elective
are not subject to federal income tax withhold-deferrals that count toward the overall $12,000Salary reduction contributions
ing. However, salary reduction contributions areannual limit on exclusion of salary reductions($36,000 × .10).............. $3,600
subject to social security, Medicare, and federaland other elective deferrals. 2% nonelective contributions
unemployment (FUTA) taxes. Matching and($36,000 × .02).............. 7 2 0Catch-up contributions.A SIMPLE plan nonelective contributions are not subject toTotal contributions........... $4,320can permit participants who are age 50 or older these taxes.
at the end of the calendar year to make catch-up
Reporting on Form W–2. Do not includeExample 2. Using the same facts as in Ex-contributions. The catch-up contribution limit for
SIMPLE IRA contributions in the “Wages, tips,ample 1, above, the maximum contribution you2003 is $1,000. This limit increases by $500
other compensation” box of Form W–2. How-can make for Jane if she earned $75,000 iseach year thereafter until it reaches $2,500 in
ever, salary reduction contributions must be in-2006. The limit is subject to cost-of-living in-$9,500, figured as follows.
cluded in the boxes for social security wagescreases after 2006. The catch-up contributions a
and Medicare wages. Also include the properSalary reduction contributionsparticipant can make for a year cannot exceed
code in Box 12. For more information, see the(maximum amount) .......... $8,000the lesser of the following amounts.
instructions for Forms W–2 and W–3.2% nonelective contributions• The catch-up contribution limit. ($75,000 × .02)............. 1,500
Total contributions.......... $9,500• The excess of the participant’s compensa-
Distributions (Withdrawals)tion over the elective deferrals that are not
catch-up contributions. Distributions from a SIMPLE IRA are subject toTime limits for contributing funds.You
IRA rules and generally are includible in incomemust make the salary reduction contributions toEmployer matching contributions. You for the year received. Tax-free rollovers can bethe SIMPLE IRA within 30 days after the end ofgenerally are required to match each made from one SIMPLE IRA into anotherthe month in which the amounts would other-employee’s salary reduction contributions (other SIMPLE IRA. A rollover from a SIMPLE IRA to awise have been payable to the employee inthan catch-up contributions) on a dollar-for-dol- non-SIMPLE IRA can be made tax free onlycash. You must make matching contributions orlar basis up to 3% of the employee’s compensa- after a 2-year participation in the SIMPLE IRAnonelective contributions by the due date (in-tion. This requirement does not apply if you plan.
cluding extensions) for filing your federal incomemake nonelective contributions as discussed Early withdrawals generally are subject to a
tax return for the year.later. 10% additional tax. However, the additional tax
is increased to 25% if funds are withdrawn within
Example. In 2003, your employee, John 2 years of beginning participation.
When To Deduct ContributionsRose, earned $25,000 and chose to defer 5% of
More information.See Publication 590 for in-his salary. You make a 3% matching contribu-You can deduct SIMPLE IRA contributions in theformation about IRA rules, including those ontion. The total contribution you can make fortax year with or within which the calendar yearthe tax treatment of distributions, rollovers, re-John is $2,000, figured as follows.
for which contributions were made ends. Youquired distributions, and income tax withholding.
can deduct contributions for a particular tax yearSalary reduction contributions
($25,000 × .05)................ $1,250 if they are made for that tax year and are made
Employer matching contribution More Information onby the due date (including extensions) of your
($25,000 × .03)................ 7 5 0 SIMPLE IRA Plansfederal income tax return for that year.
Total contributions............. $2,000
If you need more help to set up and maintain aExample 1. Your tax year is the fiscal year
SIMPLE IRA plan, see the following IRS noticeLower percentage. If you choose a match-ending June 30. Contributions under a SIMPLEand revenue procedure.ing contribution less than 3%, the percentageIRA plan for the calendar year 2003 (includingmust be at least 1%. You must notify the em-contributions made in 2003 before July 1, 2003)Notice 98–4. This notice contains questionsployees of the lower match within a reasonableare deductible in the tax year ending June 30,and answers about the implementation and op-period of time before the 60-day election period2004. eration of SIMPLE IRA plans, including the elec-(discussed earlier) for the calendar year. You tion and notice requirements for these plans.cannot choose a percentage less than 3% forExample 2. You are a sole proprietor whoseNotice 98–4 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1998–1.more than 2 years during the 5-year period thattax year is the calendar year. Contributionsends with (and includes) the year for which the Revenue Procedure 97–29. This revenueunder a SIMPLE IRA plan for the calendar yearchoice is effective. procedure provides guidance to drafters of pro-2003 (including contributions made in 2004 by
totype SIMPLE IRAs on obtaining opinion let-Nonelective contributions. Instead of April 15, 2004) are deductible in the 2003 taxters. Revenue Procedure 97–29 is inmatching contributions, you can choose to makeyear. Cumulative Bulletin 1997–1.nonelective contributions of 2% of compensa-
tion on behalf of each eligible employee who has
at least $5,000 of compensation (or some lower
Where To Deduct Contributions
amount of compensation that you select) from
Deduct contributions you make for your Qualified Planyou for the year. If you make this choice, you
must make nonelective contributions whether orcommon-law employees on your tax return. For
A qualified retirement plan is a written plan younot the employee chooses to make salary re-example, sole proprietors deduct them on
can set up for the exclusive benefit of your em-duction contributions. Only $200,000 of theSchedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form
ployees and their beneficiaries. It is sometimesemployee’s compensation can be taken into ac-1040), partnerships deduct them on Form 1065,
called a Keogh or H.R. 10 plan.count to figure the contribution limit. and corporations deduct them on Form 1120, You, or you and your employees, can makeIf you choose this 2% contribution formula,Form 1120–A, or Form 1120S. contributions to the plan. If your plan meets theyou must notify the employees within a reasona-
Sole proprietors and partners deduct contri-qualification requirements, you generally canble period of time before the 60-day election
butions for themselves on line 30 of Form 1040.deduct your contributions to the plan. For moreperiod (discussed earlier) for the calendar year.
(If you are a partner, contributions for yourselfinformation, see Publication 560.
are shown on the Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) youExample 1. In 2003, your employee, Jane Your employees generally are not taxed on
receive from the partnership).Wood, earned $36,000 and chose to have you your contributions or increases in the plan’s as-
Page 12 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 13 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sets until they are distributed. However, certain you will need continuing professional help toDefined benefit plans.An actuary must fig-
loans made from qualified plans are treated as administer a defined benefit plan. ure the deduction for contributions to a defined
taxable distributions. For more information, see benefit plan because it is based on actuarial
Publication 575. assumptions and computations.
Setting Up a Plan
Qualification requirements.To be a quali- Deduction of contributions for yourself.ToYou must adopt a written plan. The plan can befied plan, the plan must meet many require- take a deduction for contributions you make to aan IRS-approved master or prototype plan of-ments. They include requirements that plan for yourself, you must have net earningsfered by a sponsoring organization. Or it can bedetermine the following. from the trade or business for which the planan individually designed plan. was set up.• Who must be covered by the plan. Master or prototype plans. The following Limit on deduction.If the qualified plan is a• How contributions to the plan are to besponsoring organizations generally can provideprofit-sharing plan, your deduction for yourself isinvested. IRS-approved master or prototype plans. limited to the lesser of $40,000 or 20% (25%
• How contributions to the plan and benefits reduced as discussed later) of your net earn-• Trade or professional organizations.
under the plan are to be determined. ings.• Banks (including savings and loan as-
• How much of an employee’s interest in the Net earnings. Your net earnings must besociations and federally insured credit un-
plan must be guaranteed (vested). from self-employment in a trade or business inions).
which your personal services are a materialFor more information, see Publication 560. • Insurance companies. income-producing factor. Your net earnings do
not include items excluded from income (or de-• Mutual funds.More than one job.If you are self-employed ductions related to that income), other than for-and also work for someone else, you can partici-Adoption of a master or prototype plan does noteign earned income and foreign housing costpate in retirement plans for both jobs. Generally,mean your plan is automatically qualified. It stillamounts.your participation in a retirement plan for one jobmust meet all the qualification requirementsYour net earnings are your business grossdoes not affect your participation in a plan for thestated in the law. income minus the allowable business deduc-other job. However, if you have an IRA, you may tions from that business. Allowable businessnot be allowed to deduct part or all of your IRAIndividually designed plan.If you prefer, youdeductions include contributions to SEP andcontributions. See Publication 590. can set up an individually designed plan to meetqualified plans for common-law employees andspecific needs. Although advance IRS approvalthe deduction for one-half of your self-employ-is not required, you can apply for approval byKinds of Qualified Plans ment tax.paying a fee and requesting a determinationNet earnings include a partner’s distributiveThere are two basic kinds of qualified retirement letter. You may need professional help with this.share of partnership income or loss (other thanplans: defined contribution plans and defined Revenue Procedure 2003-6 in Internal Revenueseparately stated items such as capital gainsbenefit plans. Bulletin 2003-1 may help you decide whether to and losses) and any guaranteed payments. Ifapply for approval. you are a limited partner, net earnings include
only guaranteed payments for services ren-Defined Contribution Plan Deduction Limits dered to or for the partnership. For more infor-
mation, see Partnership Income or Loss underThis plan provides for a separate account forThe deduction limit for contributions to a quali-Figuring Earnings Subject to Self-Employmenteach person covered by the plan. Benefits arefied plan depends on the kind of plan you have.Tax in Publication 533.based only on amounts contributed to or allo-
Net earnings do not include income passedIn figuring the deduction for contribu-cated to each account.
through to shareholders of S corporations.tions to these plans, you cannot takeThere are two types of defined contribution
into account any contributions or bene-plans: profit-sharing and money purchase pen-
CAUTION
!
Adjustments. You must reduce your netfits that are more than the limits discussed undersion. earnings by the deduction for one-half of yourLimits on Contributions and Benefits in Publica-self-employment tax. Also, net earnings must beProfit-sharing plan.This plan lets your em-tion 560. However, your deduction can be asreduced by the deduction for contributions youployees or their beneficiaries share in the profitsmuch as the plan’s unfunded current liability.make for yourself. This reduction is made indi-of your business. The plan must have a definite
rectly, as explained next.formula for allocating the contribution among theDefined contribution plans.The deduction
participating employees and for distributing thefor contributions to a defined contribution planNet earnings reduced by adjusting contri-
accumulated funds in the plan. (profit sharing plan or money purchase pensionbution rate.You must reduce net earnings by
plan) cannot be more than 25% of the compen-your deduction for contributions for yourself. TheMoney purchase pension plan. Under this sation paid (or accrued) during the year to thededuction and the net earnings depend on eachplan, contributions are fixed and are not basedeligible employees participating in the plan. Youother. You make the adjustment indirectly byon your business profits. For example, if the planmust reduce this limit in figuring the deductionreducing the contribution rate called for in therequires contributions of 10% of each participat-for contributions you make for your own ac-plan and using the reduced rate to figure youring employee’s compensation, regardless ofcount. See Deduction of contributions for your-maximum deduction for contributions for your-whether you have a profit, the plan is a moneyself, later. self.purchase pension plan. When figuring the deduction limit, the follow-Annual compensation limit.You generallying rules apply. cannot take into account more than $200,000 ofDefined Benefit Plan • Elective deferrals (discussed in Publica-your compensation in figuring your contribution
tion 560) are not subject to the limit.to a defined contribution plan.This is any plan that is not a defined contribution
• Compensation includes elective deferrals.plan. In general, contributions to a qualified de-
fined benefit plan are based on what is needed• The maximum compensation that can beto provide definitely determinable benefits totaken into account for each employee isplan participants. Your contributions to the plan$200,000.are based on actuarial assumptions. Generally,
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 13

Page 14 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3–A. Rate Worksheet forWorksheet 3–B. Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed
Self-Employed —
Step 1 Illustrated
Enter your net profit from line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line 3, Schedule
C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or line 15a*, Schedule K-1 1) Plan contribution rate as a(Form 1065)............................................. decimal (for example, 101/2% =*General partners should reduce this amount by the same additional expenses .105) ................... 0.085subtracted from line 15a to determine the amount on line 1 or 2 of Schedule SE 2) Rate in line 1 plus 1 (for example,Step 2 .105 + 1 = 1.105)........... 1.085Enter your deduction for self-employment tax from line 28, Form 1040....... 3) Self-employed rate as a decimalStep 3 rounded to at least 3 decimalNet earnings from self-employment. Subtract step 2 from step 1........... places (line 1 ÷ line 2)........ 0.078Step 4
Enter your rate from the Worksheet 3 – A..........................
Step 5 When to make contributions.To take a de-
Multiply step 3 by step 4..................................... duction for contributions for a particular year,
Step 6 you must make the contributions not later than
Multiply $200,000 by your plan contribution rate (not the reduced rate)....... the due date (generally April 15 for calendar
Step 7 year taxpayers), plus extensions, of your tax
Enter the smaller of step 5 or step 6............................. return for that year.Step 8
More information. See Publication 560 forContribution dollar limit...................................... $40,000
more information on retirement plans for small• If you made any elective deferrals, go to step 9.
business owners, including the self-employed.• Otherwise, skip steps 9 through 18 and enter the smaller
of step 7 or step 8 on step 19. Publication 560 also discusses the reporting
Step 9 forms that must be filed for these plans.
Enter your allowable elective deferrals made during 2003. Do not enter more
than $12,000............................................
Step 10
Subtract step 9 from step 8................................... Individual RetirementStep 11
Subtract step 9 from step 3......................... Arrangement (IRA)Step 12
Enter one-half of step 11.................................... An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is aStep 13 personal savings plan that allows you to setEnter the smallest of step 7, 10, or 12............................ aside money for your retirement. You may beStep 14 able to deduct your contributions, depending onSubtract step 13 from step 3.................................. the type of IRA and your circumstances. Gener-Step 15 ally, amounts in an IRA, including earnings andEnter the smaller of step 9 or step 14............................ gains, are not taxed until they are distributed. In• If you made catch-up contributions, go to step 16.
certain cases, your earnings and gains may not• Otherwise, skip steps 16 through 18 and go to step 19.
be taxed at all if they are distributed according toStep 16
the rules. For more information on IRAs, seeSubtract step 15 from step 14.................................
Publication 590.Step 17
Enter your catch-up contributions, if any. Do not enter more than $2,000......
Step 18
Enter the smaller of step 16 or step 17...........................
Step 19
Add steps 13, 15, and 18. This is your maximum deductible contribution....
Next: Enter your deduction on line 30, Form 1040.
After you have figured your self-employedFiguring Your Deduction
rate, you can figure your maximum deduction for
contributions for yourself by completing Work-Use the following worksheet to find the reduced
sheet 3–B.contribution rate for yourself. Make no reduction
An Example of how to complete the work-to the contribution rate for any common-law em-
sheets follows.ployees.
Worksheet 3–A. Rate Worksheet for Example
Self-Employed
You are a sole proprietor with no employees.
1) Plan contribution rate as a The terms of your plan provide that you contrib-
decimal (for example, 101/2% = ute 81/2% (.085) of your compensation (defined
.105) ................... earlier) to your plan. Your net profit from line 31,
2) Rate in line 1 plus 1 (for example, Schedule C (Form 1040) is $200,000. You have
.105 + 1 = 1.105)........... no elective deferrals or catch-up contributions.
3) Self-employed rate as a decimal Your self-employment tax deduction on line 28
rounded to at least 3 decimal of Form 1040 is $8,072. You figure your self-em-
places (line 1 ÷ line 2)........ ployed rate and maximum deduction for em-
ployer contributions you made for yourself as
shown in illustrated Worksheet 3–A and Work-
sheet 3–B.
Page 14 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 15 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3–B. Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed — Illustrated
RentStep 1
Enter your net profit from line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line 3, Schedule Rent is any amount you pay for the use ofC-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or line 15a*, Schedule K-1 property you do not own. In general, you can(Form 1065)............................................. $200,000 deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is for*General partners should reduce this amount by the same additional expenses
property you use in your trade or business. If yousubtracted from line 15a to determine the amount on line 1 or 2 of Schedule SE
have or will receive equity in or title to the prop-Step 2
erty, the rent is not deductible.Enter your deduction for self-employment tax from line 28, Form 1040....... 8,072
Step 3 Unreasonable rent.You cannot take a rentalNet earnings from self-employment. Subtract step 2 from step 1........... 191,928 deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, theStep 4 issue of reasonableness arises only if you andEnter your rate from Worksheet 3 – A............................. 0.078
the lessor are related. Rent paid to a relatedStep 5
person is reasonable if it is the same amountMultiply step 3 by step 4..................................... 14,970
you would pay to a stranger for use of the sameStep 6
property. Rent is not unreasonable just becauseMultiply $200,000 by your plan contribution rate (not the reduced rate)....... 17,000
it is figured as a percentage of gross sales. ForStep 7
examples of related persons, see Related Per-Enter the smaller of step 5 or step 6............................. 14,970
sons in chapter 12.Step 8
Contribution dollar limit...................................... $40,000 Rent on your home. If you rent your home• If you made any elective deferrals, go to step 9. and use part of it as your place of business, you• Otherwise, skip steps 9 through 18 and enter the smaller
may be able to deduct the rent you pay for thatof step 7 or step 8 on step 19.
part. You must meet the requirements for busi-Step 9
ness use of your home. For more information,Enter your allowable elective deferrals made during 2003. Do not enter more
see Business use of your home in chapter 1.than $12,000............................................
Step 10
Rent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid inSubtract step 9 from step 8...................................
your trade or business is deductible in the yearStep 11
paid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, youSubtract step 9 from step 3.........................
can deduct only the amount that applies to yourStep 12
use of the rented property during the tax year.Enter one-half of step 11....................................
You can deduct the rest of your payment onlyStep 13
over the period to which it applies.Enter the smallest of step 7, 10, or 12............................
Step 14
Example 1. You leased a building for 5Subtract step 13 from step 3..................................
years beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 perStep 15
year. You paid the first year’s rent ($12,000) onEnter the smaller of step 9 or step 14............................
June 30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 ×• If you made catch-up contributions, go to step 16.
$12,000) for the rent that applies to the first year.• Otherwise, skip steps 16 through 18 and go to step 19.
Step 16
Subtract step 15 from step 14................................. Example 2. Last January you leased prop-
Step 17 erty for 3 years for $6,000 a year. You paid the
Enter your catch-up contributions, if any. Do not enter more than $2,000...... full $18,000 (3 × $6,000) during the first year of
Step 18 the lease. Each year you can deduct only
Enter the smaller of step 16 or step 17........................... $6,000, the part of the rent that applies to that
Step 19 year.
Add steps 13, 15, and 18. This is your maximum deductible contribution.... $14,970
Canceling a lease.You generally can deductNext: Enter your deduction on line 30, Form 1040.
as rent an amount you pay to cancel a business
lease.
. sion about capitalizing (including in the cost ofLease or purchase. There may be instancesproperty) certain rent expenses at the end of thein which you must determine whether your pay-chapter. ments are for rent or for the purchase of the
property. You must first determine whether yourTopics agreement is a lease or a conditional sales con-This chapter discusses: tract. Payments made under a conditional sales
contract are not deductible as rent expense.4. • The definition of rent
Conditional sales contract.Whether an• Taxes on leased property agreement is a conditional sales contract de-
pends on the intent of the parties. Determine• The cost of getting a lease
Rent Expense intent based on the provisions of the agreement• Improvements by the lessee and the facts and circumstances that exist when
you make the agreement. No single test, or• Capitalizing rent expenses
special combination of tests, always applies.Introduction However, in general, an agreement may be con-See chapter 14 for information about gettingThis chapter discusses the tax treatment of rent sidered a conditional sales contract rather thanpublications and forms.or lease payments you make for property you a lease if any of the following is true.
use in your business but do not own. It also • The agreement applies part of each pay-discusses how to treat other kinds of payments ment toward an equity interest you will re-you make that are related to your use of this ceive.property. These include payments you make for
taxes on the property, improvements to the • You get title to the property after you make
property, and getting a lease. There is a discus- a stated amount of required payments.
Chapter 4 Rent Expense Page 15

Page 16 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Leveraged leases of limited-use property.• The amount you must pay to use the prop- The liability and amount of taxes are deter-
The IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever-erty for a short time is a large part of the mined by state or local law and the lease agree-
aged leases of so-called limited-use property.amount you would pay to get title to the ment. Economic performance occurs as you use
Limited-use property is property not expected toproperty. the property.
be either useful to or usable by a lessor at the• You pay much more than the current fairend of the lease term except for continued leas-Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendarrental value of the property. ing or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce- year taxpayer that uses an accrual method of
dure 2001–28 for examples of limited-use accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-• You have an option to buy the property at
property and property that is not limited-use ness. Under state law, owners of real propertya nominal price compared to the value of
property. become liable (incur a lien on the property) forthe property when you may exercise the
real estate taxes for the year on January 1 ofoption. Determine this value when you
that year. However, they do not have to paymake the agreement. Leases over $250,000.Special rules are pro-
these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18vided for certain leases of tangible property. The• You have an option to buy the property at months later) when tax bills are issued. Underrules apply if the lease calls for total payments ofa nominal price compared to the total the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable formore than $250,000 and any of the followingamount you have to pay under the agree- the real estate taxes in the later year when theapply.ment. tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the
• Rents increase during the lease. tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable for• The agreement designates part of the pay-
the taxes for that year.ments as interest, or that part is easy to• Rents decrease during the lease.
recognize as interest. Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as• Rents are deferred (rent is payable afterrent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak’sthe end of the calendar year following theLeveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans- liability under the lease becomes fixed.calendar year in which the use occurs andactions may not be considered leases. Lever-the rent is allocated).aged leases generally involve three parties: a Example 2. The facts are the same as in
lessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor. Example 1 except that, according to the terms of• Rents are prepaid (rent is payable before
Usually the lease term covers a large part of the the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estatethe end of the calendar year preceding the
useful life of the leased property, and the taxes when the owner of the property becomescalendar year in which the use occurs and
lessee’s payments to the lessor are enough to liable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct thethe rent is allocated).
cover the lessor’s payments to the lender. real estate taxes as rent on its tax return for theThese rules do not apply if your lease specifiesearlier year. This is the year in which Oak’sIf you plan to take part in what appears to beequal amounts of rent for each month in theliability under the lease becomes fixed.a leveraged lease, you may want to get anlease term and all rent payments are due in theadvance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001–28calendar year to which the rent relates (or in thein Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001–19 containspreceding or following calendar year).the guidelines the IRS will use to determine if a
Generally, if the special rules apply, you mustleveraged lease is a lease for federal income tax Cost of
use an accrual method of accounting (and timepurposes. Revenue Procedure 2001–29 in the
Getting a Leasevalue of money principles) for your rental ex-same Internal Revenue Bulletin provides the
penses, regardless of your overall method ofinformation required to be furnished in a request
You may either enter into a new lease with theaccounting. In addition, in certain cases in whichfor an advance ruling on a leveraged lease
lessor of the property or get an existing leasethe IRS has determined that a lease was de-transaction.
from another lessee. Very often when you get ansigned to achieve tax avoidance, you must takeIn general, Revenue Procedure 2001–28 existing lease from another lessee, you mustrent and stated or imputed interest into accountprovides that, for advance ruling purposes only, pay the previous lessee money to get the lease,under a constant rental accrual method in whichthe IRS will consider the lessor in a leveraged besides having to pay the rent on the lease.the rent is treated as accruing ratably over thelease transaction to be the owner of the property
entire lease term. For details, see the regula-If you get an existing lease on property orand the transaction to be a valid lease if all the
tions under section 467 of the Internal Revenueequipment for your business, you generallyfactors in the revenue procedure are met, in-
Code. must amortize any amount you pay to get thatcluding the following.
lease over the remaining term of the lease. For
• The lessor must maintain a minimum un- example, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and
conditional “at risk” equity investment in there are 10 years remaining on the lease with
the property (at least 20% of the cost of no option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 eachTaxes on
the property) during the entire lease term. year.
The cost of getting an existing lease of tangi-Leased Property• The lessee may not have a contractual ble property is not subject to the amortizationright to buy the property from the lessor at rules for section 197 intangibles discussed inIf you lease business property, you can deductless than fair market value when the right chapter 9.as additional rent any taxes you have to pay tois exercised.
or for the lessor. When you can deduct these
• The lessee may not invest in the property, Option to renew. The term of the lease fortaxes as additional rent depends on your ac-
except as provided by Revenue Procedure amortization includes all renewal options pluscounting method.
2001–28. any other period for which you and the lessor
reasonably expect the lease to be renewed.Cash method. If you use the cash method of• The lessee may not lend any money to the However, this applies only if less than 75% ofaccounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-lessor to buy the property or guarantee the the cost of getting the lease is for the termtional rent only for the tax year in which you payloan used by the lessor to buy the prop- remaining on the purchase date (not includingthem.erty. any period for which you may choose to renew,
• The lessor must show that it expects to extend, or continue the lease). Allocate theAccrual method. If you use an accrualreceive a profit apart from the tax deduc- lease cost to the original term and any optionmethod of accounting, you can deduct taxes astions, allowances, credits, and other tax term based on the facts and circumstances. Inadditional rent for the tax year in which you canattributes. some cases, it may be appropriate to make thedetermine all the following. allocation using a present value computation.
The IRS may charge you a user fee for issuing• That you have a liability for taxes on theFor more information, see section
a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenueleased property. 1.178–1(b)(5) of the regulations.
Procedure 2004–1, in Internal Revenue Bulletin• How much the liability is.No. 2004–1, or Publication 1375, which is a Example 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease
reprint of Revenue Procedure 2004–1. • That economic performance occurred. with 20 years remaining on it and two options to
Page 16 Chapter 4 Rent Expense

Page 17 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
renew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paidAssignment of a lease.If a long-term lessee
$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for the who makes permanent improvements to land
renewal options. Because $7,000 is less than later assigns all lease rights to you for money
5.75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (or and you pay the rent required by the lease, the
$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30 amount you pay for the assignment is a capital
years. That is the remaining life of your present investment. If the rental value of the leased land
lease plus the periods for renewal. increased since the lease began, part of your
Interestcapital investment is for that increase in the
Example 2. The facts are the same as inrental value. The rest is for your investment in
Example 1, except that you paid $8,000 for thethe permanent improvements.
original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op-The part that is for the increased rental valueIntroductiontions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 overof the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-the 20-year remaining life of the original lease.amortize it over the remaining term of the lease.
ness interest expense. Business interest ex-The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease wasYou can depreciate the part that is for your
pense is an amount charged for the use ofnot less than 75% of the total cost of the leaseinvestment in the improvements over the recov-
money you borrowed for business activities.(or $7,500). ery period of the property as discussed earlier,
without regard to the lease term.Cost of a modification agreement.You may Topicshave to pay an additional “rent” amount over part This chapter discusses:of the lease period to change certain provisions
in your lease. You must capitalize these pay-Capitalizing • Allocation of interestments and amortize them over the remaining
period of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay- • Interest you can deductRent Expensesments as additional rent, even if they are de- • Interest you cannot deductscribed as rent in the agreement. Under the uniform capitalization rules, you have• Capitalization of interestto capitalize the direct costs and part of theExample. You are a calendar year taxpayerindirect costs for production or resale activities.• When to deduct interestand sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a buildingIndirect costs include amounts incurred forstarting on January 1. However, before you oc- • Below-market loansrenting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.cupy it, you decide that you really need lessGenerally, you are subject to the uniformspace. The lessor agrees to reduce your rentcapitalization rules if you do any of the followingUseful Itemsfrom $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to releasein the course of a trade or business or an activityYou may want to see:the excess space from the original lease. Incarried on for profit.exchange, you agree to pay an additional rent
Publication• Produce real or tangible personal propertyamount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install-
for use in the business or activity.ments of $50 each. ❏ 537 Installment SalesYou must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize• Produce real or tangible personal propertyit over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor- ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsfor sale to customers.tization deduction each year will be $150 ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses• Acquire property for resale. However, this($3,000 ÷ 20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 ×
rule does not apply to personal property❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5
acquired for resale if your average annual Deductionyears as rent.
gross receipts for the 3 previous tax years
Commissions, bonuses, and fees.Commis- were not more than $10 million. Form (and Instructions)
sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts you
pay to get a lease on property you use in your ❏ Sch A (Form 1040)ItemizedExample 1. You rent construction equip-business are capital costs. You must amortize Deductionsment to build a storage facility. You must capital-these costs over the term of the lease. ❏ Sch E (Form 1040)Supplementalize as part of the cost of the building the rent you
Income and Losspaid for the equipment. You recover your cost byLoss on merchandise and fixtures.If you
claiming a deduction for depreciation on thesell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you ❏ Sch K–1 (Form 1065) Partner’s Sharebuilding.bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of of Income, Credits, Deductions, etc.
getting the lease. You must capitalize the loss
❏ Sch K–1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder’sExample 2. You rent space in a facility toand amortize it over the remaining term of the
Share of Income, Credits,conduct your business of manufacturing tools.lease.
Deductions, etc.You must include the rent you paid to occupy the
facility in the cost of the tools you produce.❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement
More information.For more information, see❏ 3115 Application for Change inImprovements the regulations under section 263A of the Inter- Accounting Methodnal Revenue Code.
by Lessee ❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense
Deduction
If you add buildings or make other permanent
❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsimprovements to leased property, depreciate
the cost of the improvements using the modified
See chapter 14 for information about gettingaccelerated cost recovery system (MACRS).
publications and forms.Depreciate the property over its appropriate re-
covery period. You cannot amortize the cost
over the remaining term of the lease.
If you do not keep the improvements when
you end the lease, figure your gain or loss based Allocation of Interest
on your adjusted basis in the improvements at
that time. The rules for deducting interest vary, depending
For more information, see the discussion of on whether the loan proceeds are used for busi-
MACRS in Publication 946, How To Depreciate ness, personal, investment, or passive activi-
Property. ties. If you use the proceeds of a loan for more
Chapter 5 Interest Page 17

Page 18 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
than one type of expense, you must make an Connie uses $20,000 from the checking account ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat
allocation to determine the interest for each use for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem-any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)
of the loan’s proceeds. ber 1, Connie uses an additional $40,000 from made from any account you own, or from cash,
Allocate your interest expense to the follow- the account for personal purposes.as made from those proceeds. This applies to
ing categories. any payment made within 30 days before orUnder the interest allocation rules, the entire
$100,000 loan is treated as property held for after the proceeds are received in cash or de-• Trade or business interest investment for the period from January 4 posited in your account.
• Passive activity interest through March 31. From April 1 through AugustIf the loan proceeds are deposited in an
31, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan asaccount, you can apply this rule even if the rules• Investment interest used in the passive activity and $80,000 of thestated earlier under Order of funds spent would
• Portfolio interest loan as property held for investment. From Sep-otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as
tember 1 through December 31, she must treatused for other purposes. If you apply this rule to• Personal interest $40,000 of the loan as used for personal pur-any payments, disregard those payments (and
In general, you allocate interest on a loan theposes, $20,000 as used in the passive activity,the proceeds from which they are made) when
same way you allocate the loan proceeds. Youand $40,000 as property held for investment.applying the rules stated under Order of funds
allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse- spent.Order of funds spent.Generally, you treatments to specific uses. If you received the loan proceeds in cash,loan proceeds deposited in an account as used
you can treat the payment as made on the date(spent) before either of the following amounts.The easiest way to trace disburse- you received the cash instead of the date youments to specific uses is to keep the• Any unborrowed amounts held in the actually made the payment.proceeds of a particular loan separatesame account.
TIP
from any other funds. Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 on• Any amounts deposited after these loan
August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.proceeds.Secured loan. The allocation of loan pro- Frank deposits $1,500 in an account on Augustceeds and the related interest is not generally 18 and on August 28 writes a check on theaffected by the use of property that secures theExample. On January 9, Edith opened a account for a passive activity expense. Also,loan. checking account, depositing $500 of the pro-Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits otherceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowed loan proceeds, and pays his bills during theExample. You secure a loan with propertyfunds. The following table shows the transac-same period. Regardless of these other transac-used in your business. You use the loan pro-tions in her account during the tax year.tions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit heceeds to buy an automobile for personal use. made on August 18 as being paid on August 4You must allocate interest expense on the loanDate Transaction from the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank canto personal use (purchase of the automobile)January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan A treat the passive activity expense he paid oneven though the loan is secured by business and August 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro-property. $1,000 unborrowed funds ceeds treated as deposited in the account.
depositedIf the property that secures the loan is Optional method for determining date ofyour home, you generally do not allo-January 13 $500 proceeds of Loan B reallocation.You can use the followingcate the loan proceeds or the related
TIP
deposited method to determine the date loan proceeds areinterest. The interest is usually deductible as
reallocated to another use. You can treat allFebruary 18 $800 used for personalqualified home mortgage interest, regardless of
payments from loan proceeds in the accountpurposeshow the loan proceeds are used. For more infor-
during any month as taking place on the later ofmation, see Publication 936. February 27 $700 used for passive the following dates.activity
Allocation period.The period for which a • The first day of that month.June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan Cloan is allocated to a particular use begins on the deposited • The date the loan proceeds are depositeddate the proceeds are used and ends on the
in the account.earlier of the following dates. November 20 $800 used for an
investment However, you can use this optional method only• The date the loan is repaid.
December 18 $600 used for personal if you treat all payments from the account during• The date the loan is reallocated to another purposes the same calendar month in the same way.use.
Edith treats the $800 used for personal pur-Interest on a separate account.If you
poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loanhave an account that contains only loan pro-Proceeds not disbursed to borrower.Even A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. Sheceeds and interest earned on the account, youif the lender disburses the loan proceeds to atreats the $700 used for a passive activity ascan treat any payment from that account asthird party, the allocation of the loan is still basedmade from the remaining $200 proceeds of being made first from the interest. When theon your use of the funds. This applies whetherLoan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. She interest earned is used up, any remaining pay-you pay for property, services, or anything elsetreats the $800 used for an investment as madements are from loan proceeds.by incurring a loan, or you take property subjectentirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treatsto a debt. the $600 used for personal purposes as madeExample. You borrowed $20,000 and used
from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C the proceeds of this loan to open a new savingsProceeds deposited in borrower’s account.
and $400 of unborrowed funds. account. When the account had earned interestTreat loan proceeds deposited in an account as
of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur-For the periods during which loan proceedsproperty held for investment. It does not matter
poses. You can treat the withdrawal as comingare held in the account, Edith treats them aswhether the account pays interest. Any interest
first from the interest earned on the account,property held for investment.you pay on the loan is investment interest ex-
$867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan,Payments from checking accounts.Gen- ($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on theyou must reallocate the loan based on the use oferally, you treat a payment from a checking orloan from the time it was deposited in the ac-the funds. similar account as made at the time the check iscount until the time of the withdrawal is invest-written if you mail or deliver it to the payee withinment interest expense. The interest charged onExample. Connie, a calendar-year tax- a reasonable period after you write it. You canthe part of the proceeds used for personal pur-payer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im-treat checks written on the same day as writtenposes ($19,133) from the time you withdrew itmediately uses the proceeds to open a checkingin any order. until you either repay it or reallocate it to anotheraccount. No other amounts are deposited in the
use is personal interest expense. The interestaccount during the year and no part of the loanAmounts paid within 30 days. If you re-
charged on the loan proceeds you left in theprincipal is repaid during the year. On April 1, ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-
Page 18 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 19 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
account ($867) continues to be investment inter- to the extent the entity receives any proceeds of tween the other expenditures and any loan pro-
est expense until you either repay it or reallocate the purchase. ceeds already allocated to them. For any
it to another use. distributed loan proceeds that are more than the
Example. You buy an interest in a partner-amount allocated to the other expenditures, the
Loan repayment. When you repay any part ofship for $20,000 using borrowed funds. Therules in the previous paragraph apply.
a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it aspartnership’s only assets include machineryHow to report.If the entity does not use thebeing repaid in the following order. used in its business valued at $60,000 andoptional allocation method, it reports the intereststocks valued at $15,000. You allocate the loanexpense on the loan proceeds on the line on1) Personal use. proceeds based on the value of the assets.Schedule K–1 (Form 1065 or Form 1120S) forTherefore, you allocate $16,000 of the loan pro-2) Investments and passive activities (other “Other deductions.” The expense is identified onceeds ($60,000/$75,000 × $20,000) and the in-than those included in (3)). an attached schedule as “Interest expense allo-terest expense on that part to trade or businesscated to debt-financed distributions.” The part-3) Passive activities in connection with ause. You allocate the remaining $4,000 ner or shareholder claims the interest expenserental real estate activity in which you ac-($15,000/$75,000 × $20,000) and the interest ondepending on how the distribution was used.tively participate. that part to investment use. If the entity uses the optional allocation4) Former passive activities. Reallocation.If you allocate the loan pro-method, it reports the interest expense on the
ceeds among the assets, you must make a real-5) Trade or business use and expenses for loan proceeds allocated to other expenditures
location if the assets or the use of the assetscertain low-income housing projects. on the appropriate line or lines of Schedule K–1.
change. For example, if the entity chooses to allocate the
loan proceeds and related interest to a rentalLine of credit (continuous borrowings). How to report. Individuals should reportactivity expenditure, the entity takes the interestThe following rules apply if you have a line oftheir share of deductible partnership or S corpo-into account in figuring the net rental income orcredit or similar arrangement. ration interest expense on either Schedule A orloss reported on Schedule K–1.Schedule E of Form 1040, depending on the1) Treat all borrowed funds on which interesttype of asset (or expenditure if the allocation isMore information. For more information onaccrues at the same fixed or variable ratebased on the tracing of loan proceeds) to whichallocating and reporting these interest ex-as a single loan. the interest expense is allocated. penses, see Notice 88–37 in Cumulative Bulle-
For interest allocated to trade or business2) Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed tin 1988–1. Also see Notice 89–35 in
assets (or expenditures), report the interest infunds on which interest accrues at different Cumulative Bulletin 1989–1.
Part II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a separatefixed or variable rates as different loans.
line, put “business interest” and the name of theTreat these loans as repaid in the order
partnership or S corporation in column (a) andshown on the loan agreement.
the amount in column (h). Interest You
For interest allocated to passive activity use,Loan refinancing.Allocate the replacement
enter the interest on Form 8582 as a deduction Can Deductloan to the same uses to which the repaid loan
from the passive activity of the partnership or Swas allocated. Make the allocation only to the
corporation. Show any deductible amount inYou can generally deduct as a business ex-extent you use the proceeds of the new loan to
Part II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a separatepense all interest you pay or accrue during therepay any part of the original loan.
line, put “passive interest” and the name of thetax year on debts related to your trade or busi-
entity in column (a) and the amount in columnness. Interest relates to your trade or business ifPartnerships (f). you use the proceeds of the loan for a trade orand S Corporations For interest allocated to investment use,business expense. It does not matter what type
enter the interest on Form 4952. Carry any of property secures the loan. You can deductThe following rules apply to the allocation ofdeductible amount allocated to royalties to Partinterest on a debt only if you meet all the follow-interest expense in connection with debt-fi-II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a separate lineing requirements.nanced acquisitions of interests in partnershipsenter “investment interest” and the name of theand S corporations. These rules also apply to • You are legally liable for that debt.partnership or S corporation in column (a) andthe allocation of interest expense in connectionthe amount in column (h). Carry the balance of• Both you and the lender intend that thewith debt-financed distributions from partner-the deductible amount to line 13, Schedule Adebt be repaid.ships and S corporations. (Form 1040). • You and the lender have a trueAny interest allocated to proceeds used forThese rules do not apply if the partner- debtor-creditor relationship.personal purposes is generally not deductible.ship or S corporation is formed or used
for the principal purpose of avoidingCAUTION
!
Debt-financed distribution.A debt-financed Partial liability.If you are liable for part of athe interest allocation rules. distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor-business debt, you can deduct only your shareporation borrows funds and allocates thoseof the total interest paid or accrued.Debt-financed acquisition.A debt-financed funds to distributions made to partners or share-acquisition is the use of loan proceeds to buy anholders. The distributed loan proceeds and re-Example. You and your brother borrowinterest in, or to make a contribution to the capi-lated interest expense must be reported to themoney. You are liable for 50% of the note. Youtal of, a partnership or S corporation. partners or shareholders separately. This is be-use your half of the loan in your business, andYou must allocate the loan proceeds and thecause the loan proceeds and the interest ex-you make one-half of the loan payments. Yourelated interest expense among all the assets ofpense must be allocated depending on how thecan deduct your half of the total interest pay-the entity. You can use any reasonable method.partner or shareholder uses the proceeds.ments as a business deduction.If you buy an interest in a partnership or SThis treatment of debt-financed distributionscorporation (other than by way of a contributionfollows the general allocation rules discussedMortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paidto capital), reasonable methods include a proearlier. For example, if a shareholder uses dis- or accrued on real estate you own legally orrata allocation based on the fair market value,tributed loan proceeds to invest in a passive equitably is deductible. However, rather thanbook value, or adjusted basis of the assets,activity, that shareholder’s portion of the S deducting the interest currently, you may havereduced by any debts allocated to the assets.corporation’s interest expense on the loan pro- to add it to the cost basis of the property asIf you contribute to the capital of a partner-ceeds is allocated to a passive activity use. explained later under Capitalization of Interest.ship or S corporation, reasonable methods ordi-
narily include allocating the debt among all theOptional allocation method.The partner- Statement. If you paid $600 or more of
assets or tracing the loan proceeds to the ship or S corporation can choose to allocate the mortgage interest (including certain points) dur-
entity’s expenditures. distributed loan proceeds to other expenditures ing the year on any one mortgage, you generally
Treat the purchase of an interest in a partner- it makes during the tax year of the distribution. will receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement.
ship or S corporation as a contribution to capital This allocation is limited to the difference be- You will receive the statement if you pay interest
Chapter 5 Interest Page 19

Page 20 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to a person (including a financial institution or a year, beginning January 1, 2004. The $1,500 points reduce the issue price of the loan and
cooperative housing corporation) in the course OID on the loan is de minimis because it is less result in original issue discount, deductible as
of that person’s trade or business. A govern- than $2,500 ($100,000 × .0025 × 10). You explained in the preceding discussion.
mental unit is a person for purposes of furnishing choose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basisPartial payments on a nontax debt.If youthe statement. over the term of the loan. Beginning in 2003, you make partial payments on a debt (other than aIf you receive a refund of interest you over- can deduct $150 each year for 10 years.debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied,paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-Constant-yield method.If the OID is not dein general, first to interest and any remainder toported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannot minimis, you must use the constant-yield principal. You can deduct only the interest. Thisdeduct this amount. For information on how tomethod to figure how much you can deduct eachrule does not apply when it can be inferred thatreport this refund, see Refunds of interest later year. You figure your deduction for the first yearthe borrower and lender understood that a differ-in this chapter. using the following steps. ent allocation of the payments would be made.
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.
Installment purchase.If you make an install-1) Determine the issue price of the loan.Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage
ment purchase of business property, the con-Generally, this equals the proceeds of thecannot be deducted as interest. These ex-
tract between you and the seller generallyloan. If you paid points on the loan (aspenses, which include mortgage commissions,
provides for the payment of interest. If no inter-discussed later), the issue price generallyabstract fees, and recording fees, are capital
est or a low rate of interest is charged under theis the difference between the proceedsexpenses. If the property mortgaged is business
contract, a portion of the stated principal amountand the points.or income-producing property, you can amortize
payable under the contract may be recharacter-the costs over the life of the mortgage. 2) Multiply the result in (1) by the yield toized as interest (unstated interest). The amountmaturity.Prepayment penalty. If you pay off your recharacterized as interest reduces your basismortgage early and pay the lender a penalty for in the property and increases your interest ex-3) Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter- pense. For more information on installmentments from the result in (2). This is theest. sales and unstated interest, see PublicationOID you can deduct in the first year.
537.Interest on employment tax deficiency.In- To figure your deduction in any subsequent
terest charged on employment taxes assessedyear, follow the above steps, except determine
on your business is deductible. the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the
adjusted issue price, add to the issue price anyOriginal issue discount (OID).OID is a form Interest YouOID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2)of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-and (3) above.erally has OID when its proceeds are less than Cannot DeductThe yield to maturity is generally shown inits principal amount. The OID is the difference
the literature you receive from your lender. If youbetween the stated redemption price at maturity Certain interest payments cannot be deducted.do not have this information, consult your lenderand the issue price of the loan. In addition, certain other expenses that mayor tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity is A loan’s stated redemption price at matur- seem to be interest are not, and you cannotthe discount rate that, when used in computingity is the sum of all amounts (principal and deduct them as interest.the present value of all principal and interestinterest) payable on it other than qualified stated You cannot currently deduct interest thatpayments, produces an amount equal to theinterest. Qualified stated interest is stated in- must be capitalized, and you generally cannotprincipal amount of the loan.terest that is unconditionally payable in cash or deduct personal interest.
property (other than another loan of the issuer)
Example. The facts are the same as in theInterest paid with funds borrowed from origi-at least annually over the term of the loan at a
previous example, except that you deduct thenal lender. If you use the cash method ofsingle fixed rate.
OID on a constant yield basis over the term ofaccounting, you cannot deduct interest you payYou generally deduct OID over the term of
the loan. The yield to maturity on your loan iswith funds borrowed from the original lenderthe loan. Figure the amount to deduct each year
10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2003, through a second loan, an advance, or any otherusing the constant-yield method, unless the
you can deduct $93 [($98,500 × .102467) − arrangement similar to a loan. You can deductOID on the loan is de minimis.
$10,000]. For 2004, you can deduct $103 the interest expense once you start making pay-
De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it[($98,593 × .102467) − $10,000]. ments on the new loan.
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the When you make a payment on the new loan,Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan orstated redemption price of the loan at maturity you first apply the payment to interest and thenmortgage ends, you may be able to deduct anymultiplied by the number of full years from the to the principal. All amounts you apply to theremaining OID in the tax year in which the loandate of original issue to maturity (the term of the interest on the first loan are deductible, alongor mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may endloan). with any interest you pay on the second loan,due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure,If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one subject to any limits that apply.or similar event.of the following ways to figure the amount you
Capitalized interest.You cannot currentlycan deduct each year. If you refinance with the original lender,deduct interest you are required to capitalizeyou generally cannot deduct the re-• On a constant-yield basis over the term of under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-maining OID in the year in which theCAUTION
!
the loan. talization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buyrefinancing occurs, but you may be able to de-property and pay interest owed by the seller (for• On a straight-line basis over the term ofduct it over the term of the new mortgage orexample, by assuming the debt and any interestthe loan. loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed fromaccrued on the property), you cannot deduct theoriginal lender under Interest You Cannot De-• In proportion to stated interest payments. interest. Add this interest to the basis of theduct, later. property.• In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
Points. The term “points” is often used to de-Commitment fees or standby charges.You make this choice by deducting the OID in a
scribe some of the charges paid by a borrowerFees you incur to have business funds availablemanner consistent with the method chosen on
when the borrower takes out a loan or a mort-on a standby basis, but not for the actual use ofyour timely filed tax return for the tax year in
gage. These charges are also called loan origi-the funds, are not deductible as interest pay-which the loan is issued.
nation fees, maximum loan charges, or premiumments. You may be able to deduct them as
charges. If any of these charges (points) areExample. On January 1, 2003, you took out business expenses.
solely for the use of money, they are interest.a $100,000 discounted loan and received If the funds are for inventory or certain prop-
$98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on Because points are prepaid interest, you erty used in your business, the fees are indirect
January 1, 2013 (a 10-year term), and the cannot deduct the full amount in the year paid. costs and you generally must capitalize them
$100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter- (For an exception for points paid on your home under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-
est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of each mortgage, see Publication 936.) Instead, thetalization of Interest, later.
Page 20 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 21 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest on income tax.Interest charged on a promissory note you gave as payment be-• Real property.income tax assessed on your individual income cause it is a promise to pay and not an actual
• Tangible personal property with a class lifetax return is not a business deduction even payment.
of 20 years or more.though the tax due is related to income from Prepaid interest.You generally cannot de-your trade or business. Treat this interest as a• Tangible personal property with an esti-duct any interest paid before the year it is due.business deduction only in figuring a net operat-mated production period of more than 2Interest paid in advance can be deducted only ining loss deduction. years. the tax year in which it is due.
Penalties.Penalties on underpaid deficien-• Tangible personal property with an esti-Discounted loan.If interest or a discount iscies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-mated production period of more than 1subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not aest. You cannot deduct them. Generally, you year if the estimated cost of production ispayment of interest and you cannot deduct itcannot deduct any fines or penalties. more than $1 million. when you get the loan. For more information,
see Original issue discount (OID) under InterestInterest on loans with respect to life insur- You Can Deduct, earlier.ance policies.You generally cannot deductProperty you produce.You produce property
interest on a debt incurred with respect to anyif you construct, build, install, manufacture, de-Refunds of interest.If you pay interest and
life insurance, annuity, or endowment contractvelop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treatthen receive a refund in the same tax year of any
that covers any individual unless that individualproperty produced for you under a contract aspart of the interest, reduce your interest deduc-
is a key person. produced by you up to the amount you pay ortion by the refund. If you receive the refund in a
incur for the property. later tax year, include the refund in your incomeIf the policy or contract covers a key person,
to the extent the deduction for the interest re-you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 ofCarrying charges. Carrying charges includeduced your tax.debt for that person. However, the deduction fortaxes you pay to carry or develop real estate orany month cannot be more than the interestto carry, transport, or install personal property.Accrual method. Under an accrual method,figured using Moody’s Corporate Bond YieldYou can choose to capitalize carrying chargesyou can deduct only interest that has accruedAverage-Monthly Average Corporates (Moody’snot subject to the uniform capitalization rules ifduring the tax year.rate) for that month. they are otherwise deductible. For more infor-
Prepaid interest.You generally cannot de-mation, see chapter 8.Who is a key person? A key person is an
duct any interest paid before it is due. Instead,officer or 20% owner. However, the number ofCapitalized interest.Treat capitalized inter-deduct it in the year in which it is due.individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-est as a cost of the property produced. Youited to the greater of the following. Discounted loan.If interest or a discount isrecover your interest when you sell or use the
subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not aproperty. If the property is inventory, recover• Five individuals. payment of interest and you cannot deduct itcapitalized interest through cost of goods sold. If
• The lesser of 5% of the total officers and when you get the loan. For more information,the property is used in your trade or business,
employees of the company or 20 individu- see Original issue discount (OID) under Interestrecover capitalized interest through an adjust-
als. You Can Deduct, earlier.ment to basis, depreciation, amortization, or
other method. Tax deficiency.If you contest a federal in-Exceptions for pre-June 1997, contracts.
come tax deficiency, interest does not accruePartnerships and S corporations.The inter-You can generally deduct the interest if the con-
until the tax year the final determination of liabil-est capitalization rules are applied first at thetract was issued before June 9, 1997, and the
ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency,partnership or S corporation level. The rules arecovered individual is someone other than an
then the interest accrues in the year the tax wasthen applied at the partners’ or shareholders’employee, officer, or someone financially inter-
asserted and agreed to by you.level to the extent the partnership or S corpora-ested in your business. If the contract was pur-
tion has insufficient debt to support the produc-However, if you contest but pay the pro-chased before June 21, 1986, you can generally
tion or construction costs. posed tax deficiency and interest, and you dodeduct the interest no matter who is covered by
If you are a partner or a shareholder, younot designate the payment as a cash bond, thenthe contract.
may have to capitalize interest you incur duringthe interest is deductible in the year paid.Interest allocated to unborrowed policythe tax year for the production costs of the part-Related person. If you use an accrualcash value. Corporations and partnershipsnership or S corporation. You may also have tomethod, you cannot deduct interest owed to agenerally cannot deduct any interest expensecapitalize interest incurred by the partnership orrelated person who uses the cash method untilallocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-S corporation for your own production costs. Topayment is made and the interest is includible insurance, annuity, or endowment contracts. Thisproperly capitalize interest under these rules,the gross income of that person. The relation-rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,you must be given the required information in anship is determined as of the end of the tax year1997, that cover someone other than an officer,attachment to the Schedule K-1 you receivefor which the interest would otherwise be de-director, employee, or 20% owner. For morefrom the partnership or S corporation. ductible. If a deduction is denied under this rule,information, see section 264(f) of the Internal
Additional information.The procedures for the rule will continue to apply even if your rela-Revenue Code.
applying the uniform capitalization rules are be-tionship with the person ceases to exist before
yond the scope of this publication. For morethe interest is includible in the gross income of
information, see sections 1.263A–8 throughthat person. See Related Persons in Publication
1.263A–15 of the regulations and Notice 538.Capitalization 88–99. Notice 88–99 is in Cumulative Bulletin
1988–2.of Interest
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen- Below-Market Loans
erally must capitalize interest on debt equal to
When Toyour expenditures to produce real property or If you receive a below-market gift or demand
certain tangible personal property. The property loan and use the proceeds in your trade or
Deduct Interestmust be produced by you for use in your trade or business, you may be able to deduct the forgone
business or for sale to customers. You cannot interest. See Treatment of gift and demand
If the uniform capitalization rules, discussedcapitalize interest related to property that you loans later in this discussion.
under Capitalization of Interest, earlier, do notacquire in any other manner. A below-market loan is a loan on which noapply to you, deduct interest as follows.Interest you paid or incurred during the pro- interest is charged or on which interest is
duction period must be capitalized if the propertyCash method. Under the cash method, you charged at a rate below the applicable federal
produced is designated property. Designatedcan generally deduct only the interest you actu- rate. A gift or demand loan that is a below-mar-
property is any of the following. ally paid during the tax year. You cannot deduct ket loan generally is considered an arm’s-length
Chapter 5 Interest Page 21

Page 22 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
transaction in which you, the borrower, are con- and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the b) The amount of the items.
sidered as having received both the following. borrower’s net investment income is $1,000 orc) The cost of complying with theless, it is treated as zero. This limit does notbelow-market loan provisions if they• A loan in exchange for a note that requiresapply to a loan if the avoidance of any federal taxthe payment of interest at the applicable were to apply.is one of the main purposes of the interest ar-federal rate. rangement. d) Any reasons, other than taxes, for
• An additional payment in an amount equal structuring the transaction as a
Treatment of term loans.If you receive ato the forgone interest. below-market loan.
below-market term loan other than a gift or de-The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-mand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi-dend, contribution to capital, payment of com-tional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on thepensation, or other payment, depending on the Exception for certain loans to a qualifieddate the loan is made. This payment is equal tosubstance of the transaction. continuing care facility.The below-marketthe loan amount minus the present value, at the
interest rules do not apply to a loan made to aapplicable federal rate, of all payments dueFor any period, forgone interest  is:
qualified continuing care facility under a continu-under the loan. The same amount is treated as
ing care contract if the lender (or lender’s1) The interest that would be payable for thatoriginal issue discount on the loan. See Original
period if interest accrued on the loan at the spouse) is age 65 or older by the end of theissue discount (OID) under Interest You Can
applicable federal rate and was payable calendar year. For 2003, this exception appliesDeduct, earlier.
annually on December 31, only to the part of the total outstanding loans
Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less.Theminus from the lender (or lender’s spouse) that does
rules for below-market loans do not apply to anynot exceed $151,000.2) Any interest actually payable on the loanday on which the total outstanding loans be-for the period. A qualified continuing care facility is onetween the borrower and lender is $10,000 oror more facilities that are designed to provideless. This exception applies only to the follow-Applicable federal rates are published services under continuing care contracts anding.by the IRS each month in the Internal where substantially all the residents have en-
Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenue tered into continuing care contracts. In addition,
TIP
1) Gift loans between individuals if the loan isBulletins are available on the IRS web site at substantially all the facilities used to providenot directly used to buy or carrywww.irs.gov. You can also contact an IRS of- services required under the continuing care con-income-producing assets.fice to get these rates. tract must be owned or operated by the loan2) Compensation-related loans or borrower.corporation-shareholder loans if the avoid-Loans subject to the rules.The rules for A continuing care contract is a written con-ance of any federal tax is not a principalbelow-market loans apply to the following. tract between an individual and a qualified con-purpose of the interest arrangement.
tinuing care facility that meets all the following1) Gift loans (below-market loans where theThis exception does not apply to a term loanconditions.forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).described in (2) above that was previously sub-
ject to the below-market loan rules. Those rules2) Compensation-related loans (below-mar- 1) The individual and/or the individual’swill continue to apply even if the outstandingket loans between an employer and an spouse must be entitled to use the facilitybalance is reduced to $10,000 or less.employee or between an independent con- for the rest of their life or lives.tractor and a person for whom the contrac-
Exceptions for loans without significant tax2) The residential use must begin in a sepa-tor provides services).
effect.The following loans are specifically ex-rate, independent living unit provided by3) Corporation-shareholder loans. empted from the rules for below-market loansthe continuing care facility and continue
because their interest arrangements do not4) Tax avoidance loans (below-market loans until the individual (or individual’s spouse)
have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil-where the avoidance of federal tax is one is incapable of living independently. Theity of the borrower or the lender.of the main purposes of the interest ar- facility must provide various “personal
rangement). care” services to the resident such as1) Loans made available by lenders to the maintenance of the residential unit, meals,5) Loans to qualified continuing care facilitiesgeneral public on the same terms and con-and daily aid and supervision relating tounder a continuing care contract (made af-ditions that are consistent with the lender’sroutine medical needs.ter October 11, 1985). customary business practices.
3) The facility must be obligated to provideExcept as noted in (5) above, these rules2) Loans subsidized by a federal, state, orlong-term nursing care if the resident is noapply to demand loans (loans payable in full atmunicipal government that are made avail-
longer capable of living independently.any time upon the lender’s demand) outstandingable under a program of general applica-
after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans that tion to the public. 4) The contract must require the facility to
are not demand loans) made after that date. provide the “personal services” and3) Certain employee-relocation loans.
“long-term nursing care” without substan-Treatment of gift and demand loans.If you 4) Certain loans to or from a foreign person,tial additional cost to the individual.receive a below-market gift loan or demand unless the interest income would be effec-
loan, you are treated as receiving an additionaltively connected with the conduct of a U.S.
payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to thetrade or business and not exempt fromSale or exchange of property.Different rulesforgone interest on the loan. You are then U.S. tax under an income tax treaty. generally apply to a loan connected with the saletreated as transferring this amount back to the or exchange of property. If the loan does not5) Any other loan if the taxpayer can showlender as interest. These transfers are consid- provide adequate stated interest, part of thethat the interest arrangement has no sig-ered to occur annually, generally on December principal payment may be considered interest.nificant effect on the federal tax liability of31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade or
However, there are exceptions that may requirethe lender or the borrower. Whether anbusiness, you can deduct the forgone interest
interest arrangement has a significant ef-you to apply the below-market interest rate ruleseach year as a business interest expense. The
fect on the federal tax liability of the lenderto these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi-lender must report it as interest income.
or the borrower will be determined by allnal Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans ofthe facts and circumstances. Consider all
$100,000 or less.For gift loans between indi-the following factors. More information. For more information onviduals, forgone interest treated as transferred
below-market loans, see section 7872 of theback to the lender is limited to the borrower’s net a) Whether items of income and deduction
Internal Revenue Code and section 1.7872–5Tinvestment income for the year. This limit ap- generated by the loan offset each
of the regulations.plies if the outstanding loans between the lender other.
Page 22 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 23 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxes that is earlier than the date it originally and public parking facilities. You should in-
required. However, if you use an accrual crease the basis of your property by the amount
method, and can deduct the tax before you pay of the assessment.
6. it, use the original accrual date for the year ofYou can deduct taxes for these local benefits
change and all future years to determine whenonly if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, or
you can deduct the tax. interest charges related to those benefits. If part
of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest,Taxes Example. Your state imposes a tax on per-you must be able to show how much of the tax is
sonal property used in a trade or business con-for these expenses to claim a deduction for that
ducted in the state. This tax is assessed andpart of the tax.
Introduction becomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). In
2003, the state changed the assessment and Example. X City, to improve downtownYou can deduct various federal, state, local, andlien dates from July 1, 2004, to December 31,commercial business, converted a downtownforeign taxes directly attributable to your trade or2003, for property tax year 2004. Use the origi-business area street into an enclosed pedes-business as business expenses. nal accrual date (July 1, 2004) to determinetrian mall. The city assessed the full cost of
You cannot deduct federal income when you can deduct the tax. You must also useconstruction, financed with 10-year bonds,
taxes, estate and gift taxes, or statethe July 1 accrual date for all future years toagainst the affected properties. The city is pay-
inheritance, legacy, and successiondetermine when you can deduct the tax. ing the principal and interest with the annual
CAUTION
!
taxes. payments made by the property owners.Uniform capitalization rules.Uniform capi- The assessments for construction costs aretalization rules apply to certain taxpayers whonot deductible as taxes or as business ex-Topics produce real property or tangible personal prop-penses, but are depreciable capital expenses.This chapter discusses: erty for use in a trade or business or for sale toThe part of the payments used to pay the inter-customers. They also apply to taxpayers whoest charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes.• When to deduct taxes acquire property for resale. Under these rules,
you either include certain costs in inventory or• Real estate taxes Charges for services.Water bills, sewerage,capitalize certain expenses related to the prop-and other service charges assessed against• Income taxes erty, such as taxes. For more information, seeyour business property are not real estate taxes,• Employment taxes Publication 551. but are deductible as business expenses.
• Other taxes Carrying charges. Carrying charges includePurchase or sale of real estate.If real estatetaxes you pay to carry or develop real estate oris sold, the real estate taxes must be dividedto carry, transport, or install personal property.Useful Items between the buyer and the seller.You can choose to capitalize carrying chargesYou may want to see: The buyer and seller must divide the realnot subject to the uniform capitalization rules ifestate taxes according to the number of days inthey are otherwise deductible. For more infor-Publication the real property tax year (the period to whichmation, see chapter 8. the tax imposed relates) that each owned the❏ 15 Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guide property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes upRefunds of taxes.If you receive a refund for
to but not including the date of sale. Treat the❏ 378 Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds any taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in-
buyer as paying the taxes beginning with theclude the refund in income to the extent the❏ 533 Self-Employment Tax date of sale. You can usually find this informa-deduction reduced your federal income tax in
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods tion on the settlement statement you received atthe earlier year. For more information, see Re-
closing.covery of amount deducted in chapter 1.❏ 551 Basis of Assets If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes untilYou must include in income any inter-they are paid because you use the cash methodForm (and Instructions) est you receive on tax refunds. and the buyer of your property is personallyTIP
liable for the tax, you are considered to have❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductions
paid your part of the tax at the time of the sale.❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment This lets you deduct the part of the tax up to (butTax not including) the date of sale even though you
did not pay it. You must also include the amount❏ 3115 Application for Change in
of that tax in the selling price of the property.Accounting Method Real Estate Taxes
If you (the seller) use an accrual method and
have not chosen to ratably accrue real estateSee chapter 14 for information about gettingDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
taxes, you are considered to have accrued yourpublications and forms. or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the
part of the tax on the date you sell the property.general public welfare. The taxing authority
must base the taxes on the assessed value of
Example. Al Green, a calendar year accrualthe real estate and charge them uniformly
method taxpayer, owns real estate in X County.against all property under its jurisdiction. De-When To
He has not chosen to ratably accrue propertyductible real estate taxes generally do not in-
taxes. November 30 of each year is the assess-Deduct Taxes clude taxes charged for local benefits and
ment and lien date for the current real propertyimprovements that increase the value of the
tax year, which is the calendar year. He sold theGenerally, you can only deduct taxes in the yearproperty. See Taxes for local benefits, later.
property on June 30, 2003. Under his account-you pay them. This applies whether you use theIf you use an accrual method, you generally
ing method he would not be able to claim acash method or an accrual method of account-cannot accrue real estate taxes until you pay
deduction for the taxes because the sale oc-ing. them to the government authority. You can,
curred before November 30. He is treated asUnder an accrual method, you can deduct ahowever, choose to ratably accrue the taxes
having accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu-tax before you pay it if you meet the exceptionduring the year. See Choosing to ratably accrue,
ary 1–June 29), on June 30 and he can deduct itfor recurring items discussed under Economic later.
for 2003.Performance in Publication 538. You can also
Taxes for local benefits.Generally, you can-choose to ratably accrue real estate taxes as
not deduct taxes charged for local benefits andChoosing to ratably accrue.If you use andiscussed later under Real Estate Taxes.
improvements that tend to increase the value of accrual method, you can choose to accrue real
Limit on accrual of taxes.A taxing jurisdic- your property. These include assessments for estate tax related to a definite period ratably
tion can require the use of a date for accruing streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, over that period.
Chapter 6 Taxes Page 23

Page 24 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. John Smith is a calendar year Accrual of contested income taxes.If you necessary expenses of carrying on your trade or
taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His real use an accrual method, can deduct taxes before business. However, see Fuel taxes, later.
estate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1, you pay them, and contest a state or local in-Franchise taxes.You can deduct corporate2003, to June 30, 2004, are $1,200. July 1 is the come tax liability, a special rule applies. Underfranchise taxes as a business expense.assessment and lien date. this special rule, you must accrue and deduct
any contested amount in the tax year in whichFuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel,If John chooses to ratably accrue the taxes,
the liability is finally determined. and other motor fuels that you use in your busi-$600 will accrue in 2003 ($1,200 × 6/12, July
Filing a tax return is not considered con-ness are usually included as part of the cost of1–December 31) and the balance will accrue in
testing a liability. If you do not make an objectivethe fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-2004.
act of protest or show some affirmative evidencerate item.Separate choices.You can choose to rata-of denial of the liability, you can deduct anyYou may be entitled to a credit or refund forbly accrue the taxes for each separate trade oradditional state or local income taxes found tofederal excise tax you paid on fuels used forbusiness and for nonbusiness activities if yoube due for a prior year in the year for which theycertain purposes. For more information, seeaccount for them separately. Once you choosewere originally imposed. You cannot deductPublication 378.to ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must usethem in the year in which the liability is finallyOccupational taxes. You can deduct as athat method unless you get permission from thedetermined. business expense an occupational tax chargedIRS to change. See Changing, later.
at a flat rate by a locality for the privilege ofForeign income taxes. Generally, you canMaking the choice.If you choose to ratably working or conducting a business in the locality.take either a deduction or a credit for incomeaccrue the taxes for the first year in which you
taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or aPersonal property tax.You can deduct anyincur real estate taxes, attach a statement to
U.S. possession. However, an individual cannottax imposed by a state or local government onyour income tax return for that year. The state-
take a deduction or credit for foreign incomepersonal property used in your trade or busi-ment should show all the following items.
taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S.ness.• The trades or businesses to which thetax under the foreign earned income exclusion
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on achoice applies and the accounting methodor the foreign housing exclusion. For information
service or on the purchase or use of property asor methods used. on these exclusions, see Publication 54, Tax
part of the cost of the service or property. If theGuide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens• The period to which the taxes relate. service or the cost or use of the property is aAbroad. For information on the foreign tax credit,
deductible business expense, you can deduct• The computation of the real estate tax de-see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi-
the tax as part of that service or cost. If theduction for that first year. viduals.
property is merchandise bought for resale, the
sales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. IfGenerally, you must file your return by the due
the property is depreciable, add the sales tax todate (including extensions). However, if you
the basis for depreciation. For more informationtimely filed your return for the year withoutEmployment Taxes on basis, see Publication 551.choosing to ratably accrue, you can still make
the choice by filing an amended return within 6If you have employees, you must withhold vari- Do not deduct state and local salesmonths after the due date of the return (exclud-ous taxes from your employees’ pay. Most em- taxes imposed on the buyer that youing extensions). Attach the statement to theployers must withhold their employees’ share of must collect and pay over to the stateCAUTION
!
amended return and write “Filed pursuant tosocial security and Medicare taxes along withor local government. Do not include these taxessection 301.9100–2” on the statement. File thestate and federal income taxes. You may alsoin gross receipts or sales.amended return at the same address you filedneed to pay certain employment taxes from yourthe original return. Self-employment tax. You can deductown funds. These include your share of social
one-half of your self-employment tax as a busi-If you choose to ratably accrue for a yearsecurity and Medicare taxes as an employer,
ness expense in figuring your adjusted grossafter the first year in which you incur real estatealong with unemployment taxes.
income. This deduction only affects your incometaxes, file Form 3115. Generally, you must file You should treat the taxes you withhold from
tax. It does not affect your net earnings fromthis form during the tax year for which the choiceyour employees’ pay as wages on your tax re-
self-employment or your self-employment tax.is to be effective. For more information, see theturn. You can deduct the employment taxes you
To deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, lineinstructions for Form 3115. must pay from your own funds as taxes.
28, the amount shown on the Deduction forChanging. To change your choice to rata- one-half of self-employment tax line of ScheduleExample. You pay your employee $18,000bly accrue real estate taxes, file Form 3115 SE (Form 1040).a year. However, after you withhold variousduring the tax year for which the change is For more information on self-employmenttaxes, your employee receives $14,500. Yourequested. tax, see Publication 533.also pay an additional $1,500 in employment
taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as
wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay from
your own funds as taxes.
Income Taxes For more information on employment taxes,
see Publication 15.This section discusses federal, state, local, and
foreign income taxes. 7.Unemployment fund taxes. As an employer,
you may have to make payments to a state
Federal income taxes. You cannot deduct unemployment compensation fund or to a state
federal income taxes. disability benefit fund. Deduct these paymentsInsuranceas taxes.
State and local income taxes.A corporation
or partnership can deduct state and local in-
come taxes imposed on the corporation or part- Important Change
nership as business expenses. An individualOther Taxes for 2003can deduct state and local income taxes only as
an itemized deduction on Schedule A (FormThe following are other taxes you can deduct if
1040). Self-employed health insurance deduction.you incur them in the ordinary course of your
However, an individual can deduct a state Beginning in 2003, the self-employed health in-trade or business.
tax on gross income (as distinguished from net surance deduction percentage increases to
income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-Excise taxes.You can deduct as a business 100%. See Self-Employed Health Insurance
ness as a business expense. expense all excise taxes that are ordinary and Deduction.
Page 24 Chapter 7 Insurance

Page 25 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6) Workers’ compensation insurance set by can include only the smaller of the following
state law that covers any claims for bodily amounts.Introduction injuries or job-related diseases suffered by
You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec- 1) The amount paid for that person.employees in your business, regardless of
essary cost of insurance as a business expensefault. 2) The amount shown below. (Use theif it is for your trade, business, or profession. person’s age at the end of the year.)a) If a partnership pays workers’ compen-However, you may have to capitalize certain
sation premiums for its partners, it gen-insurance costs under the uniform capitalization a) Age 40 or younger–$250erally can deduct them as guaranteedrules. For more information, see Capitalized b) Age 41 to 50–$470payments to partners.Premiums, later.
c) Age 51 to 60–$940b) If an S corporation pays workers’ com-
Topics pensation premiums for its 2% d) Age 61 to 70–$2,510shareholder-employees, it generallyThis chapter discusses:
e) Age 71 or older–$3,130can deduct them, but must also include
them in the shareholder’s wages.• Deductible premiums
Qualified long-term care insurance con-• Nondeductible premiums 7) Contributions to a state unemployment in-tract.A qualified long-term care insurancesurance fund are deductible as taxes if• Capitalized premiums contract is an insurance contract that only pro-they are considered taxes under state law.vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-• When to deduct premiums
ices. The contract must meet all the following8) Overhead insurance that pays for business
requirements.overhead expenses you have during long
Useful Items periods of disability caused by your injury• It must be guaranteed renewable.You may want to see: or sickness.
• It must provide that refunds, other than9) Car and other vehicle insurance that cov-Publication refunds on the death of the insured orers vehicles used in your business for lia-complete surrender or cancellation of thebility, damages, and other losses. If you❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe contract, and dividends under the contractoperate a vehicle partly for personal use,Benefits may be used only to reduce future premi-deduct only the part of the insurance pre-ums or increase future benefits.❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income mium that applies to the business use of
the vehicle. If you use the standard mile-• It must not provide for a cash surrender❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods
age rate to figure your car expenses, youvalue or other money that can be paid,❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts cannot deduct any car insurance premi- assigned, pledged, or borrowed.
ums. • It generally must not pay or reimburse ex-Form (and Instructions)
10) Life insurance covering your officers andpenses incurred for services or items that
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return employees if you are not directly or indi-would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
rectly a beneficiary under the contract. cept where Medicare is a secondary payer
See chapter 14 for information about getting or the contract makes per diem or other11) Business interruption insurance that payspublications and forms. periodic payments without regard to ex-for lost profits if your business is shutpenses.down due to a fire or other cause.
Qualified long-term care services.Quali-
fied long-term care services are:Deductible Premiums Self-Employed Health
Insurance Deduction • Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-You generally can deduct premiums you pay for peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-the following kinds of insurance related to yourYou may be able to deduct 100% of the amounthabilitative services, andtrade or business. paid for medical and dental insurance and quali-
• Maintenance or personal care services.fied long-term care insurance for you, your
1) Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.spouse, and your dependents if you are one ofThe services must be required by a chronically illthe following.2) Credit insurance that covers losses from individual and prescribed by a licensed health
business bad debts. care practitioner.• A self-employed individual with a net profit
reported on Schedule C, C–EZ, or F.3) Group hospitalization and medical insur- Chronically ill individual.A chronically ill
individual is a person who has been certified asance for employees, including long-term• A partner with net earnings from self-em-
one of the following.care insurance. ployment reported on line 15a of Schedule
K–1 (Form 1065). • An individual who has been unable, due toa) If a partnership pays accident and
loss of functional capacity for at least 90• A shareholder owning more than 2% ofhealth insurance premiums for its part-
days, to perform at least two activities ofthe outstanding stock of an S corporationners, it generally can deduct them as
daily living without substantial assistancewith wages from the corporation reportedguaranteed payments to partners.
from another individual. Activities of dailyon Form W–2.
b) If an S corporation pays accident and living are eating, toileting, transferringThe insurance plan must be established underhealth insurance premiums for its 2% (general mobility), bathing, dressing, andyour business. You may be allowed this deduc-shareholder-employees, it generally continence.tion whether you paid the premiums yourself orcan deduct them, but must also include
• An individual who requires substantial su-your partnership or S corporation paid them andthem in the shareholder’s wages sub- pervision to be protected from threats toyou included the premium amounts in yourject to federal income tax withholding. health and safety due to severe cognitivegross income. Take the deduction on line 29 ofSee Publication 15–B. impairment.Form 1040.
4) Liability insurance. The certification must have been made by aQualified long-term care insurance.You licensed health care practitioner within the previ-5) Malpractice insurance that covers yourcan include premiums paid on a qualified ous 12 months.personal liability for professional negli-long-term care insurance contract for you, your
gence resulting in injury or damage to pa-spouse, or your dependents when figuring yourBenefits received.For information on ex-
tients or clients. deduction. But, for each person covered, you cluding benefits you receive from a long-term
Chapter 7 Insurance Page 25

Page 26 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are claiming the health coverage taxWorksheet 7–A. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction
credit, complete Form 8885 before you figureWorksheet (Keep for your records.)
this deduction.
1.Enter total payments made during the year for health insurance Health coverage tax credit.You may be
coverage established under your business for you, your spouse, and able to take this credit only if you were an
your dependents. (Do not include payments for any month you were eligible trade adjustment assistance (TAA) re-eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or your cipient, alternative TAA recipient, or Pensionspouse’s employer or any amount you claim on line 4 of Form 8885. Benefit Guaranty Corporation pension recipient.Also, do not include payments for qualified long-term care insurance.)1. Use Form 8885,Health Coverage Tax Credit, to2.For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract, figure the amount, if any, of your health insur-enter for each person covered the smaller of the following amounts. ance credit.a) Total payments made for that person during the year.
b) The amount shown below. (Use the person’s age at the end of More than one health plan and business.
the year.) If you have more than one health plan during the
$250—if that person is age 40 or younger year and each plan is established under a differ-
$470—if age 41 to 50 ent business, you must use separate work-
$940—if age 51 to 60 sheets (Worksheet 7–A) to figure each plan’s
$2,510—if age 61 to 70 net earnings limit. Include the premium you paid
$3,130—if age 71 or older under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa-
(Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages)
participate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For a
or your spouse’s employer.) If more than one person is covered, plan that provides long-term care insurance, thefigure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter total of the amounts entered for each person onthe total of those amounts........................... 2. line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than the3.Add the total of lines 1 and 2............................ 3. appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person.4.Enter your net profit and any other earned income* from the trade or
business under which the insurance plan is established. (If the
business is an S corporation, skip to line 11.)................. 4.
5.Enter the total of all net profits from: line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040);
Nondeductibleline 3, Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form
1040); or line 15a, Schedule K–1 (Form 1065); plus any other income
Premiumsallocable to the profitable businesses. See the instructions for
Schedule SE (Form 1040). (Do not include any net losses shown on
You cannot deduct premiums on the followingthese schedules.)................................... 5.
kinds of insurance.6.Divide line 4 by line 5................................. 6.
7.Multiply Form 1040, line 28, by the percentage on line 6......... 7.
1) Self-insurance reserve funds.  You can-8.Subtract line 7 from line 4.............................. 8.
not deduct amounts credited to a reserve9.Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 30, attributable to the
set up for self-insurance. This applies evensame trade or business in which the insurance plan is established . . .9.
if you cannot get business insurance cov-10.Subtract line 9 from line 8.............................. 10.
erage for certain business risks. However,11.Enter your wages from an S corporation in which you are a
more-than-2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is your actual losses may be deductible. See
established....................................... 11. Publication 547.
12.Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 43, attributable to the amount 2) Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre-entered on line 4 or 11 above, or the amount from Form 2555–EZ, miums for a policy that pays for lost earn-line 18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11 above....... 12.
ings due to sickness or disability.13.Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies........... 13.
However, see the discussion on overhead14.Compare the amounts on lines 3 and 13 above. Enter the smaller of
insurance, item (8), under Deductible Pre-the two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 29. (Do not include
miums, earlier.this amount when figuring a medical expense deduction on
Schedule A (Form 1040).).............................. 14. 3) Certain life insurance and annuities. 
* Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you
a) For contracts issued before June 9,created. It does not include capital gain income.
1997, you cannot deduct the premiums
on a life insurance policy covering you,
an employee, or any person with a fi-
care contract from gross income, see Publica-Effect on self-employment tax.Do not sub- nancial interest in your business if yoution 525. tract the health insurance deduction when figur-are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of
ing net earnings for your self-employment tax. the policy. You are included amongOther coverage. You cannot take the deduc-
possible beneficiaries of the policy if thetion for any month you were eligible to partici-
policy owner is obligated to repay apate in any employer (including your spouse’s)How to figure the deduction.Generally, you
loan from you using the proceeds of thesubsidized health plan at any time during thatcan use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
policy. A person has a financial interestmonth. This rule is applied separately to planstions to figure your deduction. However, if any ofin your business if the person is anthat provide long-term care insurance and plansthe following apply, you must use the worksheetowner or part owner of the business orthat do not provide long-term care insurance.in this chapter. has lent money to the business.However, any medical insurance payments not
deductible on line 29 of Form 1040 can be in-
• You had more than one source of income b) For contracts issued after June 8,cluded as medical expenses on Schedule A subject to self-employment tax. 1997, you generally cannot deduct the(Form 1040) if you itemize deductions. premiums on any life insurance policy,• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555–EZ (re- endowment contract, or annuity con-Effect on itemized deductions.Subtract the lating to foreign earned income). tract if you are directly or indirectly ahealth insurance deduction from your medical
• You are using amounts paid for qualified beneficiary. The disallowance appliesinsurance when figuring medical expenses on
long-term care insurance to figure the de- without regard to whom the policy cov-Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-
duction.tions. ers.
Page 26 Chapter 7 Insurance

Page 27 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c) Partners. If, as a partner in a partner- costs must be capitalized. For more information
ship, you take out an insurance policy see Environmental Cleanup Costs, later.When To Deduct
on your own life and name your part-
ners as beneficiaries to induce them toPremiums
retain their investments in the partner-
You can usually deduct insurance premiums inship, you are considered a beneficiary. Introduction
the tax year to which they apply.You cannot deduct the insurance pre- This chapter discusses two ways of treating cer-miums. Cash method. If you use the cash method oftain costs—deduction or capitalization.
accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre-You generally deduct a cost as a current4) Insurance to secure a loan. If you take miums in the tax year you actually paid them,business expense by subtracting it from yourout a policy on your life or on the life ofeven if you incurred them in an earlier year.income in either the year you incur it or the yearanother person with a financial interest inHowever, see Prepayment, later. you pay it.your business to get or protect a business
loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as If you capitalize a cost, you may be able toAccrual method. If you use an accrual
method of accounting, you cannot deduct insur-a business expense. Nor can you deduct recover it over a period of years through periodic
ance premiums before the tax year in which youthe premiums as interest on business deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre-
incur a liability for them. In addition, you cannotloans or as an expense of financing loans. ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it to
deduct insurance premiums before the tax yearIn the event of death, the proceeds of the the basis of property to which it relates.
in which you actually pay them (unless the ex-policy are not taxed as income even if they A partnership, corporation, estate, or trust
ception for recurring items applies). For moreare used to liquidate the debt. makes the choice to deduct or capitalize theinformation about accrual methods of account-costs discussed in this chapter except for explo-ing, see chapter 1. For information about theration costs for mineral deposits. Each individualexception for recurring items, see Publicationpartner, shareholder, or beneficiary chooses538. whether to deduct or capitalize explorationCapitalized Premiums costs.Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in
advance, even if you pay them in advance. This You may be subject to the alternativeUnder the uniform capitalization rules, you mustrule applies to any expense paid far enough in minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct anycapitalize the direct costs and part of the indirectadvance to, in effect, create an asset with a of the expenses discussed in this chap-costs for certain production or resale activities. CAUTION
!
useful life extending substantially beyond theter, other than carrying charges and the costs ofInclude these costs in the basis of property youend of the current tax year. removing architectural barriers and retired as-produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-Expenses such as insurance are generallysets.ing them as a current deduction. You recover theallocable to a period of time. You can deductFor more information on the alternative mini-costs through depreciation, amortization, or costinsurance expenses for the year to which they
mum tax, see the instructions for one of theof goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwiseare allocable.
following forms.dispose of the property.
Example. In 2003, you signed a 3-year in-Indirect costs include premiums for insur- • Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—In-
surance contract. Even though you paid the pre-ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip- dividuals.
miums for 2003, 2004, and 2005 when youment, materials, property produced, or property • Form 4626, Alternative Minimum Tax—signed the contract, you can only deduct theacquired for resale. Corporations.premium for 2003 on your 2003 tax return. You
can deduct in 2004 and 2005 the premium allo-
Uniform capitalization rules.You may be cable to those years. Topicssubject to the uniform capitalization rules if you This chapter discusses:Dividends received.If you receive dividendsdo any of the following, unless the property is
from business insurance and you deducted theproduced for your use other than in a business • Carrying chargespremiums in prior years, at least part of theor an activity carried on for profit.
dividends generally are income. For more infor-• Research and experimental costs
mation, see Recovery of amount deducted in1) Produce real property or tangible personal • Intangible drilling costschapter 1.property. For this purpose, tangible per-
• Exploration costssonal property includes a film, sound re-
cording, video tape, book, or similar • Development costsproperty.
• Circulation costs2) Acquire property for resale.
• Environmental cleanup costsHowever, these rules do not apply to the follow-8. • Retired asset removal costsing property.
• Barrier removal costs1) Personal property you acquire for resale if
your average annual gross receipts areCosts You$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years. Useful Items
You may want to see:2) Property you produce if you meet either ofCan Deductthe following conditions.
Publication
a) Your indirect costs of producing theor Capitalize ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofproperty are $200,000 or less.
Assetsb) You use the cash method of accounting
and do not account for inventories. Form (and Instructions)Important Reminder
❏ 3468 Investment CreditQualified environmental cleanup (remedia-
More information. For more information on ❏ 8826 Disabled Access Credittion) costs.The deduction for qualified envi-
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in ronmental cleanup (remediation) costs has
See chapter 14 for information about gettingPublication 538 and the regulations under Inter-been extended to include costs you pay or incur
publications and forms.nal Revenue Code section 263A. before 2004. After December 31, 2003, these
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or CapitalizePage 27

Page 28 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IF you . . . THEN . . .
Carrying Charges choose to deduct research and deduct all research and experimental costs in the
experimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all later
Carrying charges include the taxes and interestbusiness expense years.
you pay to carry or develop real property or to
do not deduct research and if you meet the requirements, amortize them over atcarry, transport, or install personal property.
experimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you firstCertain carrying charges must be capitalizedbusiness expense receive an economic benefit from the research. Seeunder the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor- Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 9.mation on capitalization of interest, see chapter
5.) You can choose to capitalize carrying
charges not subject to the uniform capitalization
perfecting a patent application, are research andrules, but only if they are otherwise deductible.
experimental costs. However, costs paid or in-You can choose to capitalize carrying Intangiblecurred to obtain another’s patent are not re-charges separately for each project you have
search and experimental costs. For more Drilling Costsand for each type of carrying charge. For unim-
information on the treatment of costs paid orproved and unproductive real property, your
incurred to obtain another’s patent, see Section The costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermalchoice is good for only 1 year. You must decide
197 Intangibles in chapter 9. wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. Youwhether to capitalize carrying charges each year
can usually recover them through depreciationthe property remains unimproved and unpro- Product. The term “product” includes any of
or depletion. However, you can choose to de-ductive. For other real property, your choice tothe following items.
duct intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a currentcapitalize carrying charges remains in effect un-
• Formula. business expense. These are certain drilling andtil construction or development is completed.
development costs for wells in the United StatesFor personal property, your choice is effective• Invention.
in which you hold an operating or working inter-until the date you install or first use it, whichever
• Patent. est. You can deduct only costs for drilling oris later.
preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, or• Pilot model.
How to make the choice.To make the choice geothermal steam or hot water.
• Process.to capitalize a carrying charge, write a statement You can choose to deduct only the costs of
saying which charges you choose to capitalize. items with no salvage value. These include• Technique.
Attach it to your original tax return for the year wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re-• Property similar to the items listed above.the choice is to be effective. However, if you lated to drilling wells and preparing them for
timely filed your return for the year without mak- production. Your cost for any drilling or develop-It also includes products used by you in your
ing the choice, you can still make the choice by ment work done by contractors under any formtrade or business or held for sale, lease, or
filing an amended return within 6 months of the of contract is also an IDC. However, seelicense.
due date of the return (excluding extensions). Amounts paid to contractor that must be capital-Costs not included.Research and experi-Attach the statement to the amended return and ized, next.mental costs do not include expenses for any ofwrite “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100–2” on You can also choose to deduct the cost ofthe following activities.the statement. File the amended return at the drilling exploratory bore holes to determine the
same address you filed the original return.• Advertising or promotions. location and delineation of offshore hydrocarbon
deposits if the shaft is capable of conducting• Consumer surveys. hydrocarbons to the surface on completion. It
• Efficiency surveys. does not matter whether there is any intent to
Research and produce hydrocarbons.• Management studies. If you do not choose to deduct your IDCs as
Experimental Costs • Quality control testing. a current business expense, you can choose to
deduct them over the 60-month period begin-• Research in connection with literary, his-The costs of research and experimentation are ning with the month they were paid or incurred.torical, or similar projects.generally capital expenses. However, you can
choose to deduct these costs as a current busi-• The acquisition of another’s patent, model,Amounts paid to contractor that must be
ness expense. Your choice to deduct these production, or process. capitalized.Amounts paid to a contractor
costs is binding for the year it is made and for all must be capitalized if they are either:
later years unless you get IRS approval to makeWhen and how to choose. You make the • Amounts properly allocable to the cost ofa change. choice to deduct research and experimental depreciable property, orIf you meet certain requirements, you maycosts by deducting them on your tax return forchoose to defer and amortize research and ex- • Amounts paid only out of production orthe year in which you first pay or incur researchperimental costs. For information on choosing to proceeds from production if theseand experimental costs. If you do not make thedefer and amortize these costs, see Research amounts are depletable income to the re-choice to deduct research and experimentaland Experimental Costs in chapter 9. cipient.costs in the first year in which you pay or incur
the costs, you can deduct the costs in a laterResearch and experimental costs defined.
year only with approval from the IRS. How to make the choice.You choose to de-Research and experimental costs are reasona-
duct IDCs as a current business expense byble costs you incur in your trade or business forResearch credit.If you pay or incur qualifiedtaking the deduction on your income tax returnactivities intended to provide information thatresearch expenses, you may be able to take thefor the first tax year you have eligible costs. Nowould eliminate uncertainty about the develop-research credit. For more information about theformal statement is required. If you file Schedulement or improvement of a product. Uncertaintyresearch credit, see the instructions to FormC (Form 1040), enter these costs under “Otherexists if the information available to you does not6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities. expenses.”establish how to develop or improve a product or
the appropriate design of a product. Whether For oil and gas wells, your choice is binding
costs qualify as research and experimental for the year it is made and for all later years. For
costs depends on the nature of the activity to geothermal wells, your choice can be revoked
which the costs relate rather than on the nature by the filing of an amended return on which you
of the product or improvement being developed do not take the deduction. You can file the
or the level of technological advancement. amended return for the year up to the normal
The costs of obtaining a patent, including time of expiration for filing a claim for credit or
attorneys’ fees paid or incurred in making and refund, generally, within 3 years after the date
Page 28 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 29 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you filed the original return or within 2 years after is treated as additional depreciation and is sub-
the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.ject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo-Development Costs
sition of the property. See Section 1250Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells.
Property under Depreciation Recapture in chap- You can deduct costs paid or incurred during theIf you capitalize the drilling and development
ter 3 of Publication 544. tax year for developing a mine or any othercosts of geothermal wells that you place in serv-
natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well)These rules also apply to the deduction ofice during the tax year, you may be able to claim
located in the United States. These costs mustdevelopment costs by corporations. See Devel-a business energy credit. See the instructions
be paid or incurred after the discovery of ores orfor Form 3468 for more information. opment Costs, later.
minerals in commercially marketable quantities.
Nonproductive well. If you capitalize your Development costs include those incurred forRecapture of exploration expenses.WhenIDCs, you have another option if the well is you by a contractor. Also, development costsyour mine reaches the producing stage, younonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of the include depreciation on improvements used inmust recapture any exploration costs you chosenonproductive well as an ordinary loss. You the development of ores or minerals. They doto deduct. Use either of the following methods.must indicate and clearly state your choice on not include costs for the acquisition or improve-
your tax return for the year the well is completed. ment of depreciable property.Method 1—Include the deducted costs inOnce made, the choice for oil and gas wells is Instead of deducting development costs ingross income for the tax year the mine reachesbinding for all later years. You can revoke your the year paid or incurred, you can choose tothe producing stage. Your choice must bechoice for a geothermal well by filing an treat them as deferred expenses and deductclearly indicated on the return. Increase youramended return that does not claim the loss. them ratably as the units of produced ores oradjusted basis in the mine by the amount in-minerals benefited by the expenses are sold.Costs incurred outside the United States.cluded in income. Generally, you must chooseThis choice applies each tax year to expensesYou cannot deduct as a current business ex-this recapture method by the due date (includ-paid or incurred in that year. Once made, thepense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil,ing extensions) of your return. However, if youchoice is binding for the year and cannot begas, or geothermal well located outside thetimely filed your return for the year withoutrevoked for any reason.United States. However, you can choose to in-making the choice, you can still make theclude the costs in the adjusted basis of the well How to make the choice. The choice to de-choice by filing an amended return within 6to figure depletion or depreciation. If you do not duct development costs ratably as the ores ormonths of the due date of the return (excludingmake this choice, you can deduct the costs over minerals are sold must be made for each mineextensions). Make the choice on yourthe 10-year period beginning with the tax year in or other natural deposit by a clear indication onamended return and write “Filed pursuant towhich you paid or incurred them. These rules do your return or by a statement filed with the IRSsection 301.9100–2” on the form where younot apply to a nonproductive well. office where you file your return. Generally, youare including the income. File the amendedmust make the choice by the due date of thereturn at the same address you filed the origi-return (including extensions). However, if you
nal return. timely filed your return for the year without mak-
Exploration Costs ing the choice, you can still make the choice byMethod 2—Do not claim any depletion deduc-
filing an amended return within 6 months of thetion for the tax year the mine reaches the pro-The costs of determining the existence, location, due date of the return (excluding extensions).ducing stage and any later tax years until theextent, or quality of any mineral deposit are Clearly indicate the choice on your amendeddepletion you would have deducted equals theordinarily capital expenditures if the costs lead return and write “Filed pursuant to sectionexploration costs you deducted.to the development of a mine. You recover these 301.9100–2.” File the amended return at the
costs through depletion as the mineral is re- same address you filed the original return.You also must recapture deducted explora-moved from the ground. However, you can
tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty fromForeign development costs. The rules dis-choose to deduct domestic exploration costs
mine property before it reaches the producingcussed earlier for foreign exploration costs applypaid or incurred before the development stage
stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction forto foreign development costs.began (except those for oil, gas, and geothermal
the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty andwells). Reduced corporate deductions for develop-any later tax years, until the depletion you wouldment costs. The rules discussed earlier forHow to make the choice.You choose to de- have deducted equals the exploration costs youreduced corporate deductions for explorationduct exploration costs by taking the deductiondeducted. costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-on your income tax return, or on an amendedGenerally, if you dispose of the mine beforevelopment costs.income tax return, for the first tax year for which
you have fully recaptured the exploration costsyou wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred
you deducted, recapture the balance by treatingduring the tax year. Your return must adequately
all or part of your gain as ordinary income.describe and identify each property or mine, and
Under these circumstances, you generallyclearly state how much is being deducted for Circulation Costs
each one. The choice applies to the tax year youtreat as ordinary income all of your gain if it is
A publisher can deduct as a current businessmake this choice and all later tax years.less than your adjusted exploration costs with
expense the costs of establishing, maintaining,respect to the mine. If your gain is more thanPartnerships. Each partner, not the part- or increasing the circulation of a newspaper,your adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi-nership, chooses whether to capitalize or to de- magazine, or other periodical. For example, anary income only a part of your gain, up to theduct that partner’s share of exploration costs. publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extraamount of your adjusted exploration costs.
Reduced corporate deductions for explora- employees for a limited time to get new sub-
tion costs. A corporation (other than an S scriptions through telephone calls. CirculationForeign exploration costs.If you pay or incurcorporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes- costs are deductible even if they normally wouldexploration costs for a mine or other naturaltic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re- be capitalized.deposit located outside the United States, youmaining 30% of costs and amortize them over This rule does not apply to the followingcannot deduct all the costs in the current year.the 60-month period starting with the month the costs that must be capitalized.You can choose to include the costs (other thanexploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo- • The purchase of land or depreciable prop-for an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the ad-ration may also elect to capitalize and amortize erty.justed basis of the mineral property to figure costmining exploration costs over a 10–year period.
depletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chap-For more information on this method of amorti- • The acquisition of circulation through the
ter 10.) If you do not make this choice, you mustzation, see section 59(e) of the Internal Reve- purchase of any part of the business of
deduct the costs over the 10-year period begin-nue Code. another publisher of a newspaper, maga-
ning with the tax year in which you pay or incurThe 30% the corporation capitalizes cannot zine, or other periodical, including the
them. These rules also apply to foreign develop-be added to its basis in the property to figure purchase of another publisher’s list of sub-
ment costs.cost depletion. However, the amount amortized scribers.
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or CapitalizePage 29

Page 30 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other treatment of circulation costs.If you otherwise allocated to the qualified contami-
do not want to deduct circulation costs as a nated site shall be treated as a qualified environ-Barrier Removal Costscurrent business expense, you can choose one mental cleanup cost.
of the following ways to recover these costs. The cost of an improvement to a business assetWhen and how to choose. You choose to
is normally a capital expense. However, you can
• Capitalize all circulation costs that arededuct environmental cleanup costs by taking
choose to deduct the costs of making a facility orproperly chargeable to a capital account.the deduction on the income tax return (filed by
public transportation vehicle more accessible tothe due date including extensions) for the tax-• Amortize circulation costs over the 3-year and usable by those who are disabled or elderly.able year in which the costs are paid or incurred.period beginning with the tax year they You must own or lease the facility or vehicle forThe costs are deducted differently depending onwere paid or incurred. use in connection with your trade or business.the type of business entity involved.
A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc-Individuals. Deduct the environmentalHow to make the choice.You choose to capi- tures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, orcleanup costs on the “Other Expenses” line oftalize circulation costs by attaching a statement similar real or personal property. A public trans-Schedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the scheduleto your return for the first tax year the choice portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus orrequires you to separately identify each expenseapplies. Your choice is binding for the year it is railroad car, that provides transportation serviceincluded in “Other Expenses” write “Section 198made and for all later years, unless you get IRS to the public (including service for your custom-Election” on the line next to the environmentalapproval to revoke it. ers, even if you are not in the business of provid-cleanup costs. ing transportation services).
All other entities.All other taxpayers (in- You cannot deduct any costs that you paid or
cluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts)incurred to completely renovate or build a facility
Environmental Cleanup deduct the environmental cleanup costs on theor public transportation vehicle or to replace
“Other Deductions” line of the appropriate fed-depreciable property in the normal course of
Costs eral income tax return. On a schedule attachedbusiness.
to the return that separately identifies each ex-
Environmental cleanup (remediation) costs arepense included in “Other Deductions” writeDeduction limit.The most you can deduct asgenerally capital expenditures. However, you“Section 198 Election” on the line next to thea cost of removing barriers to the disabled andcan choose to deduct these costs as a currentamount for environmental cleanup costs. the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However,business expense if certain requirements (dis- you can add any costs over this limit to the basisMore than one environmental cleanupcussed later) are met. This special tax treatment of the property and depreciate these excesscost. If, for any taxable year, you pay or incuris generally available for qualified environmental costs.more than one environmental cleanup cost, youcleanup costs you pay or incur before January 1,can choose to deduct one or more of such ex-2004. Partners and partnerships. The $15,000penditures for that year. You can choose to
Qualified environmental cleanup costs. limit applies to a partnership and also to eachdeduct one expenditure and choose to capitalize
Qualified environmental cleanup costs are gen- partner in the partnership. A partner can allocateanother expenditure (whether or not they are of
erally costs you pay or incur to abate or control the $15,000 limit in any manner among thethe same type or paid or incurred with respect to
hazardous substances at a qualified contami- partner’s individually incurred costs and thethe same qualified contaminated site). A choice
nated site. partner’s distributive share of partnership costs.to deduct an expenditure for one year has no
If the partner cannot deduct the entire share ofeffect on other years. You must make a separateHazardous substance. Hazardous sub- partnership costs, the partnership can add anychoice for each year in which you intend tostances are defined in section 101(14) of the costs not deducted to the basis of the improveddeduct qualified environmental cleanup costs.Comprehensive Environmental Response, property.Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 andRecapture. This deduction may have to be A partnership must be able to show that anycertain substances are designated as hazard-recaptured as ordinary income under sectionamount added to basis was not deducted by theous in section 102 of the Act. Substances are1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of thepartner and that it was over a partner’s $15,000not hazardous if a removal or remedial action isproperty that would have received an addition tolimit (as determined by the partner). If the part-prohibited under sections 104 and 104(a)(3) ofbasis if you had not chosen to deduct the expen-nership cannot show this, it is presumed that thethe Act. diture. For more information on recapturing thepartner was able to deduct the distributive share
deduction, see Depreciation and amortizationQualified contaminated site.A qualified of the partnership’s costs in full.
under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub-contaminated site is any area that meets both of
lication 544.the following requirements. Example. John Duke’s distributive share of
ABC partnership’s deductible expenses for theCosts to clean up land.For more information1) You hold it for use in a trade or business, removal of architectural barriers was $14,000.on costs you can deduct for the environmentalfor the production of income, or as inven- John had $12,000 of similar expenses in his solecleanup of land, see Environmental cleanuptory. proprietorship. He chose to deduct $7,000 ofcosts in chapter 13. them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 of2) There has been a release, threat of re-
the $15,000 limit to his share of ABC’s ex-More information. For more informationlease, or disposal of any hazardous sub-
penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of hisabout the environmental cleanup cost deduc-stance at or on the site.
own expenses to the basis of the property usedtion, see section 198 of the Internal RevenueYou must get a statement from the designated in his business. Also, if ABC can show that JohnCode.state environmental agency that the site meets could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 – $8,000) ofrequirement (2). his share of the partnership’s expenses becauseA site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for, of how John applied the limit, ABC can addthe national priorities list under section $6,000 to the basis of its property.Retired Asset Removal105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ-
mental Response, Compensation, and LiabilityCosts Qualification standards.You can deductAct of 1980. To find out if a site is on the national your costs as a current expense only if the bar-priorities list, contact the U.S. EnvironmentalIf you retire and remove a depreciable asset inrier removal meets one or more of the followingProtection Agency. connection with the installation or production ofspecific standards for improved access for the
Expenditures for depreciable property. a replacement asset, you can deduct the costsdisabled or the elderly.
You cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre- of removing the retired asset. However, if youGrading. The ground must be graded to theciable property used in connection with the replace a component (part) of a depreciablelevel of a normal entrance to make the facilityabatement or control of hazardous substances asset, capitalize the removal costs if the re-accessible to people with physical disabilities.at a qualified contaminated site. However, the placement is an improvement and deduct the
part of the depreciation for such property that is costs if the replacement is a repair.Walks.
Page 30 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 31 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5) A ramp must have level platforms no far- e) Has a toilet with a seat 19 to 20 inches
1) A public walk must be at least 48 inchesther than 30 feet apart and at any turn. from the finished floor.
wide and cannot slope more than 5%. A
6) A curb ramp with a nonslip surface mustfairly long walk of maximum or near maxi- 3) A toilet room must have, in addition to orbe provided at an intersection. The curbmum steepness must have level areas at instead of the toilet stall described in (2), atramp must not be less than 4 feet wideregular intervals. A walk or driveway must least one toilet stall that: and must not rise more than 1 inch in eachhave a nonslip surface.
foot of length. The two surfaces must a) Is at least 66 inches wide,2) A walk must have a continuing common blend smoothly.
b) Is at least 60 inches deep,surface and must not have steps or sud-
den changes in level. Entrances. A building must have at least c) Has a door, if any, that is at least 32
one main entrance that a person in a wheelchairinches wide and swings out,3) Where a walk crosses another walk, a
can use. The entrance must be on a level acces-driveway, or a parking lot, they must blend d) Has a handrail on one side, 33 inchessible to an elevator.to a common level. However, this does not high and parallel to the floor, 11/2 inchesrequire the removal of curbs that are aDoors and doorways. in outside diameter, 11/2 inches awaysafety feature for those with disabilities, from the wall, and fastened securely at1) A door must have a clear opening of atespecially blindness. the ends and center, andleast 32 inches and must be operable by a4) A sloping walk must have a level platformsingle effort. e) Has a toilet with a seat 19 to 20 inchesat the top and at the bottom. If a door from the finished floor with a centerline2) The floor on the inside and outside of aswings out onto the platform toward the 18 inches from the side wall on whichdoorway must be level for at least 5 feetwalk, the platform must be at least 5 feet the handrail is located.from the door in the direction the doordeep and 5 feet wide. If a door does not
swings and must extend at least 1 footswing onto the platform or toward the walk, 4) A toilet room must have sinks with narrowpast the opening side of the doorway.the platform must be at least 3 feet deep aprons. Drain pipes and hot water pipesand 5 feet wide. A platform must extend at3) There must not be any sharp slopes or under a sink must be covered or insulated.least 1 foot past the opening side of anysudden changes in level at a doorway. The5) A mirror and a shelf above a sink must notdoorway. threshold must be flush with the floor. Thebe higher than 40 inches above the floor,door closer must be selected, placed, andParking lots. measured from the top of the shelf and theset so as not to impair the use of the doorbottom of the mirror.by persons with disabilities.1) At least one accessible parking space
6) A toilet room for men must haveclose to a facility must be set aside and
Stairs. wall-mounted urinals with the opening ofmarked for use by persons with disabili-
the basin 15 to 19 inches from the finishedties. 1) Stairsteps must have round nosing of be-floor or floor-mounted urinals that are level
2) A parking space must be open on one sidetween 1 and 11/2 inch radius. with the main floor.
to allow room for a person in a wheelchair2) Stairs must have a handrail 32 inches 7) Towel racks, towel dispensers, and otheror on braces or crutches to get in and outhigh, measured from the tread at the facedispensers and disposal units must not beof a car onto a level surface suitable forof the riser. mounted higher than 40 inches from thewheeling and walking.
floor.3) Stairs must have at least one handrail that3) A parking space marked for use by per- extends at least 18 inches past the topsons with disabilities, when placed be- Water fountains.step and the bottom step. But this does nottween two regular diagonal or head-on mean that a handrail extension that is itselfparking spaces, must be at least 12 feet 1) A water fountain and a cooler must havea hazard is required.wide. up-front spouts and controls.
4) Each step must not be more than 7 inches4) A parking space must be located so that a 2) A water fountain and a cooler must behigh.person in a wheelchair or on braces or hand-operated or hand-and-foot-operated.
crutches does not have to wheel or walkFloors. 3) A water fountain mounted on the side of abehind parked cars. floor-mounted cooler must not be more
1) Floors must have a nonslip surface. than 30 inches above the floor.Ramps.
2) Floors on each story of a building must be4) A wall-mounted, hand-operated water1) A ramp must not rise more than 1 inch inon the same level or must be connected cooler must be mounted with the basin 36each foot of length. by a ramp of the type discussed previ- inches from the floor.
ously.2) A ramp must have at least one handrail 5) A water fountain must not be fully re-that is 32 inches high, measured from the cessed and must not be set into an alcoveToilet rooms.surface of the ramp. The handrail must be unless the alcove is at least 36 inchessmooth and must extend at least 1 foot1) A toilet room must have enough space forwide.past the top and bottom of the ramp. How-persons in wheelchairs to move around.
ever, this does mean that a handrail exten- Public telephones.2) A toilet room must have at least one toiletsion that is itself a hazard is required.
stall that: 1) A public telephone must be placed so that3) A ramp must have a nonslip surface. a person in a wheelchair can reach the diala) Is at least 36 inches wide,4) A ramp must have a level platform at the and the headset.
top and at the bottom. If a door swings outb) Is at least 56 inches deep, 2) A public telephone must be equipped for aonto the platform or toward the ramp, thec) Has a door, if any, that is at least 32person who is hearing impaired and itplatform must be at least 5 feet deep and 5inches wide and swings out, must be identified as such with instructionsfeet wide. If a door does not swing onto for its use.the platform or toward the ramp, the plat- d) Has handrails on each side that are 33
form must be at least 3 feet deep and 5 inches high and parallel to the floor, 11/2 3) Coin slots of public telephones must not
feet wide. A platform must extend at least inches in outside diameter, 11/2 inches be more than 48 inches from the floor.
1 foot past the opening side of any door- away from the wall, and fastened se-
way. curely at the ends and center, and Elevators.
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or CapitalizePage 31

Page 32 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
7) A stepwell next to the driver must have,
1) An elevator must be accessible to, and when the door is open, at least 2 foot-can-
usable by, persons with disabilities and the dles of light measured on the step tread.
elderly on the levels they use to enter the Other stepwells must have, at all times, at
building and all levels and areas normally least 2 foot-candles of light measured on
used. the step tread.
2) Cab size must measure at least 54 by 68 8) The doorways of the bus must have
inches to allow for turning a wheelchair. outside lighting that provides at least 1
foot-candle of light on the street surface for3) Door clear opening width must be at least
a distance of 3 feet from the bottom step32 inches.
edge. This lighting must be below window
4) All controls needed must be within 48 to level and must be shielded to protect the
54 inches from the cab floor. These con- eyes of entering and exiting passengers.
trols must be usable by a person with a
9) The fare box must be located as far for-visual impairment and must be identifiable
ward as practical and must not block trafficby touch.
in the vestibule.
Controls. Switches and controls for light,
Rapid and light rail vehicles.heat, ventilation, windows, draperies, fireRail facilities.alarms, and all similar controls needed or used
1) Passenger doorways on the vehicle sidesoften must be placed within the reach of a per-1) A rail facility must have a fare control areamust have clear openings at least 32 in-son in a wheelchair. These switches and con-with at least one entrance with a clear ches wide.trols must not be higher than 48 inches from theopening at least 36 inches wide.floor. 2) Audible or visual warning signals must be2) A boarding platform edge bordering a provided to alert passengers who have aIdentification. drop-off or other dangerous condition mustdisability or are elderly of closing doors.
be marked with a strip of floor material1) Raised letters or numbers must be used to 3) Handrails and stanchions must permit safedifferent in color and texture from the restidentify rooms and offices. These identifi- boarding, moving around, sitting andof the floor surface. The gap between thecation marks must be placed on the wall to standing assistance, and getting off byboarding platform and vehicle doorwaythe right or left of the door at a height of 54 persons who have a disability or are eld-to 66 inches above the finished floor. must be as small as possible. erly. On a level-entry vehicle, handrails,
2) A door that might prove dangerous if a stanchions, and seats must be located toBuses.visually impaired person used it, such as a allow a wheelchair user to enter the vehi-
door leading to a loading platform, boiler cle and position the wheelchair in a loca-1) A bus must have a mechanism such as aroom, stage, or fire escape, must be identi- tion that does not block the movement oflift or ramp to enter the bus and enoughfiable by touch. other passengers. On a vehicle with stepsclearance to let a wheelchair user reach athat must be used in boarding, handrailssecure location.Warning signals. and stanchions must be provided in the
2) The bus must have a wheelchair-securing entrance so that persons who have a disa-1) An audible warning signal must be accom-device. However, this does not mean that bility or are elderly can grasp them frompanied by a simultaneous visual signal fora wheelchair-securing device that is itself aoutside the vehicle and use them whilethe benefit of hearing impaired persons. boarding.barrier or hazard is required.
2) A visual warning signal must be accompa- 4) Floors must have nonslip surfaces. Step3) The vertical distance from a curb or fromnied by a simultaneous audible signal for edges on a light rail vehicle must have astreet level to the first front doorstep mustthe benefit of visually impaired persons. band of bright contrasting color running thenot be more than 8 inches. Each front
full width of the step.doorstep after the first step up from theHazards. Hanging signs, ceiling lights, andcurb or street level must also not be more5) A stepwell next to the driver must have,similar objects and fixtures must be at least 7than 8 inches high. The steps at the frontwhen the door is open, at least 2 foot-can-feet above the floor.
and rear doors must be at least 12 inchesdles of light measured on the step tread.International accessibility symbol.The deep. Other stepwells must have, at all times, atinternational accessibility symbol must be dis- least 2 foot-candles of light measured on4) The bus must have clearly legible signsplayed on routes to a wheelchair-accessible en- the step tread.that indicate that seats in the front of thetrance to a facility, at the entrance itself, and at
bus are priority seats for persons who6) Doorways on a light rail vehicle must havewheelchair-accessible entrances to public trans-
have a disability or are elderly. The signsoutside lighting that provides at least 1portation vehicles. This symbol is the outline
must encourage other passengers to make foot-candle of light on the street surface fordrawing of a person in a wheelchair and is
a distance of 3 feet from the bottom stepthese seats available to those having prior-shown in the following illustration.
edge. This lighting must be below windowity who wish to use them.
level and must be shielded to protect the5) Handrails and stanchions must be pro- eyes of entering and exiting passengers.vided in the entrance to the bus so that
passengers who have a disability or areOther barrier removals.To be deductible,
elderly can grasp them from outside theexpenses of removing any barrier not covered
bus and use them while boarding and pay-by the above standards must meet all three of
ing the fare. This system must include athe following tests. 
rail across the front of the bus interior that
passengers can lean against while paying1) The removed barrier must be a substantial
fares. Overhead handrails must be contin-barrier to access or use of a facility or
uous except for a gap at the rear doorway.public transportation vehicle by persons
who have a disability or are elderly.6) Floors and steps must have nonslip sur-
faces. Step edges must have a band of 2) The removed barrier must have been a
bright contrasting color running the fullbarrier for at least one major group of per-
width of the step. sons who have a disability or are elderly
Page 32 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 33 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(such as people who are blind, deaf, or• Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles expenses. Capital expenses are part of your
wheelchair users). basis in the business. Generally, you recover• Amortizing reforestation costs costs for particular assets through depreciation3) The barrier must be removed without cre-• Amortizing costs of pollution control facili-deductions. However, you generally cannot re-ating any new barrier that significantly im-ties cover other costs until you sell the business orpairs access to or use of the facility or otherwise go out of business. See Capital Ex-• Amortizing costs of research and experi-vehicle by a major group of persons who penses in chapter 1 for a discussion of how tomentationhave a disability or are elderly. treat these costs if you do not go into business.
You can choose to amortize certain costs for
How to make the choice. If you choose to setting up your business over a period of 60Useful Items
deduct your costs for removing barriers to the months or more. The cost must qualify as one ofYou may want to see:
disabled or the elderly, claim the deduction on the following.
your income tax return (partnership return forPublication • A business start-up cost.partnerships) for the tax year the expenses were
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofpaid or incurred. Identify the deduction as a • An organizational cost for a corporation.
Assetsseparate item. The choice applies to all the qual- • An organizational cost for a partnership.ifying costs you have during the year, up to the❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses$15,000 limit. If you make this choice, you must
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertymaintain adequate records to support your de- Business Start-Up Costsduction.
Form (and Instructions)For your choice to be valid, you generally Start-up costs are costs for creating an active
must file your return by its due date, including trade or business or investigating the creation or❏ 3468 Investment Creditextensions. However, if you timely filed your acquisition of an active trade or business.
return for the year without making the choice,❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization Start-up costs include any amounts paid or in-
you can still make the choice by filing an curred in connection with any activity engaged in❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—amended return within 6 months of the due date for profit and for the production of income inIndividualsof the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi- anticipation of the activity becoming an active
cate the choice on your amended return and trade or business.See chapter 14 for information about gettingwrite “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100–2.”publications and forms. Qualifying costs.A start-up cost is amortiz-File the amended return at the same address
able if it meets both the following tests.you filed the original return. Your choice is irrev-
ocable after the due date, including extensions, • It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or
of your return. incurred it to operate an existing activeHow To Deduct trade or business (in the same field as the
Disabled access credit.If you make your one you entered into).Amortizationbusiness accessible to persons with disabilities
• It is a cost you pay or incur before the dayand your business is an eligible small business,
The purpose of this section is to explain how youyour active trade or business begins.you may be able to claim the disabled access
deduct amortization.credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you must
Start-up costs include costs for the followingreduce the amount you deduct or capitalize byForm 4562. You deduct amortization that be-items.the amount of the credit. gins during the current year by completing Part
For more information about the disabled ac- • An analysis or survey of potential markets,VI of Form 4562 and attaching it to your current
cess credit, see Form 8826. products, labor supply, transportation facil-year’s return.
ities, etc.For a later year, with respect to an item you
elect to amortize, you do not report your deduc-• Advertisements for the opening of thetion for amortization on Form 4562 unless youbusiness.begin to amortize a different amortizable item in
• Salaries and wages for employees whothat later year. In that case, you must list on the
are being trained and their instructors.Form 4562 not only the item you are beginning9. to amortize in the later year, but any items you• Travel and other necessary costs for se-had previously begun to amortize and are stillcuring prospective distributors, suppliers,amortizing. For example, if you began amortiz-or customers.ing a lease in 2002, and a second lease in 2003,Amortization • Salaries and fees for executives and con-you would show the second lease on line 42 of
sultants, or for similar professional serv-Form 4562, and the first on line 43. If you had not
ices.added the second lease in 2003, you would
follow the instructions in Other forms to use,Introduction
next. Nonqualifying costs.Start-up costs do notAmortization is a method of recovering (deduct-
include deductible interest, taxes, or researching) certain capital costs over a fixed period ofOther forms to use. If you do not have toand experimental costs. See Research and Ex-time. It is similar to the straight line method ofreport amortization on Form 4562 for years afterperimental Costs, later.depreciation. the year the amortization begins, claim amorti-
The various amortizable costs covered inzation directly on the “Other expenses” line ofPurchasing an active trade or business.
this chapter are included in the list below. How-Schedule C or F (Form 1040) or the “OtherAmortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-
ever, this chapter does not discuss amortizationdeductions” line of Form 1065, 1120, 1120-A, ortive trade or business include only investigative
of bond premium . For information, see chapter1120-S. However, if you are amortizing refores-costs incurred in the course of a general search
3 of Publication 550. tation costs, see Where to report under Refores- for or preliminary investigation of the business.
tation Costs, later. These are the costs that help you decide
Topics whether to purchase a new business and which
This chapter discusses: active business to purchase. Costs you incur in
an attempt to purchase a specific business are
• How to deduct amortization Going Into Business capital expenses that you cannot amortize.
• Amortizing costs of going into businessWhen you go into business, treat all costs youExample. In June, you hired an accounting
• Amortizing costs of getting a lease incur to get your business started as capital firm and a law firm to assist you in the potential
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 33

Page 34 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
purchase of XYZ. They researched XYZ’s indus-Costs of Organizing How To Amortize
try and analyzed the financial projections ofa Partnership You deduct start-up and organizational costs inXYZ. In September, the law firm prepared and
equal amounts over a period of 60 months orsubmitted a letter of intent to XYZ. The letterThe costs of organizing a partnership are themore. You can choose a period for start-up costsstated that a binding commitment would resultdirect costs of creating the partnership.that is different from the period you choose foronly after a purchase agreement was signed.
organizational costs, as long as both are not lessThe law firm and accounting firm continued toQualifying costs.You can amortize an orga-than 60 months. Once you choose an amortiza-provide services including a review of XYZ’s
nizational cost only if it meets all the followingtion period, you cannot change it.books and records and the preparation of a To figure your deduction, divide your totaltests.purchase agreement. In October, you signed a start-up or organizational costs by the months inpurchase agreement with XYZ. • It is for the creation of the partnership andthe amortization period. The result is the amountThe costs to investigate the business beforenot for starting or operating the partner-you can deduct for each month.submitting the letter of intent to XYZ are amortiz-ship trade or business.
able investigative costs. The costs for services Cash method partnership.A partnership us-
• It is chargeable to a capital account.after that time relate to the attempt to purchase ing the cash method of accounting cannot de-
duct an organizational cost it has not paid by thethe business and must be capitalized. • It could be amortized over the life of the
end of the tax year. However, any cost the part-partnership if the partnership had a fixed
nership could have deducted as an organiza-Disposition of business.If you completely life. tional cost in an earlier tax year (if it had beendispose of your business before the end of the• It is incurred by the due date of the part-paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year ofamortization period, you can deduct any remain-nership return (excluding extensions) forpayment.ing deferred start-up costs. However, you canthe first tax year in which the partnershipdeduct these deferred start-up costs only to the When to begin amortization.The amortiza-is in business. However, if the partnershipextent they qualify as a loss from a business. tion period starts with the month you begin busi-uses the cash method of accounting and
ness operations.pays the cost after the end of its first taxCosts of Organizing year, see Cash method partnership under
a Corporation How To Amortize, later. How To Make the Choice
• It is for a type of item normally expected toThe costs of organizing a corporation are the To choose to amortize start-up or organizationalbenefit the partnership throughout its en-direct costs of creating the corporation. costs, you must attach Form 4562 and an ac-tire life. companying statement (explained later) to yourQualifying costs.You can amortize an orga- return for the first tax year you are in business. IfOrganizational costs include the followingnizational cost only if it meets all the following you have both start-up and organizational costs,fees.tests. attach a separate statement to your return for
each type of cost.• It is for the creation of the corporation.• Legal fees for services incident to the or-
Generally, you must file the return by the dueganization of the partnership, such as ne-• It is chargeable to a capital account. date (including any extensions). However, if yougotiation and preparation of the timely filed your return for the year without mak-• It could be amortized over the life of thepartnership agreement. ing the choice, you can still make the choice bycorporation if the corporation had a fixed
• Accounting fees for services incident tofiling an amended return within 6 months of thelife.
due date of the return (excluding extensions).the organization of the partnership.
• It is incurred before the end of the first tax For more information, see the instructions for• Filing fees.year in which the corporation is in busi- Part VI of Form 4562.
ness. A corporation using the cash Once you make the choice to amortize
method of accounting can amortize orga-Nonqualifying costs. The following costs start-up or organizational costs, you cannot re-
nizational costs incurred within the first tax voke it.cannot be amortized.
year, even if it does not pay them in that
Corporations and partnerships.If your busi-• The cost of acquiring assets for the part-year.
ness is organized as a corporation or partner-nership or transferring assets to the part-
ship, only your corporation or partnership cannership.The following are examples of organizational
choose to amortize its start-up or organizationalcosts. • The cost of admitting or removing part-costs. A shareholder or partner cannot make
ners, other than at the time the partnership• The cost of temporary directors. this choice. You, as shareholder or partner, can-
is first organized. not amortize any costs you incur in setting up• The cost of organizational meetings. your corporation or partnership. The corporation• The cost of making a contract concerning
• State incorporation fees. or partnership can amortize these costs.the operation of the partnership trade or
business (including a contract between a• The cost of accounting services for setting You, as an individual, can choose to
partner and the partnership). amortize costs you incur to investigateup the corporation.
an interest in an existing partnership.
TIP
• The costs for issuing and marketing inter-• The cost of legal services (such as draft- These costs qualify as business start-up costs ifests in the partnership (such as broker-ing the charter, bylaws, terms of the origi- you acquire the partnership interest.age, registration, and legal fees andnal stock certificates, and minutes of
printing costs). These “syndication fees”organizational meetings). Start-up costs.If you choose to amortize yourare capital expenses that cannot be de-start-up costs, complete Part VI of Form 4562
preciated or amortized. and prepare a separate statement that containsNonqualifying costs.The following costs are
the following information.not organizational costs. They are capital ex-
Liquidation of partnership.If a partnership ispenses that you cannot amortize. • A description of the business to which the
liquidated before the end of the amortizationstart-up costs relate.• Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-period, the unamortized amount of qualifyingcurities, such as commissions, profes- • A description of each start-up cost in-organizational costs can be deducted in thesional fees, and printing costs. curred.partnership’s final tax year. However, these
costs can be deducted only to the extent they• Costs associated with the transfer of as- • The month your active business began (or
sets to the corporation. qualify as a loss from a business. was acquired).
Page 34 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 35 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The number of months in your amortiza- For more information on the costs of getting 5) A patent, copyright, formula, process, de-
sign, pattern, know-how, format, or similartion period (not less than 60). a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in
item.chapter 4.
Filing the statement early. You can 6) A customer-based intangible.choose to amortize your start-up costs by filing
7) A supplier-based intangible.the statement with a return for any tax year
before the year your active business begins. IfSection 197 Intangibles8) Any item similar to items (3) through (7).
you file the statement early, the choice becomes
9) A license, permit, or other right granted byeffective in the month of the tax year your activeYou must generally amortize over 15 years thea governmental unit or agency (includingbusiness begins. capitalized costs of “section 197 intangibles” youissuances and renewals).acquired after August 10, 1993. You must amor-Revised statement. You can file a revised
10) A covenant not to compete entered into intize these costs if you hold the section 197statement to include any start-up costs not in- connection with the acquisition of an inter-intangibles in connection with your trade or busi-cluded in your original statement. However, you est in a trade or business.ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc-cannot include on the revised statement any
tion of income.cost you previously treated on your return as a 11) A franchise, trademark, or trade name (in-
cluding renewals).cost other than a start-up cost. You can file theYou may not be able to amortize sec-
revised statement with a return filed after the tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans-12) A contract for the use of, or a term interestreturn on which you chose to amortize your action that did not result in a significantCAUTION
!
in, any item in this list.start-up costs. change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churning
Rules, later. You cannot amortize any of the in-
Organizational costs.If you choose to amor- tangibles listed in items (1) through (8)Your amortization deduction each year is the
tize your corporation’s or partnership’s organi- that you created (rather than acquired)applicable part of the intangible’s adjusted basisCAUTION
!
zational costs, complete Part VI of Form 4562 unless you created them in connection with the(for purposes of determining gain), figured by
and prepare a separate statement that contains acquisition of assets constituting a trade or busi-amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months).
the following information. ness or a substantial part of a trade or business.The 15-year period begins with the later of:
• A description of each cost. • The month the intangible is acquired, orGoodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi-
• The amount of each cost. ness based on expected continued customer• The month the trade or business or activity
patronage due to its name, reputation, or anyengaged in for the production of income• The date each cost was incurred. other factor.begins.• The month your corporation or partnership
Going concern value. This is the additionalYou cannot deduct amortization for the monthbegan active business (or acquired the
value of a trade or business that attaches toyou dispose of the intangible.business).
property because the property is an integral partIf you pay or incur an amount that increases• The number of months in your amortiza- of an ongoing business activity. It includes valuethe basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi-tion period (not less than 60). based on the ability of a business to continue toble after the 15-year period begins, amortize itfunction and generate income even though
Partnerships. The statement prepared for over the remainder of the 15-year period begin-there is a change in ownership (but does not
a cash basis partnership must also indicate thening with the month the basis increase occurs.include any other section 197 intangible). It also
amount paid before the end of the year for eachYou are not allowed any other depreciationincludes value based on the immediate use or
cost. or amortization deduction for an amortizableavailability of an acquired trade or business,
section 197 intangible. such as the use of earnings during any period inYou do not need to separately list any
which the business would not otherwise bepartnership organizational cost that is
available or operational.Cost attributable to other property.Theless than $10. Instead, you can list the
TIP
rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply tototal amount of these costs with the dates the Workforce in place, etc.This includes theany amount that is included in determining thefirst and last costs were incurred. composition of a workforce (for example, its ex-cost of property that is not a section 197 intangi-After a partnership makes the choice to perience, education, or training). It also includesble. For example, if the cost of computeramortize organizational costs, it can file an the terms and conditions of employment,software is not separately stated from the cost ofamended return to include additional organiza- whether contractual or otherwise, and any otherhardware or other tangible property and youtional costs not included in the partnership’s value placed on employees or any of their attrib-consistently treat it as part of the cost of theoriginal return and statement. utes.hardware or other tangible property, these rulesFor example, you must amortize the part ofdo not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac-the purchase price of a business that is for thequiring real property held for the production ofexistence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, you
rental income is considered the cost of goodwill,must amortize the cost of acquiring an existingGetting a Lease going concern value, or any other section 197employment contract or relationship with em-
intangible. ployees or consultants.If you get a lease for business property, you
recover the cost by amortizing it over the term of
Business books and records, etc.This in-Section 197the lease. The term of the lease for amortization
cludes the intangible value of technical manuals,purposes generally includes all renewal optionsIntangibles Defined training manuals or programs, data files, and(and any other period for which you and the accounting or inventory control systems. It alsoThe following assets are section 197 in-lessor reasonably expect the lease to be re- includes the cost of customer lists, subscriptiontangibles.newed). However, renewal periods are not in- lists, insurance expirations, patient or client files,cluded if 75% or more of the cost of getting the and lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, and1) Goodwill.lease is for the term of the lease remaining on television advertisers.the acquisition date (not including any period for2) Going concern value.
which you may choose to renew, extend, or Patents, copyrights, etc.This includes pack-3) Workforce in place.continue the lease). age design, computer software, and any interest
4) Business books and records, operatingEnter your deduction in Part VI of Form 4562 in a film, sound recording, videotape, book, or
systems, or any other information base,if you are deducting amortization that begins other similar property, except as discussed later
including lists or other information con-during the current year, or on the appropriate under Assets That Are Not Section 197 In-
cerning current or prospective customers.line of your tax return. tangibles.
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 35

Page 36 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, aCustomer-based intangible.This is the com- Computer software. Section 197 intangibles
position of market, market share, and any othersection 197 intangible. Section 197 in- do not include the following types of computer
value resulting from the future provision of software.tangibles include any right under a license, con-
goods or services because of relationships withtract, or other arrangement providing for the use
1) Software that meets all the following re-customers in the ordinary course of business.of any section 197 intangible. It also includes
quirements.For example, you must amortize the part of theany term interest in any section 197 intangible,
purchase price of a business that is for thewhether the interest is outright or in trust.a) It is (or has been) readily available forexistence of the following intangibles.
purchase by the general public.
• A customer base. Assets That Are Not b) It is subject to a nonexclusive license.Section 197 Intangibles• A circulation base.
c) It has not been substantially modified.
• An undeveloped market or market growth.The following assets are not section 197 in- This requirement is considered met if
the cost of all modifications is not moretangibles.• Insurance in force.
than the greater of 25% of the price of
• A mortgage servicing contract. 1) Any interest in a corporation, partnership,the publicly available unmodified
trust, or estate. software or $2,000.• An investment management contract.
2) Any interest under an existing futures con-• Any other relationship with customers in- 2) Software that is not acquired in connectiontract, foreign currency contract, notionalvolving the future provision of goods or with the acquisition of a trade or businessprincipal contract, interest rate swap, orservices. or a substantial part of a trade or business.similar financial contract.
Accounts receivable or other similar rights to Computer software defined. Computer3) Any interest in land.
income for goods or services provided to cus- software includes all programs designed to4) Most computer software. (See Computertomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi- cause a computer to perform a desired function.software, later.)ness are not section 197 intangibles. It also includes any database or similar item that
is in the public domain and is incidental to the5) Any of the following assets not acquired inSupplier-based intangible.This is the value operation of qualifying software.connection with the acquisition of a traderesulting from the future acquisition of goods oror business or a substantial part of a tradeservices used or sold by the business because Rights of fixed duration or amount.Sectionor business.of business relationships with suppliers. 197 intangibles do not include any right under a
For example, you must amortize the part ofa) An interest in a film, sound recording,contract or from a governmental agency if the
the purchase price of a business that is for the right is acquired in the ordinary course of a tradevideo tape, book, or similar property.existence of the following intangibles. or business (or in an activity engaged in for theb) A right to receive tangible property orproduction of income) but not as part of a• A favorable relationship with distributors services under a contract or from apurchase of a trade or business and either:(such as favorable shelf or display space governmental agency.at a retail outlet). • Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, orc) An interest in a patent or copyright.• A favorable credit rating. • Is of a fixed amount that, except for thed) Certain rights that have a fixed duration• A favorable supply contract. rules for section 197 intangibles, would beor amount. (See Rights of fixed dura- recovered under a method similar to thetion or amount, later.) unit-of-production method of cost recov-Government-granted license, permit, etc. ery.This is any right granted by a governmental unit6) An interest under either of the following.
or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen- However, this does not apply to the following
a) An existing lease or sublease of tangi-tal unit. For example, you must amortize the intangibles.
ble property.capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing • Goodwill.or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-b) A debt that was in existence when thelion or license, or a television or radio broadcast- • Going concern value.interest was acquired.ing license. • A covenant not to compete.
7) A professional sports franchise or any itemCovenant not to compete. Section 197 in- • A franchise, trademark, or trade name.acquired in connection with the franchise.tangibles include a covenant not to compete (or
• A customer-related information base,similar arrangement) entered into in connection8) A right to service residential mortgages un-customer-based intangible, or similar item.with the acquisition of an interest in a trade orless the right is acquired in connection with
business, or a substantial portion of a trade orthe acquisition of a trade or business or a
business. An interest in a trade or businesssubstantial part of a trade or business.Anti-Churning Rulesincludes an interest in a partnership or a corpo-9) Certain transaction costs incurred by par-ration engaged in a trade or business. Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizingties to a corporate organization or reorgan-An arrangement that requires the former most section 197 intangibles if the transaction inization in which any part of a gain or loss isowner to perform services (or to provide prop- which you acquired them did not result in anot recognized.erty or the use of property) is not similar to a significant change in ownership or use. These
covenant not to compete to the extent the rules apply to goodwill and going concern value,Intangible property that is not amortizable
amount paid under the arrangement represents and to any other section 197 intangible that isunder the rules for section 197 intangibles can
reasonable compensation for those services or not otherwise depreciable or amortizable.be depreciated if it meets certain requirements.for that property or its use. You generally must use the straight line methodUnder the anti-churning rules, you cannot
over its useful life. For certain intangibles, theuse 15-year amortization for the intangible if anyFranchise, trademark, or trade name. A of the following conditions apply.depreciation period is specified in the law andfranchise, trademark, or trade name is a sectionregulations. For example, the depreciation pe-197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase 1) You or a related person (defined later)riod for computer software that is not a sectionor renewal costs, other than certain contingent held or used the intangible at any time197 intangible is 36 months.payments that you can deduct currently. For from July 25, 1991, through August 10,For more information on depreciating intan-information on currently deductible contingent 1993.gible property, see Intangible Property underpayments, see Franchise, trademark, trade
Can You Use MACRS To Depreciate Your Prop-name under Miscellaneous Expenses in 2) You acquired the intangible from a person
chapter 13. erty? in chapter 1 of Publication 946. who held it at any time during the period in
Page 36 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 37 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(1) and, as part of the transaction, the user value of the outstanding stock of the cor-• That person chose to recognize gain on
did not change. poration and more than 20% of the capital the disposition of the intangible and pay
or profits interest in the partnership. income tax on the gain at the highest tax3) You granted the right to use the intangible rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 forto a person (or a person related to that• Two S corporations, and an S corporation information on making this choice.person) who held or used it at any time and a regular corporation, if the same per-
during the period in (1). This applies only if sons own more than 20% of the value ofIf this exception applies, the anti-churningthe transaction in which you granted the the outstanding stock of each corporation.rules apply only to the amount of your adjustedright and the transaction in which you ac-• Two partnerships if the same persons basis in the intangible that is more than the gainquired the intangible are part of a series ofown, directly or indirectly, more than 20%recognized by the transferor.related transactions. See Related person, of the capital or profits interests in bothlater, for information about the kinds of Notification.If the person you acquired thepartnerships.persons that are related. intangible from chooses to recognize gain under
• A partnership and a person who owns, the rules for this exception, that person must
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of thenotify you in writing by the due date of the returnExceptions. The anti-churning rules do not
capital or profits interests in the partner-on which the choice is made.apply in the following situations.
ship.
• You acquired the intangible from a dece- Anti-abuse rule.You cannot amortize any• Two persons who are engaged in tradesdent and its basis was stepped up to its section 197 intangible acquired in a transactionor businesses under common control (asfair market value. for which the principal purpose was either of thedescribed in section 41(f)(1) of the Internalfollowing.• The intangible was amortizable as a sec- Revenue Code).
tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans- • To avoid the requirement that the intangi-feror you acquired it from. This exceptionWhen to determine relationship.Persons ble be acquired after August 10, 1993.does not apply if the transaction in whichare treated as related if the relationship existed
you acquired the intangible and the trans- • To avoid any of the anti-churning rules.at the following time.
action in which the seller or transferor ac-
• In the case of a single transaction, imme-quired it are part of a series of related More information. For more informationdiately before or immediately after thetransactions. about the anti-churning rules, including addi-transaction in which the intangible was ac-
• The gain-recognition exception, discussed tional rules for partnerships, see sectionquired.
later, applies. 1.197–2(h) of the regulations.
• In the case of a series of related transac-
tions (or a series of transactions that com-Incorrect Amount ofRelated person. For purposes of the prise a qualified stock purchase underanti-churning rules, the following are related per- Amortization Deductedsection 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenuesons. Code), immediately before the earliestIf you did not deduct the correct amortization fortransaction or immediately after the last• An individual and his or her brothers, sis- a section 197 intangible in any year, you may betransaction.ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, able to make a correction for that year by filingancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), an amended return. See Amended Return, later.Ownership of stock. In determiningand lineal descendants (children, grand- If you are not allowed to make the correction onwhether an individual directly or indirectly ownschildren, etc.). an amended return, you can change your ac-any of the outstanding stock of a corporation, thecounting method to claim the correct amortiza-• A corporation and an individual who owns,following rules apply. tion. See Changing Your Accounting Method,directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the
Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned bylater.value of the corporation’s outstanding
or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or truststock.
is considered owned proportionately by or for itsBasis adjustment. If you could have de-• Two corporations that are members of theshareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.ducted amortization but you did not take thesame controlled group as defined in sec- deduction, you must reduce the basis of theRule 2. An individual is considered to owntion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue section 197 intangible by the amortization youthe stock directly or indirectly owned by or for hisCode, except that “more than 20%” is sub- were entitled to deduct. If you deducted moreor her family. Family includes only brothers andstituted for “at least 80%” in that definition amortization than you should have, you mustsisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse,and the determination is made without re- reduce your basis by the correct amortizationancestors, and lineal descendants.gard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of plus any of the excess for which you received asection 1563. (For an exception, see sec-Rule 3. An individual owning (other than bytax benefit.tion 1.197–2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.)applying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is
considered to own the stock directly or indirectly• A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more
owned by or for his or her partner.than 20% of the value of the corporation’s Amended Return
outstanding stock is owned, directly or in-Rule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2,If you did not deduct the correct amortization,directly, by or for the trust or grantor of theor 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per-you can file an amended return to make any oftrust. son under Rule 1 as actually owned by thatthe following corrections.person. Do not treat stock constructively owned• The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci-
by an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by• Correction of a mathematical error madeary and beneficiary, of any trust.
the individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to makein any year.• The fiduciaries of two different trusts, andanother person the constructive owner of the• Correction of a posting error made in anythe fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-stock. year.ferent trusts, if the same person is the
Gain-recognition exception.This exceptiongrantor of both trusts. • Correction of the amortization deductionto the anti-churning rules applies if the personfor a section 197 intangible for which you• The executor and beneficiary of an estate.you acquired the intangible from (the transferor)have not adopted a method of accounting.• A tax-exempt educational or charitable or- meets both the following requirements.
ganization and a person who directly or You have adopted a method of accounting for• That person would not be related to youindirectly controls the organization (or a section 197 intangible if you did not deduct the(as described under Related person, ear-whose family members control it). correct amortization for the intangible on two orlier) if the 20% test for ownership of stock
more consecutively filed tax returns for reasons• A corporation and a partnership if the and partnership interests were replaced by
other than a mathematical or posting error. Yousame persons own more than 20% of the a 50% test.
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 37

Page 38 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cannot file amended returns to correct the did not make the change because the zation period of the exchanged or converted
amount of amortization. intangible. Amortize over a new 15-year periodForm 3115 was withdrawn, not perfected,
the part of your adjusted basis in the acquireddenied, or not granted.
When to file.If an amended return is allowed, intangible that is more than your adjusted basis
you must file it by the later of the following dates. in the exchanged or converted intangible.See the other exceptions listed in section 4.02
and section 2.01(2)(c) of the Appendix of Reve-• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-
Example. You own a section 197 intangiblenue Procedure 2002–9. See also the modifica-nal return for the year in which you did not
you have amortized for 4 full years. It has ations made to section 4.02 by Revenuededuct the correct amount. (A return filed
remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. YouProcedure 2002–19 in Internal Revenue Bulle-early is considered filed on the due date.)
exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kindtin No. 2002–13 and Revenue Procedure
• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro-2002–54 in Internal Revenue Bulletin No.that year. visions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor-2002–35.
tize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the
acquired intangible over the 11 years remainingChanging Your Disposition of in the original 15-year amortization period for theAccounting Method Section 197 Intangibles transferred asset. You amortize the other
$10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-yearIf you cannot correct your amortization deduc-A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia-period.tions for a section 197 intangible by filingble property used in your trade or business. Ifamended returns, you can claim the correctyou held the intangible for more than 1 year, anyamount only by changing your method of ac-
gain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow-counting for the intangible. You will then be ableable amortization, is ordinary income (sectionto take into account any unclaimed or excess Reforestation Costs1245 gain). Any remaining gain, or any loss, is aamortization from years before the year ofsection 1231 gain or loss. If you held the intangi-change. You can choose to amortize a limited amount ofble 1 year or less, any gain or loss on its disposi-
reforestation costs for qualified timber propertytion is an ordinary gain or loss. For moreApproval required. You must get IRS ap- over a period of 84 months. Reforestation costsinformation on ordinary or capital gain or loss onproval to change your method of accounting. are the direct costs of planting or seeding forbusiness property, see chapter 3 in PublicationFile Form 3115, Application for Change in Ac- forestation or reforestation.544.counting Method, to request a change to a per- The choice to amortize reforestation costsmissible method of accounting for amortization. incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es-Nondeductible loss.You cannot deduct anyRevenue Procedure 97–27, which is in Internal tate must be made by the partnership, corpora-loss on the disposition or worthlessness of aRevenue Bulletin 1997–21, gives general in- tion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, orsection 197 intangible that you acquired in thestructions for getting approval. You do not need beneficiary cannot make that choice.same transaction (or series of related transac-IRS approval to correct any mathematical ortions) as other section 197 intangibles you stillA trust cannot choose to amortize re-posting error. See Amended Return, earlier. have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of forestation costs and cannot deduct itseach remaining amortizable section 197 intangi-Automatic approval.You may be able to get share of any amortizable reforestationCAUTION
!
ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductibleautomatic approval from the IRS to change your costs of a partnership, S corporation, or estate.loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non-method of accounting for a section 197 intangi-
deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi-ble if you meet both the following conditions. Qualifying costs.Qualifying costs includeble by the following fraction. only those costs you must capitalize and include• You did not deduct amortization or you
in the adjusted basis of the property. They in-• The numerator is the adjusted basis ofdeducted the incorrect amount of amorti-
clude costs for the following items.each remaining intangible on the date ofzation for the intangible in at least the 2
the disposition.years immediately preceding the year of • Site preparation.change. • The denominator is the total adjusted ba-• Seeds or seedlings.ses of all remaining amortizable section• You owned the intangible at the beginning
• Labor.197 intangibles on the date of the disposi-of the year of change.
tion. • Tools.File Form 3115 to request a change to a
• Depreciation on equipment used in plant-permissible method of accounting for amortiza-Covenant not to compete.A covenant not to ing and seeding.tion. Revenue Procedure 2002–9 and sectioncompete, or similar arrangement, is not consid-2.01 of its Appendix, which is in Internal Reve-ered disposed of or worthless before you dis-Costs you can deduct currently are not qualify-nue Bulletin No. 2002–3, have instructions forpose of your entire interest in the trade oring costs.getting automatic approval and list exceptions tobusiness for which you entered into the cove-If the government reimburses you for refores-the automatic approval procedures. nant. tation costs under a cost-sharing program, youExceptions. You generally cannot use the can amortize these costs only if you include theNonrecognition transfers.If you acquire aautomatic approval procedure in any of the fol- reimbursement in your income.section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-lowing situations.
fer, you are treated as the transferor with respectQualified timber property.Qualified timber• You (your federal income tax return) areto the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi-property is property that contains trees in signifi-under examination. ble that is not more than the transferor’s ad-cant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlotjusted basis. You amortize this part of the• You are before a federal court or an ap- or other site that you own or lease. The propertyadjusted basis over the intangible’s remainingpeals office for any income tax issue and qualifies only if it meets all the following require-amortization period in the hands of the trans-the method of accounting to be changed is ments.feror. Nonrecognition transfers include transfersan issue under consideration by the fed-
to a corporation, partnership contributions anderal court or appeals office. • It is located in the United States.
distributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun-• You changed the same method of ac- • It is held for the growing and cutting oftary conversions.counting (with or without obtaining IRS ap- timber you will either use in, or sell for useIn a like-kind exchange or involuntary con-proval) during the last 5 years (including in, the commercial production of timberversion of a section 197 intangible, you mustthe year of change). products.continue to amortize the part of your adjusted
basis in the acquired intangible that is not more• You filed a Form 3115 to change the same • It consists of at least one acre planted with
than your adjusted basis in the exchanged ormethod of accounting during the last 5 tree seedlings in the manner normally
converted intangible over the remaining amorti-years (including the year of change), but used in forestation or reforestation.
Page 38 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 39 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified timber property does not include for costs incurred in any tax year is $1,428.57 You cannot report your amortization deduction
property on which you have planted shelter belts ($10,000 ÷ 7), or $714.29 ($5,000 ÷ 7) if marriedon Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).
or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees. filing separately. The maximum deduction in thePartner or shareholder.If you are a part-first and last tax year of the 84-month amortiza-ner in a partnership or a shareholder in an SAmortization period.The 84-month amorti- tion period is one half of the maximum annualcorporation, see the instructions for Schedulezation period starts on the first day of the firstdeduction, or $714.29 ($357.15 if married filing
K-1 (Form 1065 or Form 1120S) for informationmonth of the second half of the tax year youseparately).
on where to report any allocated amortization forincur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax-
qualifying reforestation costs. However, if youLife tenant and remainderman.If one per-payer), regardless of the month you actually
son holds the property for life with the remainderhave qualifying reforestation costs from otherincur the costs. You can claim amortization de-
going to another person, the life tenant is entitledductions for no more than 6 months of the first sources, your total deduction may be limited.
to the full amortization (up to the annual limit) forand last (eighth) tax years of the period. See Annual limit, earlier.
qualifying reforestation costs incurred by the lifeEstate. If the estate does not file Scheduletenant. Any remainder interest in the property isExample. Last year (a full 12-month tax C or F for the activity in which the qualifyingignored for amortization purposes.year), John Jones incurred qualifying reforesta-
reforestation costs were incurred, include thetion costs of $8,400. His monthly amortization
amortization deduction on line 15a of FormRecapture. If you dispose of qualified timberdeduction ($100) is figured by dividing $8,400 by
property within 10 years after the tax year you1041.84 months. Since it was the first year of the
incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report84-month period, he can deduct only $600
any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-Revoking the choice.You must get IRS ap-($100 × 6 months).
tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544proval to revoke your choice to amortize qualify-
for more information.Annual limit.Each year, you can choose to ing reforestation costs. Your application to
amortize up to $10,000 ($5,000 if you are mar- revoke the choice must include your name, ad-Investment credit.Amortizable reforestationried filing separately) of qualifying costs you pay dress, the years for which your choice was incosts qualify for the investment credit, whetheror incur during the tax year. You cannot carry effect, and your reason for revoking it. You, oror not they are amortized. See the instructionsover or carry back qualifying costs over the an- your duly authorized representative, must signfor Form 3468 for information on the investmentnual limit. The annual limit applies to qualifying the application and file it at least 90 days beforecredit.costs for all your qualified timber property. the due date (without extensions) for filing yourIf your qualifying costs are more than income tax return for the first tax year for whichHow to make the choice.To choose to amor-$10,000 for more than one piece of qualifiedtize qualifying reforestation costs, enter your de-your choice is to end.timber property, you can divide the annual limitduction in Part VI of Form 4562 and attach aamong any of the properties in any manner youstatement that contains the following informa-wish. tion. Send the application to:
Example. You incurred $10,000 of qualify-• A description of the costs and the dates
ing costs on each of four qualified timber proper-you incurred them. Commissioner of Internal Revenue
ties last year. You can allocate $2,500 to each Washington, DC 20224• A description of the type of timber beingproperty, $5,000 to two properties, or the entiregrown and the purpose for which it is$10,000 to any one property, or you can dividegrown.the $10,000 among some or all of the properties
in any other manner. Attach a separate statement for each property
Pollutionfor which you amortize reforestation costs.Partnerships and S corporations.A part-
nership or S corporation can choose to amortizeGenerally, you must make the choice on aControl Facilities
up to $10,000 of qualifying reforestation coststimely filed return (including extensions) for the
each tax year. A partner’s or shareholder’stax year in which you incurred the costs. How-You can choose to amortize over 60 months the
share of these amortizable costs is figuredever, if you timely filed your return for the yearcost of a certified pollution control facility.
under the general rules for allocating items ofwithout making the choice, you can still make
income, loss, deductions, etc., of a partnershipthe choice by filing an amended return within 6Certified pollution control facility.A certi-or S corporation. months of the due date of the return (excludingfied pollution control facility is a new identifiableThe partner or shareholder is also subject toextensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state-treatment facility used in connection with a plantthe annual limit of $10,000 ($5,000 if marriedment to the amended return and write “Filedor other property in operation before 1976, tofiling separately) on qualifying costs. This limitpursuant to section 301.9100–2” on Form 4562.reduce or control water or atmospheric pollutionapplies to all the partner’s or shareholder’s qual-File the amended return at the same addressor contamination. The facility must do so byifying costs, regardless of their source.you filed the original return. removing, changing, disposing, storing, or
preventing the creation or emission of pollu-Where to report.The following chart showsExample. You are single and a partner in
tants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facilitywhere to report your amortization deduction fortwo partnerships, both of which incurred qualify-
must be certified by state and federal certifyingqualifying reforestation costs after you enter iting reforestation costs of more than $10,000 for
authorities.on Form 4562.the year. Each partnership chose to amortize
these costs up to the $10,000 annual limit. Your The facility must not significantly increaseIf you file . . . The deduction goes on . . .share of that $10,000 is $6,000 for one partner- the output or capacity, extend the useful life, or
Schedule Cship and $8,000 for the other. Although your reduce the total operating costs of the plant or
(Form 1040) Line 27qualifying costs total $14,000, the amount you other property. Also, it must not significantly
can amortize is limited to $10,000. change the nature of the manufacturing or pro-Schedule F
duction process or facility.(Form 1040) Line 34Estates. Estates can choose to amortize up
to $10,000 of qualifying reforestation costs each The federal certifying authority will not certifyForm 1120 Line 26tax year. These amortizable costs are divided your property to the extent it appears you will
between the estate and the income beneficiaryForm 1120-A Line 22 recover (over the property’s useful life) all or part
based on the income of the estate allocable to of its cost from the profit based on its operationForm 1120S Schedules K and K-1each. The amortizable cost allocated to the ben- (such as through sales of recovered wastes).
eficiary is subject to the beneficiary’s annual The federal certifying authority will describe theForm 1065 Schedules K and K-1
limit. nature of the potential cost recovery. You mustNone of the Line 33 of Form 1040 then reduce the amortizable basis of the facilityMaximum annual amortization deduction. above (identify as “RFST”) by this potential recovery.The maximum annual amortization deduction
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 39

Page 40 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can claim a special depreciationamended return at the same address you filed
allowance on a certified pollution con-the original return. Who Cantrol facility that is qualified property
TIP
Your choice is binding for the year it is madeeven if you elect to amortize its cost. You must Claim Depletion?and for all later years unless you get IRS ap-reduce its cost (amortizable basis) by the
proval to change to a different method.amount of any special allowance you claim. Full If you have an economic interest in mineral prop-
discussion of the special depreciation allowance erty or standing timber, you can take a deduction
and what property qualifies for it is in Chapter 3 for depletion. More than one person can have anMore information. For more information onof Publication 946. economic interest in the same mineral deposit oramortizing research and development costs,
timber.see section 174 of the Internal Revenue CodeNew identifiable treatment facility.A new
You have an economic interest if both theidentifiable treatment facility is tangible depre-and the related regulations. following apply.ciable property that is identifiable as a treatment
facility. It does not include a building and its • You have acquired by investment any in-structural components unless the building is ex- terest in mineral deposits or standing tim-clusively a treatment facility. ber.
• You have a legal right to income from theBasis reduction for corporations.A corpo-
extraction of the mineral or cutting of theration must reduce the amortizable basis of a10. timber to which you must look for a returnpollution control facility by 20% before figuring
of your capital investment.the amortization deduction.
A contractual relationship that allows you anMore information. For more information on economic or monetary advantage from productsthe amortization of pollution control facilities,Depletion of the mineral deposit or standing timber is not,see section 169 of the Internal Revenue Code in itself, an economic interest. A production pay-and the related regulations. ment carved out of, or retained on the sale of,
mineral property is not an economic interest.
Important Reminder
Research and Alternative minimum tax.Individuals, corpo-
rations, estates, and trusts who claim depletionMineral PropertyExperimental Costs deductions may be liable for alternative mini-
mum tax. The term “mineral property” means each sepa-You can amortize your research and experimen-
rate interest you own in each mineral deposit intal costs, deduct them as current business ex-For more information on alternative mini-each separate tract or parcel of land. You canpenses, or write them off over a 10-year period.mum tax, see the following sources. treat two or more separate interests as oneIf you choose to amortize these costs, deduct
property or as separate properties. See sectionthem in equal amounts over 60 months or more.If you are: See: 614 of the Internal Revenue Code and the re-The amortization period begins the month youAn individual The instructions for Form lated regulations for rules on how to treat sepa-first receive an economic benefit from the ex- 6251, Alternative Minimum rate mineral interests.penditures. For a definition of “research and Tax—Individuals. Mineral property includes oil and gas wells,experimental costs” and information on deduct-
mines, and other natural deposits (including ge-ing them as current business expenses, seeA corporation Form 4626, Alternative
othermal deposits).chapter 8. Minimum Tax—
Corporations. There are two ways of figuring depletion on
Optional write-off method. Rather than mineral property.An estate or trust Form 1041, U.S. Incomeamortize these costs or deduct them as a cur- Tax Return for Estates • Cost depletion.rent expense, you have the option of deducting and Trusts, and its(writing off) research and experimental costs • Percentage depletion.instructions.ratably over a 10-year period beginning with the
Generally, you must use the method that givestax year in which you incurred the costs.
you the larger deduction. However, unless youFor more information on the optional write-off are an independent producer or royalty owner,method, see Internal Revenue Code section you generally cannot use percentage depletion59(e). for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells,Introduction later.Costs you can amortize. You can amortize
Depletion is the using up of natural resources bycosts chargeable to a capital account if you meet
mining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple-both the following requirements. Cost Depletion
tion deduction allows an owner or operator to• You paid or incurred the costs in your To figure cost depletion you must first determineaccount for the reduction of a product’strade or business. the following.reserves.
• You are not deducting the costs currently. • The property’s basis for depletion.There are two ways of figuring depletion:
cost depletion and percentage depletion. For• The total recoverable units of mineral inHow to make the choice.To choose to amor-mineral property, you generally must use thethe property’s natural deposit.tize research and experimental costs, enter yourmethod that gives you the larger deduction; for• The number of units of mineral sold duringdeduction in Part VI of Form 4562 and attach itstanding timber, you must use cost depletion.the tax year.to your income tax return. Generally, you must
file the return by the due date (including exten-Topicssions). However, if you timely filed your return Basis for depletion.To figure the property’sfor the year without making the choice, you can This chapter discusses: basis for depletion, subtract all the followingstill make the choice by filing an amended return from the property’s adjusted basis.• Who can claim depletion?within 6 months of the due date of the return
(excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the 1) Amounts recoverable through:• Mineral propertyamended return and write “Filed pursuant to
• Timbersection 301.9100–2” on Form 4562. File the a) Depreciation deductions,
Page 40 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 41 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b) Deferred expenses (including deferred connection with mineral property, reducePercentage Depletion
any allowable deduction for mining ex-exploration and development costs),
penses by the part of any gain you mustTo figure percentage depletion, you multiply aand
report as ordinary income that is allocablecertain percentage, specified for each mineral,c) Deductions other than depletion. to the mineral property. See sectionby your gross income from the property during
1.613–5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor-the tax year.2) The residual value of land and improve- mation on how to figure the ordinary gainThe rates to be used and other conditionsments at the end of operations. and qualifications for oil and gas wells are dis- allocable to the property.
cussed later under Independent Producers and3) The cost or value of land acquired for pur-
Royalty Owners and under Natural Gas Wells.poses other than mineral production. For tax years beginning after 1997 andRates and other rules for percentage depletion before 2004, percentage depletion onof other specific minerals are found later inAdjusted basis.The adjusted basis of your the marginal production of oil or natural
TIP
Mines and Geothermal Deposits.property is your original cost or other basis, plus gas is not limited to taxable income from thecertain additions and improvements, and minus property figured without the depletion deduction.Gross income. When figuring your percent-certain deductions such as depletion allowed orage depletion, subtract from your gross incomeallowable and casualty losses. Your adjustedfrom the property the following amounts. Oil and Gas Wellsbasis can never be less than zero. See Publica-
• Any rents or royalties you paid or incurredtion 551, Basis of Assets, for more information You cannot claim percentage depletion for an oilfor the property.on adjusted basis. or gas well unless at least one of the following
• The part of any bonus you paid for a leaseapplies.Total recoverable units.The total recover- on the property allocable to the product
• You are either an independent producer orable units is the sum of the following. sold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross
a royalty owner.income) for the tax year.• The number of units of mineral remaining
• The well produces natural gas that is ei-A bonus payment includes amounts you paid asat the end of the year (including units re-
ther sold under a fixed contract or pro-a lessee to satisfy a production payment re-covered but not sold).
duced from geopressured brine.tained by the lessor.• The number of units of mineral sold during
Use the following fraction to figure the part ofthe tax year (determined under your If you are an independent producer or royaltythe bonus you must subtract.method of accounting, as explained next). owner, see Independent Producers and Royalty
Owners, next.No. of units sold in the tax yearYou must estimate or determine recoverable Bonus For information on the depletion deductionRecoverable units from the ×units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands Payments for wells that produce natural gas that is eitherpropertyof cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod- sold under a fixed contract or produced from
For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos-ucts using the current industry method and the geopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells,
its, gross income from the property is definedmost accurate and reliable information you can later.later under Oil and Gas Wells. For property otherobtain.
than a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well,
gross income from the property is defined laterNumber of units sold. You determine the Independent Producers and
under Mines and Geothermal Deposits.number of units sold during the tax year based Royalty Owners
on your method of accounting. Use the followingTaxable income limit.The percentage deple-If you are an independent producer or royaltytable to make this determination. tion deduction cannot be more than 50% (100% owner, you figure percentage depletion using afor oil and gas property) of your taxable incomerate of 15% of the gross income from the prop-IF you use THEN the units sold from the property figured without the depletionerty based on your average daily production of... during the year are ... deduction. domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up toTaxable income from the property meansThe cash The units sold for which your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-gross income from the property minus all allowa-method of you receive payment ever, certain refiners, as explained next, andaccounting during the tax year ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de- certain retailers and transferees of proven oil(regardless of the year ofpletion) attributable to mining processes,and gas properties, as explained later, cannotsale). including mining transportation. These deducti-claim percentage depletion. For information onble items include the following.An accrual The units sold based on figuring the deduction, see Figuring percentage
method of your inventories. • Operating expenses. depletion, later.
accounting • Certain selling expenses. Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-
• Administrative and financial overhead.pletion.You cannot claim percentage deple-The number of units sold during the tax year
tion if you or a related person refine crude oil anddoes not include any for which depletion deduc-• Depreciation. you and the related person refined more thantions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.
• Intangible drilling and development costs.50,000 barrels on any day during the tax year.
Figuring the cost depletion deduction. • Exploration and development expendi- Related person. You and another person
Once you have figured your property’s basis fortures. are related persons if either of you holds a signif-
depletion, the total recoverable units, and the icant ownership interest in the other person or if
number of units sold during the tax year, you canThe following rules apply when figuring youra third person holds a significant ownership in-
figure your cost depletion deduction by takingtaxable income from the property for purposesterest in both of you.
the following steps. of the taxable income limit. For example, a corporation, partnership, es-
tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significant• Do not deduct any net operating loss de-Step Action Result ownership interest in it are related persons. Aduction from the gross income from the
partnership and a trust are related persons if one 1 Divide your property’s Rate per property.
person holds a significant ownership interest inbasis for depletion by unit. • Corporations do not deduct charitable con-each of them.total recoverable units. tributions from the gross income from theFor purposes of the related person rules, 2 Multiply the rate per Cost property. significant ownership interest means direct orunit by units sold depletion indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one of• If, during the year, you dispose of an itemduring the tax year. deduction. the following.of section 1245 property that was used in
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 41

Page 42 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas Paul determined his percentage participation• The value of the outstanding stock of a from your customers or persons related to to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income hecorporation. your customers. received) by $200,000 (the gross revenue from
• The interest in the profits or capital of a the property). Paul determined his share of the• There are no arrangements for the retailerpartnership. oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar-to acquire oil or natural gas you producedrels × 11%).• The beneficial interests in an estate or for resale or made available for purchase
trust. by the retailer. Depletable oil or natural gas quantity.Gen-
• Neither you nor the retailer knows of orerally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar-Any interest owned by or for a corporation,controls the final disposition of the oil orrels. Your depletable natural gas quantity ispartnership, trust, or estate is considered to benatural gas you sold or the original source6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number ofowned directly both by itself and proportionatelyof the petroleum products the retailer ac-barrels of your depletable oil quantity that youby its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.quired for resale. choose to apply. If you claim depletion on both
Retailers who cannot claim percentage de- oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de-
pletion.You cannot claim percentage deple- pletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num-Transferees who cannot claim percentagetion if both the following apply. ber of barrels you use to figure your depletabledepletion. You cannot claim percentage de-
natural gas quantity. If you have production frompletion if you received your interest in a proven1) You sell oil or natural gas or their by-prod- marginal wells, see section 613A(c)(6) of theoil or gas property by transfer after 1974 anducts directly or through a related person in Internal Revenue Code to figure your depletablebefore October 12, 1990. For a definition of theany of the following situations. oil or natural gas quantity.term “transfer,” see section 1.613A–7(n) of the
regulations. For a definition of the term “interesta) Through a retail outlet operated by you Example. You have both oil and natural gasin proven oil or gas property,” see sectionor a related person. production. To figure your depletable natural1.613A–7(p) of the regulations.b) To any person who is required under gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels of
an agreement with you or a related per- your 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. YourFiguring percentage depletion.Generally,son to use a trademark, trade name, or depletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 millionas an independent producer or royalty owner,service mark or name owned by you or cubic feet of gas (360 × 6000). You must reduceyou figure your percentage depletion by comput-a related person in marketing or distrib- your depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000ing your average daily production of domestic oiluting oil, natural gas, or their by-prod- − 360).or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil oructs. gas quantity. If your average daily productionBusiness entities and family members.
does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan-c) To any person given authority under an You must allocate the depletable oil or gas
tity, you figure your percentage depletion byagreement with you or a related person quantity among the following related persons in
multiplying the gross income from the oil or gasto occupy any retail outlet owned, proportion to each entity’s or family member’s
property (defined later) by 15%. If your averageleased, or controlled by you or a related production of domestic oil or gas for the year.
daily production of domestic oil or gas exceedsperson. • Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% oryour depletable oil or gas quantity, you must
more of the beneficial interest is owned bymake an allocation as explained later under Av-2) The combined gross receipts from sales the same or related persons (consideringerage daily production exceeds depletable(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, or only persons that own at least 5% of thequantities.their by-products by all retail outlets taken beneficial interest).In addition, there is a limit on the percentageinto account in (1) are more than $5 million
depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit,for the tax year. • You and your spouse and minor children.
later.For the purpose of determining if this rule For purposes of this allocation, a related person
applies, do not count the following. is anyone mentioned under Related persons inAverage daily production.Figure your aver-
chapter 12 except that item (1) in that discussionage daily production by dividing your total do-• Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities) includes only an individual, his or her spouse,mestic production for the tax year by the numberof oil or natural gas to commercial or in- and minor children.of days in your tax year.dustrial users.
Controlled group of corporations.Mem-Partial interest.If you have a partial inter-• Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart- bers of the same controlled group of corpora-est in the production from a property, figure yourment of Defense. tions are treated as one taxpayer when figuringshare of the production by multiplying total pro-• Sales of oil or natural gas or their by-prod- the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Theyduction from the property by your percentage ofucts outside the United States if none of share the depletable quantity. Under this rule, ainterest in the revenues from the property.your domestic production or that of a re- controlled group of corporations is defined inYou have a partial interest in the productionlated person is exported during the tax section 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,from a property if you have a net profits interestyear or the prior tax year. except that the stock ownership requirement inin the property. To figure the share of production
that definition is “more than 50%” rather than “atfor your net profits interest, you must first deter-Related person. To determine if you and least 80%.”mine your percentage participation (as mea-another person are related persons, see Re- sured by the net profits) in the gross revenuelated person under Refiners who cannot claim Gross income from the property.For pur-from the property. To figure this percentage, youpercentage depletion, earlier. poses of percentage depletion, gross incomedivide the income you receive for your net profits
from the property (in the case of oil and gasSales through a related person.You are interest by the gross revenue from the property.
wells) is the amount you receive from the sale ofconsidered to be selling through a related per-Then multiply the total production from the prop-
the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well.son if any sale by the related person produceserty by your percentage participation to figure
If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property,gross income from which you may benefit be-your share of the production.
but manufacture or convert it into a refined prod-cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter-
uct before sale or transport it before sale, theExample. John Oak owns oil property inest in the person.
gross income from the property is the represen-which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest.You are not considered to be selling through
tative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil orDuring the year, the property produced 10,000a related person who is a retailer if all the follow-
gas, before conversion or transportation.barrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000.ing apply.
John had expenses of $90,000 attributable to If you sold gas after you removed it from the• You do not have a significant ownershipthe property. The property generated a net profit premises for a price that is lower than the RMFP,interest in the retailer. of $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re- determine gross income from the property for
ceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 × .20) for percentage depletion purposes without regard• You sell your production to persons who
his net profits interest. to the RMFP.are not related to either you or the retailer.
Page 42 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 43 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gross income from the property does not partnership or S corporation makes the alloca-• Retailers who cannot claim percentage
include lease bonuses, advance royalties, ortion as of the date it acquires the oil or gasdepletion (discussed under Independent
other amounts payable without regard to pro-property. Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier).
duction from the property. Each partner’s share of the adjusted basis of• Any partner whose average daily produc-the oil or gas property generally is figured ac-Average daily production exceeds deplet- tion of domestic crude oil and natural gascording to that partner’s interest in partnershipable quantities.If your average daily produc- is more than 500 barrels during the taxcapital. However, in some cases, it is figuredtion for the year is more than your depletable oil year in which the partnership tax yearaccording to the partner’s interest in partnershipor natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for ends. Average daily production is dis-income.depletion for each domestic oil or natural gas cussed earlier.The partnership or S corporation adjusts theproperty as follows.
partner’s or shareholder’s share of the adjusted
1) Figure your average daily production of oilbasis of the oil and gas property for any capitalNatural Gas Wells
or natural gas for the year. expenditures made for the property and for any
You can use percentage depletion for a well thatchange in partnership or S corporation interests.2) Figure your depletable oil or natural gas produces natural gas either sold under a fixedquantity for the year. Each partner or shareholder must sep-contract or produced from geopressured brine.arately keep records of his or her share3) Figure depletion for all oil or natural gas of the adjusted basis in each oil andRECORDS
produced from the property using a per- Natural gas sold under a fixed contract.gas property of the partnership or S corporation.centage depletion rate of 15%. Natural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifiesThe partner or shareholder must reduce his or
4) Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac- for a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This isher adjusted basis by the depletion allowed or
tion, the numerator of which is the result domestic natural gas sold by the producer underallowable on the property each year. The part-
figured in (2) and the denominator of which a contract that does not provide for a price in-ner or shareholder must use that reduced ad-
is the result figured in (1). This is your crease to reflect any increase in the seller’s taxjusted basis to figure cost depletion or his or her
depletion allowance for that property forgain or loss if the partnership or S corporationliability because of the repeal of percentage de-
the year. disposes of the property. pletion for gas. The contract must have been in
effect from February 1, 1975, until the date of
Taxable income limit.If you are an indepen- sale of the gas. Price increases after February 1,Reporting the deduction. Information thatdent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas, 1975, are presumed to take the increase in taxyou, as a partner or shareholder, use to figureyour deduction for percentage depletion is lim- liability into account unless demonstrated other-your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper-ited to the smaller of the following. wise by clear and convincing evidence.ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora-
tion on line 25 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or• Your taxable income from the property fig-
on line 23 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). De-ured without the deduction for depletion. Natural gas from geopressured brine.Qual-duct oil and gas depletion for your partnership orFor a definition of taxable income from the ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli-S corporation interest on line 20 of Schedule Eproperty, see Taxable income limit, earlier, gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%.(Form 1040). The depletion deducted on Sched-under Mineral Property. This is natural gas that is both the following.ule E is included in figuring income or loss from• 65% of your taxable income from all rental real estate or royalty properties. The in-• Produced from a well you began to drillsources, figured without the depletion al-structions for Schedule E explain where to re-after September 1978 and before 1984.lowance, any net operating loss carryback,port this income or loss and whether you need toand any capital loss carryback. • Determined in accordance with sectionfile either of the following forms.
503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978You can carry over to the following year any• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. to be produced from geopressured brine.amount you cannot deduct because of the
65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de-• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-
pletion allowance (before applying any limits) fortions. Mines andthe following year.
Geothermal DepositsTemporary suspension of taxable income Electing large partnerships must figure de-
limit for marginal production.For tax years pletion allowance.An electing large partner-Certain mines, wells, and other natural deposits,beginning after 1997 and before 2004, percent-ship, rather than each partner, generally mustincluding geothermal deposits, qualify for per-age depletion on the marginal production of oilfigure the depletion allowance. The partnershipcentage depletion.or natural gas is not limited to taxable incomefigures the depletion allowance without taking
from the property figured without the depletioninto account the 65 percent-of-taxable-income
deduction. For information on marginal produc- Mines and other natural deposits.For a nat-limit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan-
tion, see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Rev-tity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner’s inter- ural deposit, the percentage of your gross in-
enue Code. est in the partnership is not affected by thecome from the property that you can deduct as
depletion allowance. depletion depends on the type of deposit.
An electing large partnership is one thatThe following is a list of the percentage de-Partnerships and S Corporations meets both the following requirements. pletion rates for the more common minerals. 
Generally, each partner or shareholder, and not• The partnership had 100 or more partners DEPOSITS RATEthe partnership or S corporation, figures the de-in the preceding year.
pletion allowance separately. (However, see Sulphur, uranium, and, if from• The partnership chooses to be an electingElecting large partnerships must figure deple- deposits in the United States,large partnership.tion allowance, later.) Each partner or share- asbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickelholder must decide whether to use cost or ore, and mica............. 2 2 %Disqualified persons.An electing largepercentage depletion. If a partner or shareholder
partnership does not figure the depletion allow-Gold, silver, copper, iron ore, anduses percentage depletion, he or she must ap-
ance of its partners that are disqualified per-certain oil shale, if from deposits inply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his or
sons. Disqualified persons must figure itthe United States........... 1 5 %her taxable income from all sources.
themselves, as explained earlier. Borax, granite, limestone, marble,Partner’s or shareholder’s adjusted basis. All the following are disqualified persons.mollusk shells, potash, slate,The partnership or S corporation must allocate soapstone, and carbon dioxide• Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-to each partner or shareholder his or her share produced from a well........ 1 4 %pletion (discussed under Independent Pro-of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas property
Coal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10%ducers and Royalty Owners, earlier).held by the partnership or S corporation. The
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 43

Page 44 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
portation is considered mining and included in which is the bonus and the denominator of whichClay and shale used or sold for the computation of gross income from mining. is the total bonus and royalties expected to beuse in making sewer pipe or bricks received. To figure cost depletion on advancedor used or sold for use as sintered If you wish to include transportation ofroyalties, use the computation explained earlieror burned lightweight aggregates 71/2% more than 50 miles in the computationunder Cost Depletion, treating the number ofof gross income from mining, file anClay used or sold for use in units for which the advanced royalty is receivedapplication in duplicate with the IRS. Include onmaking drainage and roofing tile, as the number of units sold.the application the facts concerning the physicalflower pots, and kindred products,
and other requirements which prevented the Figuring percentage depletion. In theand gravel, sand, and stone (other
than stone used or sold for use by construction and operation of the plant within 50 case of mines, wells, and other natural deposits
a mine owner or operator as miles of the point of extraction. Send this appli- other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you
dimension or ornamental stone) 5% cation to: may use the percentage rates discussed earlier.
Any bonus or advanced royalty payments are
You can find a complete list of minerals andInternal Revenue Service generally part of the gross income from the prop-
their percentage depletion rates in section Washington, DC 20224 erty to which the rates are applied in making the
613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. Attention: Associate Chief Counsel, Pass- calculation. However, in the case of indepen-
throughs and Special Industries dent producers and royalty owners of oil and gasCorporate deduction for iron ore and coal.
property, bonuses and advance royalty pay-The percentage depletion deduction of a corpo-Disposal of coal or iron ore.You cannot take ments are not a part of gross income.ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) isa depletion deduction for coal (including lignite)Terminating the lease.If you receive a bo-reduced by 20% of: or iron ore mined in the United States if both thenus on a lease that expires, terminates, or isfollowing apply.• The percentage depletion deduction for abandoned before you derive any income from
• You disposed of it after holding it for morethe tax year (figured without regard to this the extraction of mineral, include in income for
than 1 year. the year of expiration, termination, or abandon-reduction), minus
ment, the depletion deduction you took. Also• You disposed of it under a contract under• The adjusted basis of the property at the increase your adjusted basis in the property towhich you retain an economic interest inclose of the tax year (figured without the restore the depletion deduction you previouslythe coal or iron ore.depletion deduction for the tax year). subtracted.
Treat any gain on the disposition as a capitalFor advanced royalties, include in income for
gain. the year of lease termination, the depletionGross income from the property.For prop-
claimed on minerals for which the advancederty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil orDisposal to related person.This rule doesroyalties were paid if the minerals were not pro-gas well, gross income from the property meansnot apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore toduced before termination. Increase your ad-one of the following persons.the gross income from mining. Mining includes justed basis in the property by the amount youall the following. • A related person (as listed in chapter 12).include in income.
• Extracting ores or minerals from the • A person owned or controlled by the sameDelay rentals.These are payments for defer-interests that own or control you.ground. ring development of the property. Since delay
• Applying certain treatment processes. rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in-
Geothermal deposits. Geothermal deposits come that is not subject to depletion. These• Transporting ores or minerals (generally,located in the United States or its possessionsrentals can be avoided by either abandoning thenot more than 50 miles) from the point ofqualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. Alease, beginning development operations, orextraction to the plants or mills in whichgeothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir ofobtaining production.
the treatment processes are applied. natural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquid
or vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, a
Excise tax. Gross income from mining in-geothermal deposit is not considered a gas well.
cludes the separately stated excise tax receivedFigure gross income from the property for aTimber
by a mine operator from the sale of coal togeothermal steam well in the same way as for oil
and gas wells. See Gross income from the prop-compensate the operator for the excise tax the You can figure timber depletion only by the cost
erty, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells. Percent-mine operator must pay to finance black lung method. Percentage depletion does not apply to
age depletion on a geothermal deposit cannotbenefits. timber. Base your depletion on your cost or other
be more than 50% of your taxable income frombasis in the timber. Your cost does not includeExtraction. Extracting ores or mineralsthe property. the cost of land or any amounts recoverablefrom the ground includes extraction by mine through depreciation.owners or operators of ores or minerals from theLessor’s Gross Income Depletion takes place when you cut standing
waste or residue of prior mining. This does not timber. You can figure your depletion deduction
apply to extraction from waste or residue of priorA lessor’s gross income from the property thatwhen the quantity of cut timber is first accurately
qualifies for percentage depletion usually is themining by the purchaser of the waste or residue measured in the process of exploitation.
total of the royalties received from the lease.or the purchaser of the rights to extract ores or
However, for oil, gas, or geothermal property,Figuring cost depletion.To figure your costminerals from the waste or residue.
gross income does not include lease bonuses,depletion allowance, you multiply the number ofTreatment processes. The processes in- advanced royalties, or other amounts payabletimber units cut by your depletion unit.
cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineralwithout regard to production from the property.Timber units. When you acquire timbermined. To qualify as mining, the treatment
property, you must make an estimate of theBonuses and advanced royalties.Bonusesprocesses must be applied by the mine owner or quantity of marketable timber that exists on theand advanced royalties are payments a lesseeoperator. For a listing of treatment processes property. You measure the timber using boardmakes before production to a lessor for the grantconsidered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) of feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you laterof rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil tothe Internal Revenue Code and the related regu- determine that you have more or less units ofbe extracted from leased property. If you are thelations. timber, you must adjust the original estimate.lessor, your income from bonuses and ad-
vanced royalties received is subject to an allow- The term “timber property” means your eco-Transportation of more than 50 miles.If
ance for depletion. nomic interest in standing timber in each tract orthe IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be
block representing a separate timber account.transported more than 50 miles to plants or millsFiguring cost depletion.To figure cost de-
to be treated because of physical and otherpletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted basisDepletion unit.You figure your depletion
requirements, the additional authorized trans- in the property by a fraction, the numerator of unit each year by taking the following steps.
Page 44 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 45 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A debt is closely related to your trade or busi-
1) Determine your cost or adjusted basis of ness if your primary motive for incurring the debt
the timber on hand at the beginning of the is business related.
year. Adjusted basis is defined under Cost 11. The bad debts of a corporation are always
Depletion in the discussion on Mineral business bad debts.
Property.
Credit sales.Business bad debts are mainly2) Add to the amount determined in (1) the the result of credit sales to customers. Goodscost of any timber units acquired duringBusiness and services customers have not paid for arethe year and any additions to capital. recorded in your books as either accounts re-
3) Figure the number of timber units to take ceivable or notes receivable. If you are unable toBad Debts
into account by adding the number of tim- collect any part of these receivables, the uncol-
ber units acquired during the year to the lectible part is a business bad debt.
number of timber units on hand in the ac-  Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair
count at the beginning of the year and thenIntroduction market value when received are deductible only
adding (or subtracting) any correction to at that value, even though the fair market valueIf someone owes you money you cannot collect,the estimate of the number of timber units may be less than face value. If you bought anyou have a bad debt. There are two kinds of badremaining in the account. account receivable for less than its face value,debts—business and nonbusiness. This chap-the amount you can deduct if it becomes worth-4) Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).ter covers business bad debts. less is the amount you paid for it.This is your depletion unit. Generally, a business bad debt is one that You can take a bad debt deductioncomes from operating your trade or business. only if the amount owed you was previ-Example. You bought a timber tract forYou can deduct business bad debts on your ously included in gross income. ThisCAUTION
!
$160,000 and the land was worth as much asbusiness tax return. applies to amounts owed you from all sources ofthe timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000.All other bad debts are nonbusiness badtaxable income, including sales, services, rents,Based on an estimated one million board feetdebts and are deductible only as short-term cap-and interest.(1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure yourital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For moredepletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷ Accrual method. If you use an accrualinformation on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub-1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple- method of accounting, you generally report in-lication 550.tion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF × come as you earn it. You can only take a bad$80). debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable ifTopics
you have previously included the uncollectibleWhen to claim depletion.Claim your deple-This chapter discusses: amount in income.tion allowance as a deduction in the year of sale If you qualify, you can use theor other disposition of the products cut from the• Definition of business bad debt nonaccrual-experience method of accountingtimber, unless you choose to treat the cutting of• When a debt becomes worthless discussed later. Under this method, you do nottimber as a sale or exchange. Include allowable have to accrue income that, based on your ex-depletion for timber products not sold during the• How to treat business bad debts perience, you do not expect to collect.tax year the timber is cut as a cost item in the• Recovery of a business bad debtclosing inventory of timber products for the year. Cash method. If you use the cash method
The inventory is your basis for determining gain• Where to deduct business bad debts of accounting, you generally report income
or loss in the tax year you sell the timber prod- when you receive payment. You cannot take a
ucts. bad debt deduction for amounts owed to youUseful Items because you never included those amounts in
Example. Assume the same facts as in theYou may want to see: income. For example, a cash basis architect
previous example except that you sold only half cannot take a bad debt deduction if a client does
of the timber products in the cutting year. YouPublication not pay the bill because the architect’s fee was
would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletion not previously included in income.❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomethat year. You would add the remaining $20,000
depletion to your closing inventory of timber Debts from a former business. If you sell❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) forproducts. your business but keep its receivables, theseIndividuals, Estates, and Trusts
debts are business debts since they arose out ofChoosing to treat the cutting of timber as a❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of your trade or business. If one of these debtssale or exchange. You can choose, under Assets later becomes worthless, the loss is still a busi-
certain circumstances, to treat the cutting of ness bad debt. These debts would also be busi-❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensestimber held for more than 1 year as a sale or ness debts if sold to the new owner of the
exchange. You must make the choice on your ❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal business.
income tax return for the tax year to which it Rights, and Claims for Refund If you sell your business to one person andapplies. If you make this choice, subtract the sell your receivables to someone else, the activi-adjusted basis for depletion from the fair marketSee chapter 14 for information about gettingties of the new holder of the debts determinevalue of the timber on the first day of the tax yearpublications and forms. whether they are business or nonbusiness debtsin which you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the for that person. A loss from the debts is a busi-cutting. You generally report the gain as ness bad debt to the new holder if that personlong-term capital gain. The fair market value acquired the debts in his or her trade or businessthen becomes your basis for figuring your ordi- or if the debts were closely related to the newBusiness Bad Debtnary gain or loss on the sale or other disposition holder’s trade or business when they becameof the products cut from the timber. For more worthless. Otherwise, a loss from these debts isDefinedinformation, see Timber in chapter 2 of Publica- a nonbusiness bad debt.tion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of As-A business bad debt is a loss from the worth-Debt acquired from a decedent.The char-sets. lessness of a debt that was either: acter of a loss from debts of a business acquired
Form T. Attach Form T (Timber), Forest Activi- from a decedent is determined in the same way• Created or acquired in your trade or busi-ties Schedule, to your income tax return if you as debts sold by a business. If you are in a tradeness, orare claiming a deduction for timber depletion or or business, a loss from the debts is a business
• Closely related to your trade or businesschoosing to treat the cutting of timber as a sale bad debt if the debts were closely related to your
or exchange. when it became partly or totally worthless. trade or business when they became worthless.
Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts Page 45

Page 46 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Otherwise, a loss from these debts is a nonbusi-Business loan guarantee.If you guarantee a It is not necessary to go to court if you can
debt that becomes worthless, the debt can qual-ness bad debt. show that a judgment from the court would be
ify as a business bad debt if all the followinguncollectible. You must only show that you have
Example 1.  In 2002, Arnie died leaving hisrequirements are met. taken reasonable steps to collect the debt.
business, including the accounts receivable, to Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-• You made the guarantee in the course ofhis son Carl. Certain receivables become worth- dence of the worthlessness of at least a part ofyour trade or business.less in 2003. Carl can deduct the loss as a an unsecured and unpreferred debt.
• You have a legal duty to pay the debt.business bad debt because the debt was closely
Property received for debt.If you receiverelated to his business when it became worth-• You made the guarantee before the debtproperty in partial settlement of a debt, reduceless. became worthless. You meet this require-the debt by the fair market value of the propertyment if you reasonably expected youExample 2.  In 2002, Charlie died leaving received. You can deduct the remaining debt aswould not have to pay the debt without fullhis business to his son George, but leaving the a bad debt if and when it becomes worthless.reimbursement from the issuer.receivables to his daughter Diane. The receiv- If you later sell the property, any gain on the
• You receive reasonable consideration forables become worthless in 2003. Diane is not sale is due to the appreciation of the property. It
making the guarantee. You meet this re-engaged in any trade or business during 2002 or is not a recovery of a bad debt. For information
quirement if you made the guarantee in2003. Therefore, Diane’s loss is a nonbusiness on the sale of an asset, see Publication 544.
accord with normal business practice orbad debt even though the original debt was
for a good faith business purpose.incurred in a business. Example. Patti owed Margaret $5,000. In
partial satisfaction of the debt, Patti gave Mar-Liquidation.If you liquidate your business garet property worth $2,000. Margaret deductedExample. Jane Zayne owns the Zayneand some of your accounts receivable become the remaining $3,000 as a bad debt but did notDress Company. She guaranteed payment of aworthless, they are business bad debts. get a tax benefit from the deduction as she had$20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-
no taxable income. Margaret later sold the prop-let. Elegant Fashions is one of Zayne’s largestTypes of Business Bad erty for a $1,000 gain. Even though Margaret didclients. Elegant Fashions later filed for bank-Debts not get a tax benefit from the earlier bad debtruptcy and defaulted on the loan. Ms. Zayne
deduction, she must include the $1,000 gain inmade full payment to the bank. She can take aThe following are situations that may result in a her income. It is not a recovery of her bad debt.business bad debt deduction, since her guaran-business bad debt. tee was made in the course of her trade or
business for a good faith business purpose. SheLoans to clients and suppliers.If you make was motivated by the desire to retain one of hera loan to a client, supplier, employee, or distribu-better clients and keep a sales outlet. How To Treattor for a business reason and it becomes worth-
less, you have a business bad debt. Employee. Any guarantee you make to pro-There are two ways to treat business bad debts.tect or improve your job is closely related to your
Example. John Smith, an advertising agent,trade or business as an employee. • The specific charge-off method.
made loans to certain clients to keep their busi-Deductible in the year paid.If you make a • The nonaccrual-experience method.ness. One of these clients went bankrupt andpayment on a loan you guaranteed, you cancould not repay him. Since the main reason for Generally, you must use the specific charge-offdeduct it in the year paid, unless you have rightsmaking the loan was business related, the debt method. However, you can use theagainst the borrower.was a business debt and John can take a busi- nonaccrual-experience method if you meet the
ness bad debt deduction. Rights against a borrower. When you requirements discussed later under
make payment on a loan you guaranteed, youNonaccrual-Experience Method.
Debts of political parties.If a political partymay have the right to take the place of the
(or other organization that accepts contributionslender. The debt is then owed to you. If you haveSpecific Charge-Off Methodor spends money to influence elections) owesthis right, or some other right to demand pay-
you money and the debt becomes worthless,ment from the borrower, you cannot take a badIf you use the specific charge-off method, youyou can take a bad debt deduction only if youdebt deduction until these rights become partlycan deduct specific business bad debts that
use an accrual method of accounting and meet or totally worthless. become either partly or totally worthless during
all the following tests. the tax year.Joint debtor. If two or more debtors jointly
owe you money, your inability to collect from one1) The debt arose from the sale of goods or Partly worthless debts.You can deduct spe-does not enable you to deduct a proportionateservices in the ordinary course of your cific bad debts that become partly uncollectible.amount as a bad debt.trade or business. Your tax deduction is limited to the amount you
charge off on your books during the year. You do2) More than 30% of your receivables ac-Bankruptcy claim. If a person who owes you
not have to charge off and deduct your partlycrued in the year of the sale were frommoney becomes bankrupt, the amount you can
worthless debts annually. You can delay thesales to political parties. deduct as a bad debt is the amount owed to you
charge off until a later year. You cannot, how-minus the amount you receive from distribution3) You made substantial continuing efforts to ever, deduct any part of a debt after the year itof the bankrupt person’s assets.collect on the debt. becomes totally worthless.
Sale of mortgaged property.If mortgaged or Significantly modified debt. An exceptionpledged property is sold for less than the debt,Loan or capital contribution.You cannot to the charge-off rule exists for debt which hasthe unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is atake a bad debt deduction for a loan you made to been significantly modified and on which thebad debt.a corporation if, based on the facts and circum- holder recognized gain. For more information,stances, the loan is actually a contribution to see section 1.166-(3)(a)(3) of the regulations.capital.
Deduction disallowed.You can generally
Debts of an insolvent partner.If your busi- take a partial bad debt deduction only in the yearWhen Debt Is
ness partnership breaks up and one of your you make the charge-off on your books. If, under
former partners is insolvent and cannot pay any audit, the IRS does not allow your deduction andWorthless
of the partnership’s debts, you may have to pay the debt becomes partly worthless in a later tax
more than your share. If you pay any part of the year, you can deduct the amount you charge offYou do not have to wait until a debt is due to
insolvent partner’s share of the debts, you can in that year plus the disallowed amountdetermine whether it is worthless. A debt be-
take a bad debt deduction for the amount you charged-off in the earlier year. The charge off incomes worthless when there is no longer any
pay. the earlier year, unless reversed on your books,chance the amount owed will be paid.
Page 46 Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts

Page 47 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
fulfills the charge-off requirement for the later consulting, engineering, health, law, or the “Other income” on the appropriate business
year. performing arts, or form or schedule.
See  Recoveries in Publication 525 for more• You meet the $5 million gross receipts testTotally worthless debts.If a debt becomes information.for all prior years.totally worthless, you can deduct the entire
amount, except any amount deducted in an ear- Net operating loss (NOL) carryover.If a
lier tax year when the debt was only partly worth-Service related income.You can use the bad debt deduction increases an NOL carryover
less. nonaccrual-experience method only for that has not expired before the beginning of the
You do not have to make an actual amounts earned by performing services. Youtax year in which the recovery takes place, you
charge-off on your books to claim a bad debtcannot use this method for amounts owed to youtreat the deduction as having reduced your tax.
deduction for a totally worthless debt. However,from activities such as lending money, sellingA bad debt deduction that contributes to a net
you may want to do so. If you do not and the IRSgoods, or acquiring receivables or other rights tooperating loss helps lower taxes in the year tolater rules the debt is only partly worthless, youreceive payment. which you carry the net operating loss.will not be allowed a deduction for the debt in
More information.See Publication 536 forthat tax year. A deduction of a partly worthlessGross receipts test. You meet the gross re-more information about net operating losses.bad debt is limited to the amount actuallyceipts test if your average annual gross receiptscharged off. for the 3 prior tax years does not exceed
$5,000,000.Filing a claim for refund.If you did not deduct
a bad debt on your original return for the year it Where To DeductInterest or penalty charged.Generally, youbecame worthless, you can file a claim for acannot use the nonaccrual-experience methodcredit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth- Use the following table to find where to deductfor amounts due on which you charge interest orless, you must file the claim by the later of the your business bad debts.a late payment penalty. However, do not treat afollowing dates.
discount offered for early payment as the charg-
• 7 years from the date your original return Table 11–2. Where To Deduct aing of interest or a penalty if both the following
was due (not including extensions). Bad Debtapply.
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.• You otherwise accrue the full amount dueIF you file as THEN deduct your bad
a... debt on...as gross income at the time you provideIf the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt,the services.you must file the claim by the later of the follow- Sole proprietor  Line 27 of Schedule C
(Form 1040)ing dates. • You treat the discount allowed for early
payment as an adjustment to gross in-• 3 years from the date you filed your origi- Farmer  Line 34 of Schedule Fcome in the year of payment. (Form 1040)nal return.
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax. Corporation  Line 15 of Form 1120Methods available.You can use any of the or Form 1120–AYou may have longer to file the claim if you were following nonaccrual-experience methods.
physically or mentally unable to handle your S corporation  Line 10 of Form 1120S• 6-year moving average method.financial affairs for a time. For details and more Partnership  Line 12 of Form 1065information about filing a claim, see Publication• Actual experience method.
556. • Modified Black Motor method.
Use one of the following forms to file a claim.• Modified 6-year moving average method.
Table 11–1. Forms Used To File a • Alternative nonaccrual-experience
Claim method.
Apply the nonaccrual-experience method sepa-IF you filed as
rately to each account receivable. 12.a... THEN file...
You generally cannot change from oneSole proprietor Form 1040X method to another without IRS approval. Youor farmer
may be able to obtain automatic consent to
Corporation  Form 1120X Electric andchange your method of accounting. See section
1.448–2T(g) of the regulations for more infor-S corporation  Form 1120S
mation on obtaining consent to change to a(check box F(5)) Clean-Fuelnonaccrual-experience method or to change
Partnership  Form 1065 from one method to another.(check box G(5)) VehiclesFor more information about the
nonaccrual-experience method, including the $5
million gross receipts test, see section 448(d)(5)
Nonaccrual-Experience of the Internal Revenue Code and section Important Reminder1.448–2T of the regulations.Method
Maximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction.If you use an accrual method of accounting and
qualify under the rules explained in this section, The maximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction and
you can use the nonaccrual-experience method qualified electric vehicle credit were scheduledRecoveryfor bad debts. Under this method, you do not to be 25% lower for 2002 and both were sched-
accrue service related income you expect to be uled to be phased out completely by 2005. TheIf you deduct a bad debt on your tax return anduncollectible. full deduction and credit are now allowed forlater recover (collect) all or part of it, you mayYou generally can use the nonaccrual-expe- qualified property placed in service in 2002 andhave to include all or part of the recovery inrience method for accounts receivables for serv- 2003. The phaseout of the deduction and thegross income. The amount you include is limitedices you performed only if: credit will begin in 2004, and no deduction orto the amount you actually deducted. However,
you can exclude the amount deducted that did credit will be allowed for property placed in serv-• The services are provided in the fields of
not reduce your tax. Report the recovery asaccounting, actuarial science, architecture, ice after 2006. See chapter 12.
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel VehiclesPage 47

Page 48 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonqualifying property. This is property Qualified property.Your property must meet
used in the following ways. the following requirements to qualify for the de-Introduction
duction.
1) Predominantly outside the United States.You are allowed a limited deduction for the cost
of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve- 1) It must be acquired for your own use and2) Predominantly to furnish lodging or in con-hicle refueling property you place in service dur- not for resale.nection with the furnishing of lodging.ing the tax year. Also, you are allowed a tax 2) Its original use must begin with you.3) By certain tax-exempt organizations.credit of 10% of the cost of any qualified electric
vehicle you place in service during the tax year. 3) Either—4) By governmental units or foreign persons
or entities.You can take the electric vehicle credit a) The motor vehicle of which it is a partor the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle must satisfy any federal or state emis-property regardless of whether you use
TIP
sions standards that apply to each fuel
the vehicle in a trade or business. However, you by which the vehicle is designed to becan take a deduction for clean-fuel vehicle re- propelled, orDeductions forfueling property only if you use the property in
b) It must satisfy any federal and stateyour trade or business. Clean-Fuel Vehicle emissions certification, testing, and
warranty requirements that apply.Topics and Refueling Property
This chapter discusses: 4) It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-You are allowed a limited deduction for the costfined earlier.• The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop-of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve-
erty hicle refueling property. These deductions are
allowed only in the tax year you place the prop-Deduction limit. The maximum deduction• The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle refuel-erty in service. you can claim for qualified clean-fuel vehicleing property You cannot claim these deductions for theproperty with respect to any motor vehicle is one
• Recapture of the deductions part of the property’s cost you claim as a sectionof the following.
179 deduction. For information on the section• The electric vehicle credit 1) $50,000 for a truck or van with a gross179 deduction, see Publication 946.
vehicle weight rating over 26,000 pounds• Recapture of the credit
or for a bus with a seating capacity of atDeduction for Clean-Fuel least 20 adults (excluding the driver).Useful Items Vehicle Property
2) $5,000 for a truck or van with a gross vehi-You may want to see:
The deduction for this property may be claimedcle weight rating over 10,000 pounds but
regardless of whether the property is used in anot more than 26,000 pounds.Publication
trade or business. 3) $2,000 for a vehicle not included in (1) or❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car (2).Clean-fuel vehicle property.Clean-fuel vehi-Expenses
cle property is either of the following kinds of❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of property. Deduction for Clean-FuelAssets
Vehicle Refueling Property1) A motor vehicle (defined earlier) produced❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
by an original equipment manufacturer and
Your property must meet the following require-designed to be propelled by a clean-burn-Form (and Instructions) ments to qualify for this deduction.ing fuel. The only part of a vehicle’s basis
that qualifies for the deduction is the part❏ 8834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Credit 1) It must be depreciable property.attributable to:
See chapter 14 for information about getting 2) Its original use must begin with you.
a) A clean-fuel engine that can use apublications and forms. 3) It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-clean-burning fuel,
fined earlier.
b) The property used to store or deliver
the fuel to the engine, or
Clean-fuel vehicle refueling property.Definitions c) The property used to exhaust gasesClean-fuel vehicle refueling property is anyfrom the combustion of the fuel. property (other than a building or its structuralThe following definitions apply throughout this
components) used to do either of the following.chapter. 2) Any property installed on a motor vehicle
(including installation costs) to enable it toClean-burning fuels. The following are 1) Store or dispense a clean-burning fuel (de-
be propelled by a clean-burning fuel if:clean-burning fuels. fined earlier) into the fuel tank of a motor
vehicle propelled by the fuel, but only if thea) The property is an engine (or modifica-1) Natural gas. storage or dispensing is at the point wheretion of an engine) that can use a the fuel is delivered into the tank.2) Liquefied natural gas. clean-burning fuel, or
2) Recharge motor vehicles propelled by3) Liquefied petroleum gas. b) The property is used to store or deliverelectricity, but only if the property is lo-that fuel to the engine or to exhaust4) Hydrogen. cated at the point where the vehicles aregases from the combustion of that fuel.recharged.5) Electricity.
For vehicles that may be propelled by both a6) Any other fuel that is at least 85% alcohol Recharging property. This property in-clean-burning fuel and any other fuel, your de-(any kind) or ether. cludes any equipment used to provide electricityduction is generally the additional cost of permit-to the battery of a motor vehicle propelled byting the use of the clean-burning fuel.Motor vehicle.A motor vehicle is any vehicle electricity. It includes low-voltage recharging
that has four or more wheels and is manufac- Clean-fuel vehicle property does notequipment, high-voltage (quick) charging equip-
tured primarily for use on public streets, roads,include an electric vehicle that qualifiesment, and ancillary connection equipment such
and highways. It does not include a vehicle oper-for the electric vehicle credit, dis-as inductive charging equipment. It does notCAUTION
!
ated exclusively on a rail or rails. cussed later. include property used to generate electricity,
Page 48 Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Page 49 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
such as solar panels or windmills, and does not To determine whether an individual directly 2) It ceases to be a qualified clean-fuel vehi-
include the battery used in the vehicle. or indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock ofcle property (for example, by failing to
a corporation, see Ownership of stock under meet emissions standards).Deduction limit. The maximum deduction Related Persons in Publication 538. 3) It becomes nonqualifying property, definedyou can claim for clean-fuel vehicle refueling
earlier.property placed in service at one location isHow To Claim$100,000. To figure your maximum deduction
the Deductionsfor any tax year, subtract from $100,000 the total Sales or other dispositions.If you sell oryou (or any related person or predecessor) otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 yearsHow you claim the deductions for clean-fuelclaimed for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property after the date you placed it in service and knowvehicle property and clean-fuel vehicle refuelingplaced in service at that location for all earlier or have reason to know that it will be changed inproperty depends on the use of the property andyears. any of the ways described above, you are sub-the kind of income tax return you file.
If the deduction limit applies, you must ject to the recapture rules. In other dispositions
Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel vehi-specify on your tax return the property (including a disposition by reason of an accident
cle property by individuals.Individuals can(and the portion of the property’s cost) or other casualty), the recapture rules do notCAUTION
!
claim the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop-you are using as a basis for the deduction. apply.
erty used for nonbusiness purposes by includingIf the vehicle was subject to depreciation, theRelated persons. For this purpose, the fol-the deduction in the total on line 33 of Formdeduction (minus any recapture) is consideredlowing are considered related persons. 1040. Also, enter the amount of your deductiondepreciation when figuring the part of any gainand “Clean-Fuel” on the dotted line next to linefrom the disposition that is ordinary income. See1) An individual and his or her brothers and33. If you use the vehicle partly for business, seePublication 544 for more information on disposi-sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,the next two discussions. tions of depreciable property.ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),
Deduction for business clean-fuel vehicleand lineal descendants (children, grand-
Recapture amount. Figure your recaptureproperty by employees.Employees who usechildren, etc.).
amount by multiplying the deduction by the fol-clean-fuel vehicle property for business, or2) An individual and a corporation if the indi- lowing percentage.partly for business and partly for nonbusinessvidual owns, directly or indirectly, morepurposes, should include the entire deduction inthan 50% in value of the outstanding stock • 100% if the recapture date is within thethe total on line 33 of Form 1040. Also, enter theof the corporation. first full year after the date the vehicle wasamount of your deduction and “Clean-Fuel” onplaced in service.the dotted line next to line 33.3) Two corporations that are members of the
same controlled group as defined in sec- • 662/3% if the recapture date is within theSole proprietors.Sole proprietors must claimtion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code. second full year after the date the vehicledeductions for clean-fuel vehicle property andwas placed in service.4) A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.clean-fuel vehicle refueling property used for
• 331/3% if the recapture date is within thebusiness on the Other expenses line of either5) Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if the third full year after the date the vehicleSchedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Formsame person is a grantor of both trusts.1040). If clean-fuel vehicle property is used was placed in service.
6) A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the samepartly for nonbusiness purposes, claim the non-
trust. Recapture date.The recapture date is gen-business part of the deduction as explained ear-
lier under Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuelerally the date of the event that causes the7) A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa-vehicle property by individuals. recapture. However, the recapture date for anrate trusts if the same person is a grantor
event described in item (3), earlier, is the firstof both trusts. Partnerships. Partnerships claim the deduc-day of the recapture year in which the eventtions for clean-fuel vehicle property and8) A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation if occurs.clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 20 ofthe trust or a grantor of the trust owns,
Form 1065.directly or indirectly, more than 50% in How to report.How you report the recapture
value of the outstanding stock of the cor- amount for clean-fuel vehicle property as in-S corporations.S corporations claim the de-poration. come depends on how you claimed the deduc-ductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and
tion for that property.9) A person and a tax-exempt educational orclean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 19 of
charitable organization that is controlled di-Form 1120S. Deducted by individuals as
rectly or indirectly by that person or by nonbusiness-use property. Include theC corporations.C corporations claim the de-members of the family of that person. amount on line 21 of Form 1040.ductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and
10) A corporation and a partnership if theclean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 26 ofDeducted by employees as business-use
same persons own more than 50% in Form 1120 (line 22 of Form 1120–A). property. Include the amount on line 21 of
value of the outstanding stock of the cor- Form 1040.
poration and more than 50% of the capitalRecapture of Deducted by sole proprietors asor profits interest in the partnership.
the Deductions business-use property.Include the amount
11) Two S corporations or an S corporation on the Other income line of either Schedule C
and a regular corporation if the same per-If the property ceases to qualify, you may have(Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).
sons own more than 50% in value of theto recapture the deduction. You recapture thePartnerships and corporations (includingoutstanding stock of each corporation.deduction by including it, or part of it, in yourS corporations).Include the amount on theincome.12) A partnership and a person if the person, Other income line of the form you file.
directly or indirectly owns, more than 50%
of the capital or profits interests in the part-Clean-Fuel Vehicle Propertynership. Clean-Fuel Vehicle
Refueling PropertyYou must recapture the deduction for clean-fuel13) Two partnerships if the same persons
vehicle property if the property ceases to qualifyown, directly or indirectly, more than 50% You must recapture the deduction for clean-fuelwithin 3 years after the date you placed it inof the capital or profits interest in both part- vehicle refueling property if the property ceasesservice. The property will cease to qualify if it isnerships. to qualify at any time before the end of its depre-changed in any of the following ways.
ciation recovery period. The property will cease14) An executor of an estate and a beneficiary
to qualify if it is changed in any of the followingof the estate unless the sale or exchange 1) It is modified so that it can no longer be
ways.is in satisfaction of a pecuniary bequest. propelled by a clean-burning fuel.
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel VehiclesPage 49

Page 50 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
vehicle in service, it ceases to qualify for theQualified Electric Vehicle1) It ceases to be a clean-fuel vehicle refuel- electric vehicle credit. You recapture the credit
ing property (for example, by being con- by adding it, or part of it, to your income tax forA vehicle is a qualified electric vehicle if it meetsverted to store and dispense gasoline). the year in which the recapture event occurs.all the following requirements.
The vehicle will cease to qualify if it is2) It is no longer used 50% or more in your1) It is a motor vehicle (defined earlier) pow-changed in either of the following ways.trade or business. ered primarily by an electric motor drawing
3) It becomes nonqualifying property, defined 1) It is modified so that it is no longer prima-current from rechargeable batteries, fuel
earlier. rily powered by electricity.cells, or other portable sources of electrical
current. 2) It becomes nonqualifying property, defined
Sales or other dispositions.If you sell or earlier.2) You were the first person to use it.otherwise dispose of the property before the end
3) You acquired it for your own use and notof its recovery period and know or have reason Sales or other dispositions.If you sell orfor resale.to know that it will be changed in any of the ways otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 yearsdescribed above, you are subject to the recap-4) It has never been used as a nonelectricafter the date you placed it in service and knowture rules. In other dispositions (including a dis-vehicle. or have reason to know that it will be changed inposition by reason of an accident or other either of the ways described above, you are5) It is not nonqualifying property, definedcasualty), the recapture rules do not apply. subject to the recapture rules. In other disposi-earlier.The deduction (minus any recapture tions (including a disposition by reason of anamount) is considered depreciation when figur- accident or other casualty), the recapture rulesing the part of any gain from the disposition that do not apply.Amount of the Creditis ordinary income. See Publication 544 for If the vehicle was subject to depreciation, themore information on dispositions of depreciable credit (minus any recapture amount) is consid-The credit is generally 10% of the cost of eachproperty. ered depreciation when figuring the part of anyqualified electric vehicle you place in service
gain from the disposition that is ordinary income.during the year. If your vehicle is a depreciableRecapture amount. Figure your recapture See Publication 544 for more information onbusiness asset, you must reduce the cost of theamount by multiplying the deduction you dispositions of depreciable property.vehicle by any section 179 deduction beforeclaimed by the following fraction. figuring the 10% credit. If you need informationRecapture amount. Figure your recaptureon the section 179 deduction, see Publicationamount by multiplying the credit by the followingTotal Recovery 946. percentage.recovery years before_period for the the recapture Credit limits.The credit is limited to $4,000• 100% if the recapture date is within theproperty year for each vehicle. The total credit is limited to thefirst full year after the date the vehicle wasexcess of your regular tax liability, reduced byplaced in service.Total recovery period for the propertycertain credits, over your tentative minimum tax.
• 662/3% if the recapture date is within theTo figure the credit limit, complete Form 8834
second full year after the date the vehicleand attach it to your tax return.How to report.How you report the recapture
was placed in service.amount for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property
depends on how you claimed the deduction forHow To • 331/3% if the recapture date is within the
that property. third full year after the date the vehicleClaim the Credit
was placed in service.Sole proprietors.Include the amount on
You must complete and attach Form 8834 tothe Other income line of either Schedule C
your tax return to claim the electric vehicleRecapture date.The recapture date is gen-(Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).
credit. Enter your credit on your tax return aserally the date of the event that causes the
Partnerships and corporations (includingdiscussed next. recapture. However, the recapture date for an
S corporations).Include the amount on the event described in item (2), earlier, is the firstIndividuals.Individuals claim the credit by en-Other income line of the form you file. day of the recapture year in which the eventtering the amount from line 20 of Form 8834 onoccurs.line 52 of Form 1040. Check box “c” and specifyBasis Adjustments How to report. Report the recapture amountForm 8834.
as follows.You must reduce the basis of your clean-fuelPartnerships. Partnerships enter the amountvehicle property or clean-fuel vehicle refueling Individuals.Include the amount on line 60from line 20 of Form 8834 on line 13 of Scheduleproperty by the deduction claimed. If, in a later of Form 1040. Write “QEVCR” on the dotted lineK (Form 1065). The partnership then allocatesyear, you must recapture part or all of the deduc- next to line 60.the credit to the partners on line 13 of Scheduletion, increase the basis of the property by theK–1 (Form 1065). See the instructions for FormPartnerships. Include on line 25 of Sched-amount recaptured. If the property is deprecia-1065. ule K–1 (Form 1065) the information a partnerble property, you can recover this additional
needs to figure the recapture of the credit.basis over the property’s remaining recoveryS corporations. S corporations enter the
period beginning with the tax year of recapture.amount from line 20 of Form 8834 on line 13 ofS corporations. Include on line 23 of
Schedule K (Form 1120S). The S corporationSchedule K–1 (Form 1120S) the information aIf you were using the percentage tablesthen allocates the credit to the shareholders onshareholder needs to figure the recapture of theto figure your depreciation on the prop-line 13 of Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S). See thecredit.erty, you will not be able to continue toCAUTION
!
instructions for Form 1120S.do so. See Publication 946 for information on C corporations.Include the amount on line
figuring your depreciation without the tables.C corporations. C corporations claim the 10 of Schedule J (Form 1120), or line 5 of Part I
credit by entering the amount from line 20 of (Form 1120–A). Check the box for “Other” and
Form 8834 in the total for line 6c of Schedule J attach the required schedule. See the instruc-
(Form 1120), checking the “Other” box and en- tions for Form 1120.
tering “8834” in the space provided. See the
Electric Vehicle Credit
instructions for Form 1120. Basis Adjustments
You can choose to claim a tax credit for a quali-
fied electric vehicle you place in service during If you claim a tax credit for a qualified electric
Recapture of the Credit
the year. You can make this choice regardless of vehicle you place in service during the year, you
whether the property is used in a trade or busi- The electric vehicle credit is subject to recapture must reduce your basis in that vehicle by the
ness. if, within 3 years after the date you place the lesser of:
Page 50 Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Page 51 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 13–1. Reporting Reimbursements
1) $4,000, or
If the type of reimbursement (or other2) 10% of the cost of the vehicle. expense allowance) arrangement is under: Then the employer reports on Form W-2:
This basis reduction rule applies even if the
An accountable plan with:credit allowed is less than that amount.
If you must recapture part or all of the credit,Actual expense reimbursement: No amount.
increase the basis of your vehicle by the amountAdequate accounting made and excess
recaptured. If the qualified electric vehicle isreturned
depreciable property, you can recover the addi-
Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1.tional basis over the vehicle’s remaining recov-Adequate accounting and return of excessery period beginning with the tax year of both required but excess not returnedrecapture.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to theNo amount.If you were using the percentage tablesfederal rate:to figure your depreciation on the vehi-Adequate accounting made and excesscle, you will not be able to continue toCAUTION
!
returneddo so. See Publication 946 for information on
figuring your depreciation without the tables.Per diem or mileage allowance up to theThe excess amount as wages in box 1. The
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.
both required but excess not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds theThe excess amount as wages in box 1. The
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.
13. rate only and excess not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1.Other Expenses excess, or both, not required by plan
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.
Important Change
• Bribes and kickbacks See chapter 14 for information about gettingfor 2003 publications and forms.• Charitable contributions
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- • Education expensesage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,
• Franchises, trademarks, and trade namespickup, or panel truck in 2003 is 36 cents a mile
Travel, Meals,for all business miles. For more information, see• Lobbying expensesCar and truck expenses, under Miscellaneous and Entertainment• Penalties and finesExpenses.
• Repayments (claim of right) To be deductible, expenses incurred for travel,
meals, and entertainment must be ordinary and• Other miscellaneous expenses
necessary expenses of carrying on your trade orImportant Changes business. Generally, you also must show that
Useful Items entertainment expenses (including meals) arefor 2004 You may want to see: directly related to, or associated with, the con-
duct of your trade or business.
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- Publication The following discussion explains how youage rate for the cost of operating your car, van, deduct any reimbursements or allowances you❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringepickup, or panel truck in 2004 is 37.5 cents a make for these expenses incurred by your em-Benefitsmile for all business miles. ployees. If you are self-employed and incur
these expenses yourself, see Publication 463❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarMeal expense deduction subject to “hours of
Expenses for information on how you can deduct them.service” limits.In 2004, this deduction in-
creases to 70% of the reimbursed meals your❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
Reimbursementsemployees consume while they are subject to
❏ 542 Corporationsthe Department of Transportation’s “hours of
How you deduct a reimbursement or allowanceservice” limits. For more information, see Meal ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property arrangement (including per diem allowances,expenses when subject to “hours of service”
❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates discussed later) for travel, meals, and entertain-limits, later.
ment expenses incurred by your employees de-
Form (and Instructions) pends on whether you have an accountable plan
or a nonaccountable plan. A reimbursement or❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionsallowance arrangement is a system by whichIntroduction you pay advances, reimbursements, and❏ Sch C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss from
This chapter covers expenses you as a busi- charges for your employees’ business expensesBusiness
ness owner may have that are not explained in and they substantiate their expenses to you so❏ 1099–MISC Miscellaneous Incomeearlier chapters of this publication. you can substantiate your deduction of the ad-
vance, reimbursement, or charge. If you make a❏ 6069 Return of Excise Tax on Excess
Topics single payment to your employees and it in-Contributions to Black Lung Benefit
cludes both wages and an expense reimburse-Trust Under Section 4953 andThis chapter discusses:
ment, you must specify the amount of theComputation of Section 192
reimbursement.• Travel, meals, and entertainment Deduction
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 51

Page 52 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you reimburse these expenses under an 2) Your employees adequately account forFAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedure
their expenses within 60 days after the ex- 2002-61 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2002-39.accountable plan, deduct them as travel, meal,
penses were paid or incurred. You can read Revenue Procedure 2002-61 atand entertainment expenses. If you reimburse
many public libraries or online at www.irs.gov.these expenses under a nonaccountable plan,3) Your employees return any excess reim-you must report the reimbursements as wages bursement within 120 days after the ex-Per diem allowance. If your employee actu-on Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement, and pense was paid or incurred. ally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-deduct them as wages. See Table 13–1.
cussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursed4) You give a periodic statement (at least
using the per diem allowance, how you reportquarterly) to your employees that asks
and deduct the allowance depends on whetherthem to either return or adequately ac-Accountable Plans
the allowance is for lodging and meal expensescount for outstanding advances and they
To be an accountable plan, your reimbursement or for meal expenses only and whether the al-comply within 120 days of the statement.
or allowance arrangement must require your lowance is more than the federal rate.
employees to meet all the following require-How to deduct. You can take a deduction forRegular federal per diem rate.The regularments. travel, meals, and entertainment expenses iffederal per diem rate is the highest amount the
you reimburse your employees for these ex-federal government will pay to its employees for1) They must have paid or incurred deducti-penses under an accountable plan. The amountlodging, meal, and incidental expenses (or mealble expenses while performing services asyou deduct for meals and entertainment, how-and incidental expenses only) while they areyour employees. ever, may be subject to a 50% limit, discussedtraveling away from home in a particular area.
2) They must adequately account to you forlater. If you are a sole proprietor, deduct theThe rates are different for different locations.
these expenses within a reasonable periodreimbursement on line 24 of Schedule C (FormPublication 1542 lists the rates in the continental
of time. 1040). If you file a corporation income tax return,United States.
include the reimbursement in the amount3) They must return any excess reimburse- Internet access. Per diem rates are avail-claimed on the Other decutions line of Formment or allowance within a reasonable pe- able on the Internet. If you have a computer and1120, U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return, orriod of time. a modem, you can access per diem rates atForm 1120–A, U.S. Corporation Short-Form In-www.policyworks.gov/perdiem.An arrangement under which you advancecome Tax Return. If you file any other income
money to employees is treated as meeting (3)tax return, such as a partnership or S corpora-Standard meal allowance. The federal
above only if the following requirements are alsotion return, deduct the reimbursement on therate for meal and incidental expense (M & IE) is
met. appropriate line of the return as provided in the the standard meal allowance. You may pay an
instructions for that return. allowance for meal and incidental expenses only• The advance is reasonably calculated not if, for example, you reimburse actual lodgingto exceed the amount of anticipated ex- expenses or do not reimburse lodging expensespenses. Per Diem and Car Allowances because there are none.
• You make the advance within a reasona- High-low method. This is a simplifiedYou may reimburse your employees under anble period of time. method of computing the federal per diem rateaccountable plan based on travel days, miles, or
for lodging and meal expenses for travelingsome other fixed allowance. In these cases,If any expenses reimbursed under this ar- within the continental United States. It elimi-your employee is considered to have accountedrangement are not substantiated, or are an ex- nates the need to keep a current list of the perto you for the amount of the expense that doescess reimbursement that is not returned within a diem rate in effect for each city in the continentalnot exceed the rates established by the federalreasonable period of time by an employee, you United States.government. Your employee must actually sub-cannot treat these expenses as reimbursedstantiate to you the other elements of the ex-Under the high-low method, the per diemunder an accountable plan. Instead, treat thepense, such as time, place, and business amount for travel during 2003 is $204 ($45 for Mreimbursed expenses as paid under a nonac-purpose. & IE) for certain high-cost locations. All othercountable plan, discussed later. areas have a per diem amount of $125 ($35 forFederal rate.The federal rate can be figuredM & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for theAdequate accounting. Your employees must using any one of the following methods. $204 per diem amount under the high-lowadequately account to you for their expenses.
method are listed in Publication 1542.They must give you documentary evidence of1) For per diem amounts:
their travel, mileage, and other employee busi- Reporting per diem and car allowances.a) The regular federal per diem rate.ness expenses. This evidence should include The following paragraphs explain how to reportitems such as receipts, along with either a state-b) The standard meal allowance. per diem and car allowances. The manner inment of expenses, an account book, a diary, or a which you report them depends on how thec) The high-low rate.similar record in which the employee entered allowance compares to the federal rate.each expense at or near the time the expense
2) For car expenses:was incurred. Allowance LESS than or EQUAL to the fed-
eral rate.If your allowance for the employee isa) The standard mileage rate.Excess reimbursement or allowance. An less than or equal to the appropriate federal rate,
excess reimbursement or allowance is any b) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). that allowance is not included as part of the
amount you pay to an employee that is more employee’s pay in box 1 of the employee’s Form
than the business-related expenses for which W–2. Deduct the allowance as travel expenses
Car allowance. Your employee is consideredthe employee adequately accounted. The em- (including meals that may be subject to the 50%
to have accounted to you for car expenses thatployee must return any excess reimbursement limit, discussed later). See How to deduct under
do not exceed the standard mileage rate. Foror other expense allowance to you within a rea- Accountable Plans, earlier.
2003, the standard mileage rate is 36 cents personable period of time. Allowance MORE than the federal rate.Ifmile for each business mile.
your employee’s allowance is more than theYou can choose to reimburse your employ-Reasonable period of time. A reasonable
appropriate federal rate, you must report theees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al-period of time depends on the facts and circum-
allowance as two separate items.lowance. This is an allowance that includes astances. Generally, actions that take place
combination of payments covering fixed and va- You include the allowance amount up to thewithin the times specified in the following list will
riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to federal rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee’sbe treated as taking place within a reasonable
cover your employees’ variable operating costs Form W–2. Deduct it as travel expenses (asperiod of time.
(such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover explained above). This part of the allowance is
1) You give an advance within 30 days of theyour employees’ fixed costs (such as deprecia- treated as reimbursed under an accountable
time the employee has the expense. tion, insurance, etc.). For information on using a plan.
Page 52 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 53 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You include the amount that is more than the reimbursed meals your employees consumeNonaccountable Plans
federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if theywhile away from their tax home on business
A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement thatapply) of the employee’s Form W–2. Deduct itduring or incident to any period subject to the
does not meet the requirements for an account-as wages subject to income tax withholding,Department of Transportation’s hours of service
able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid,social security, Medicare, and federal unem-limits.
under a nonaccountable plan are reported asployment taxes. This part of the allowance isIndividuals subject to the Department ofwages on Form W–2. The payments are subjecttreated as reimbursed under a nonaccountableTransportation’s hours of service limits includeto income tax withholding, social security, Medi-plan as explained later under Nonaccountable the following. care, and federal unemployment taxes. You canPlans.
deduct the reimbursement as compensation or• Certain air transportation workers (such as
wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and
ity tests for employees’ pay in chapter 2. DeductMeals and Entertainment control tower operators) who are under
the allowable amount as compensation orFederal Aviation Administration regula-
Under an accountable plan, you can generally wages on the appropriate line of your income taxtions.
deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible return, as provided in its instructions.
• Interstate truck operators and bus driversbusiness-related meal and entertainment ex-
who are under Department of Transporta-penses you reimburse your employees. The de-
tion regulations.duction limit applies even if you reimburse them Other Reimbursed Expenses
for 100% of the expenses. • Certain railroad employees (such as engi-You may provide meals and entertainment toneers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-Application of the 50% limit.The 50% de- individuals who are not your employees. Theseers, and control operations personnel)duction limit applies to reimbursements you expenses may or may not be subject to the 50%who are under Federal Railroad Adminis-make to your employees for expenses they incur limit, depending on the circumstances.tration regulations.for meals while traveling away from home on
business and for entertaining business custom- Nonemployee. If you provide a person who is• Certain merchant mariners who are underers at your place of business, a restaurant, or not your employee with meals, goods, services,Coast Guard regulations.another location. It applies to expenses incurred or the use of a facility, and the item you provide
at a business convention or reception, business is considered entertainment, you can deduct the
De minimis (minimal) fringe benefit.Themeeting, or business luncheon at a club. The expense only to the extent it is included in the
50% limit does not apply to an expense for fooddeduction limit may also apply to meals you gross income of the recipient as compensation
or beverage that is excluded from the grossfurnish on your premises to your employees for services or as a prize or award. If you are
income of an employee because it is a de(discussed in chapter 2). required to include these expenses on an infor-
minimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15–B formation return (Form 1099–MISC), you cannotRelated expenses. Taxes and tips relatingadditional information on de minimis fringe ben-claim a deduction for them unless you file theto a meal or entertainment activity you reim-efits. necessary information return. For more informa-burse to your employee under an accountable tion about when to file Form 1099–MISC, seeplan are included in the amount subject to the the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,Company cafeteria or executive dining50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex- 5498, and W–2G. These expenses are not sub-room. You can deduct the cost of food andpenses, such as cover charges for admission to ject to the 50% limit.beverages you provide primarily to your employ-a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinnerees on your business premises. This includesor cocktail party, or the amount you pay for Director, stockholder, or employee meet-the cost of maintaining the facilities for providingparking at a sports arena, are all subject to the ings. You can deduct entertainment expensesthe food and beverages. These expenses are50% limit. However, the cost of transportation to directly related to business meetings of yoursubject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as deand from an otherwise allowable business meal employees, partners, stockholders, agents, orminimis fringe benefits, discussed in Publicationor a business-related entertainment activity is directors. You can provide some minor social15–B, or unless they are compensation to yournot subject to the 50% limit. activities, but the main purpose of the meetingemployees and you treat them as provided must be your company’s business. These ex-Amount subject to 50% limit.If you provideunder a nonaccountable plan, as discussedpenses are subject to the 50% limit.your employees with a per diem allowance (dis-later.cussed earlier) only for meal and incidental ex- Trade association meetings.You can de-penses, the amount treated as an expense forEmployee activities.You can deduct the ex-duct expenses directly related to and necessaryfood and beverages is the lesser of the follow- for attending business meetings or conventionspense of providing recreational, social, or similaring. of certain exempt organizations. These organi-activities (including the use of a facility) for your
zations include business leagues, chambers of• The per diem allowance. employees. The benefit must be primarily for
commerce, real estate boards, and trade andyour employees who are not highly compen-• The federal rate for M & IE. professional associations. Meal and entertain-sated employees.
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.For this purpose, a highly compensated em-If you provide your employees with a per diem
ployee is an employee who meets either of theallowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci- Sale of meals or entertainment.You can de-following requirements.dental expenses, you must treat an amount duct the cost of providing meals, entertainment,
equal to the federal M & IE rate for the area of goods and services, or use of facilities you sell to1) Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi-travel as an expense for food and beverages. If the public. For example, if you run a nightclub,ness during the year or the precedingthe per diem allowance you provide is less than your expense for the entertainment you furnishyear. An employee is treated as owningthe federal per diem rate for the area of travel, to your customers, such as a floor show, is aany interest owned by his or her brother,you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance as business expense. These expenses are notsister, spouse, ancestors, and lineal de-the amount for food and beverages. subject to the 50% limit.scendants.
Drilling rigs.The 50% limit does not apply to Advertising to promote goodwill.You can2) Received more than $90,000 in pay for thethe food or beverages an employer provides on deduct the cost of providing meals, entertain-preceding year. You may choose to in-an oil or gas platform or drilling rig located off- ment, or recreational facilities to the generalclude only employees who were also in theshore or in Alaska. This exception also applies public as a means of advertising or promotingtop 20% of employees when ranked byto food and beverages provided by an employer goodwill in the community. For example, thepay for the preceding year.at a support camp that is near and integral to an expense of sponsoring a television or radiooil or gas platform or drilling rig located inThese expenses are not subject to the 50%show is deductible. You can also deduct theAlaska. limit. For example, the expenses for food, bever-expense of distributing free food and beverages
ages, and entertainment for a company-wideMeal expenses when subject to “hours of to the general public. These expenses are not
service” limits.You can deduct 65% of the picnic are not subject to the 50% limit. subject to the 50% limit.
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 53

Page 54 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Charitable sports event.The 50% limit does ment is a foreign government, the Under certain conditions, you can use the
not apply to the expenses covered by a package standard mileage rate instead of deducting thepayments are not deductible if they are
deal that includes a ticket to a charitable sports actual expenses for your vehicle. The standardunlawful under the Foreign Corrupt Prac-
event if the event meets certain conditions. See mileage rate for the cost of operating your car,tices Act of 1977.
Entertainment tickets in chapter 2 of Publication van, pickup, or panel truck in 2003 is 36 cents a2) Payments directly or indirectly to a person463 for a list of the conditions a charitable sports mile for all business miles. For more informationin violation of any federal or state law (butevent must meet. on how to figure your deduction, see Publicationonly if that state law is generally enforced)463.that provides for a criminal penalty or for
the loss of a license or privilege to engageCharitable contributions.Cash payments to
in a trade or business. charitable, religious, educational, scientific, orMiscellaneous similar organizations may be deductible as busi-
Meaning of “generally enforced.”A state ness expenses if the payments are not charita-Expenses law is considered generally enforced unless it isble contributions or gifts. If the payments are
never enforced or enforced only for infamouscharitable contributions or gifts, you cannot de-In addition to travel, meal, and entertainmentpersons or persons whose violations are ex-duct them as business expenses. However, cor-expenses, there are other expenses you cantraordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law isporations (other than S corporations) can deductdeduct. This section briefly covers some ofgenerally enforced unless proper reporting of acharitable contributions on their income tax re-these expenses (listed in alphabetical order).violation of the law results in enforcement onlyturns. See Charitable Contributions in Publica-
under unusual circumstances. tion 542 for more information. Sole proprietors,Advertising expenses. You generally can
partners in a partnership, or shareholders in andeduct reasonable advertising expenses if theyKickbacks. A kickback includes a paymentS corporation may be able to deduct charitablerelate to your business activities. Generally, youfor referring a client, patient, or customer. Thecontributions made by their business on Sched-cannot deduct the cost of advertising to influ-common kickback situation occurs when moneyule A (Form 1040).ence legislation. See Lobbying expenses, later. or property is given to someone as payment forYou can usually deduct as a business ex-influencing a third party to purchase from, useExample. You paid $15 to a local church forpense the cost of institutional or goodwill adver-the services of, or otherwise deal with the per-a half-page ad in a program for a concert it istising to keep your name before the public if itson who pays the kickback. In many cases, thesponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en-relates to business you reasonably expect toperson whose business is being sought or en-courage readers to buy your products. Sincegain in the future. For example, the cost of ad-joyed by the person who pays the kickback doesyour payment is not a contribution, you cannotvertising that encourages people to contribute tonot know of the payment. deduct it as such. However, you can deduct it asthe Red Cross, to buy U.S. Savings Bonds, or to
an advertising expense.participate in similar causes is usually deducti-Example 1. Mr. Green, an insurance bro-ble. ker, pays part of the insurance commissions heInventory. If you contribute inventory (prop-
earns to car dealers who refer insurance cus-erty you sell in the course of your business), theForeign expenses. You cannot deduct the
tomers to him. The car dealers are not licensedamount you can claim as a contribution deduc-costs of advertising on foreign radio and televi-
to sell insurance. Mr. Green cannot deducttion is the smaller of its fair market value on thesion (including cable) where the advertising is
these payments if they are in violation of anyday you contributed it or its basis. The basis ofprimarily for a market in the United States. How-
federal or state law as explained previously indonated inventory is any cost incurred for theever, this rule only applies to advertising ex-
(2) under Bribes and kickbacks. inventory in an earlier year that you would other-penses in countries that deny a deduction for
wise include in your opening inventory for theadvertising on a United States broadcast prima-
Example 2. The Yard Corporation is in theyear of the contribution. You must remove therily for that country’s market.
business of repairing ships. It returns 10% of theamount of your contribution deduction from your
Anticipated liabilities.Anticipated liabilitiesrepair bills as kickbacks to the captains and chiefopening inventory. It is not part of the cost of
or reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de-officers of vessels it repairs. It considers kick-goods sold.
ductible. For example, assume you sold 1-yearbacks necessary to get business. The owners ofIf the cost of donated property is not included
TV service contracts this year totaling $50,000.the ships do not know of these payments. in your opening inventory, the property’s basis is
From experience, you know you will have ex-In the state where the corporation operates, zero and you cannot claim a charitable contribu-
penses of about $15,000 in the coming year forit is unlawful to attempt to influence the actions tion deduction. Treat the property’s cost as you
these contracts. You cannot deduct any of theof any employee, private agent, or fiduciary in would ordinarily treat it under your method of
$15,000 this year by charging expenses to arelation to the principal’s or employer’s affairs by accounting. For example, include the purchase
reserve or liability account. You can deduct yourgiving or offering anything of value without the price of inventory bought and donated in the
expenses only when you actually pay or accrueknowledge and consent of the principal or em- same year in the cost of goods sold for that year.
them, depending on your accounting method.ployer. The state generally enforces the law. A corporation (other than an S corporation)
The kickbacks paid by the Yard Corporation are can deduct its basis in the property plus one-halfBlack lung benefit trust contributions.If not deductible. of the gain that would have been realized if theyou, as a coal mine operator, make a contribu- property had been sold at its fair market value ontion to a qualified black lung benefit trust, youMedicare or Medicaid.Kickbacks, bribes,the date of contribution. But the deduction can-may be able to deduct your contribution. Toand rebates paid in Medicare or Medicaid pro-not be more than twice the property’s basis. Fordeduct it, you must make your contribution dur-grams are not deductible. more information on the charitable contributioning the tax year or pay it to the trust by the dueForm 1099–MISC. If you pay kickbacks of property by a corporation, see sectiondate for filing your federal income tax returnduring your tax year, whether or not they are170(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.(including extensions). You must make the con-deductible on your income tax return, you maytribution in cash or in property the trust is permit- Example 1. You own an auto repair shophave to report them on an information return,ted to hold. and in 2003 you donated auto parts to your localForm 1099–MISC. For more information aboutFigure your allowable deduction for contribu- school for its auto repair class. The fair marketwhen to file Form 1099–MISC, see the Generaltions to a black lung benefit trust on Schedule A value of the parts at the time of the contributionInstructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, andof Form 6069. was $600 and you had included $400 for theW–2G.
parts in your opening inventory for 2003. YourBribes and kickbacks. You cannot deduct
Car and truck expenses.You can deduct thecharitable contribution is $400. You reduce yourbribes, kickbacks, or similar payments if they are
costs of operating a car, truck, or other vehicle inopening inventory by the $400 for the donatedeither of the following.
your business. These costs include gas, oil, re-property.
pairs, license tags, insurance, and depreciation.1) Payments directly or indirectly to an official
Only the expenses for business use are deducti-or employee of any government or an Example 2. Assume the same facts as Ex-
ble. Traveling between your home and youragency or instrumentality of any govern- ample 1, except you purchased the auto parts in
place of business is usually not business use.ment in violation of the law. If the govern- 2003 for $400 (not part of the opening inven-
Page 54 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 55 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tory). The $400 is included as part of the cost ofDonations to business organizations.You
1) Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi-goods sold for 2003 but not in figuring the basis can deduct donations to business organizations
tion of the item,of the property. Your charitable contribution is as business expenses if all the following condi-
$0. tions are met. 2) Payable at least annually for the entire
term of the transfer agreement, and• The donation relates directly to your tradeClub dues and membership fees.Generally,
or business.you cannot deduct amounts you pay or incur for 3) Substantially equal in amount (or payable
membership in any club organized for business, under a fixed formula).• You reasonably expect a financial return inpleasure, recreation, or any other social pur-line with your donation. When determining the term of the transferpose. This includes country clubs, golf and ath- agreement, include all renewal options and any• The donation is not a nondeductible lobby-letic clubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline other period for which you and the transferrering expense as discussed later under Lob-clubs, and clubs operated to provide meals reasonably expect the agreement to be re-bying expenses.under circumstances generally considered to be newed.conducive to business discussions.
A franchise includes an agreement that givesFor example, a donation you make to a com-Exception. None of the following organiza- one of the parties to the agreement the right tomittee organized by the Chamber of Commercetions will be treated as a club organized for distribute, sell, or provide goods, services, orto bring a national convention to your city maybusiness, pleasure, recreation, or other social facilities within a specified area.be deductible.purpose unless one of the main purposes is to Property acquired after August 10, 1993conduct entertainment activities for members orEducation expenses. You can deduct the or-(or after July 25, 1991, if elected).Anytheir guests or to provide members or theirdinary and necessary expenses you pay for theamounts you pay or incur that are not describedguests with access to entertainment facilities.education and training of your employees. Forin (1) through (3) must be charged to a capitalmore information, see Education Expenses in• Boards of trade. account. These are section 197 intangibles andchapter 2. are amortized over 15 years. See chapter 9 for• Business leagues. You can also deduct your own educationmore information on amortization.expenses (including certain related travel) re-• Chambers of commerce. You can elect to apply this treatment to anylated to your trade or business. You must befranchise, trademark, or trade name acquired• Civic or public service organizations.able to show the education maintains or im-after July 25, 1991. This election is binding andproves skills required in your trade or business,• Professional organizations such as bar as- cannot be revoked without approval of the IRS.or it is required by your employer, or by law orsociations and medical associations.
Property acquired before August 11, 1993.regulations, for keeping your pay, status, or job.
• Real estate boards. For a transfer not treated as a sale or exchangeYou cannot deduct education expenses you
of a capital asset, you can deduct a lump-sumincur to meet the minimum requirements of your• Trade associations.
payment of an agreed upon principal amountpresent trade or business, or those that qualify
ratably over the shorter of the following.you for a new trade or business. This is trueDamages recovered. Special rules apply toeven if the education maintains or improves• 10 years.compensation you receive for damages sus-skills presently required in your business. Fortained as a result of patent infringement, breachmore information on education expenses, see• The period of the transfer agreement.of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola-Publication 970.tions. You must include this compensation in For a transfer not treated as a sale or ex-your income. However, you may be able to takeExample 1. Dr. Carter, who is a psychiatrist,change of a capital asset, you can deduct, in thea special deduction. The deduction applies begins a program of study at an accredited psy-year made, a payment that is one of a series ofonly to amounts recovered for actual injury, notchoanalytic institute to qualify as a psychoana-approximately equal payments payable over ei-any additional amount. The deduction is thelyst. She can deduct the cost of the programther of the following.smaller of the following. because the study maintains or improves skills• The period of the transfer agreement.required in her profession and does not qualify• The amount you received or accrued for
her for a new one. • A period of more than 10 years, regard-damages in the tax year reduced by the
less of the period of the agreement.amount you paid or incurred in the year to
Example 2. Herb Jones owns a repair shoprecover that amount.
for electronic equipment. The bulk of the busi- The above business deductions do not• Your losses from the injury you have notness is television repairs, but occasionally he apply to transfers after October 2,deducted. fixes tape decks and disc players. To keep up 1989, and before August 11, 1993, ifCAUTION
!
with the latest technical changes, he takes athe principal sum is over $100,000.special course to learn how to repair disc play-Demolition expenses or losses.You cannot
Charge any payment not deductible becauseers. Since the course maintains and improvesdeduct any amount paid or incurred to demolish
of these rules to a capital account. However, youskills required in his trade, he can deduct itsa structure or any loss for the undepreciated
can deduct the payments charged to a capitalcost.basis of a demolished structure. Add these
account over the life of the asset if you canamounts to the basis of the land where the
Environmental cleanup costs.You can de- determine the useful life of the asset. Otherwise,demolished structure was located.
duct certain costs to clean up land and to treatyou can choose to amortize the payment over a
Depreciation.If property you buy to use ingroundwater you contaminated with hazardous25-year period beginning with the tax year the
your business has a useful life that extendswaste from your business operations. You cantransfer occurs.
substantially beyond the year it is placed in serv-deduct the costs you incur to restore your landContracts entered into before October 3,ice, you generally cannot deduct the entire costand groundwater to the same physical condition1989. For contracts to buy a franchise, trade-as a business expense in the year you buy it.that existed prior to contamination. You cannotmark, or trade name entered into before OctoberYou must spread the cost over more than onededuct costs for the construction of groundwater3, 1989, you can deduct payments contingenttax year and deduct part of it each year. Thistreatment facilities. You must capitalize thoseon productivity, use, or disposition. The rulesmethod of deducting the cost of business prop-costs and you can recover them through depre-discussed earlier for annual and substantiallyerty is called depreciation. ciation. For more information, see Environmen- equal payments do not apply.However, you may be able to elect to deducttal cleanup costs, in chapter 8.
a limited amount of the cost of certain deprecia- Disposition of franchise, trademark, or
ble property in the year you place it in service inFranchise, trademark, trade name.If you trade name. If you transfer, sell, or otherwise
your business. This deduction is known as the buy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, you dispose of a franchise, trademark, or trade
section 179 deduction. can deduct the amount you pay or incur as a name, you must recapture as ordinary income
For information on depreciation and the sec- business expense only if your payments are part (up to any gain realized) the payments you de-
tion 179 deduction, see Publication 946. of a series of payments that are: ducted as any of the following.
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 55

Page 56 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that part of your tax return relating to your busi- a) Is serving in a position in Level I of the• A lump-sum or serial payment of a princi-ness as a sole proprietor. The remaining cost Executive Schedule under section 5312pal amount not treated as a sale or ex-may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if of title 5, United States Code,change of a capital asset. you itemize deductions. b) Has been designated by the President• An amortized payment deducted over 25 You can also take a business deduction for as having Cabinet-level status, oryears. the amount you pay or incur in resolving as-
c) Is an immediate deputy of an individualserted tax deficiencies for your business as a• The amortization claimed on section 197 listed in item (a) or (b).sole proprietor.intangibles.
Licenses and regulatory fees.Licenses andFor more information about dispositions of Exceptions to denial of deduction.The
regulatory fees for your trade or business paidfranchises, trademarks, and trade names, see general denial of the deduction does not apply to
each year to state or local governments gener-chapter 2 in Publication 544. the following.
ally are deductible. Some licenses and fees may
• Expenses of appearing before, or commu-Impairment-related expenses.If you are dis-have to be amortized. See chapter 9 for more
nicating with, any local council or similarabled, you can deduct expenses necessary forinformation.
governing body concerning its legislationyou to be able to work (impairment-related ex-
(local legislation) if the legislation is of di-penses) as a business expense, rather than as aLobbying expenses. Generally, you cannot
rect interest to you or to you and an organ-medical expense. deduct lobbying expenses. Lobbying expenses
ization of which you are a member. AnYou are disabled if you have either of theinclude amounts paid or incurred for any of the
Indian tribal government is treated as afollowing. following activities.
local council or similar governing body.• A physical or mental disability (for exam-• Influencing legislation. • Any in-house expenses for influencing leg-ple, blindness or deafness) that function-
• Participating in or intervening in any politi-islation and communicating directly with aally limits your being employed.
cal campaign for, or against, any candi- covered executive branch official if those• A physical or mental impairment that sub-date for public office. expenses for the tax year do not exceedstantially limits one or more of your major $2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).• Attempting to influence the general public,life activities.
or segments of the public, about elections,• Expenses incurred by taxpayers engaged
legislative matters, or referendums. in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-You can deduct the expense as a business
fessional lobbyists) on behalf of anotherexpense if all the following apply. • Communicating directly with covered ex- person (but does apply to payments by theecutive branch officials (defined later) in• Your work clearly requires the expense for other person to the lobbyist for lobbyingany attempt to influence the official actionsyou to satisfactorily perform the work. activities).or positions of those officials.
• The goods or services purchased are
• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-clearly not needed or used, other than in- Moving machinery. Generally, the cost ofdinating any of the preceding activities.cidentally, in your personal activities. moving your machinery from one city to another
is a deductible expense. So is the cost of moving• Their treatment is not specifically providedYour expenses for influencing legislation andmachinery from one plant to another, or fromfor under other tax law provisions. communicating directly with a covered execu-one part of your plant to another. You can de-tive branch official include a portion of your laborduct the cost of installing the machinery in thecosts and general and administrative costs ofExample. You are blind. You must use a new location. However, you must capitalize theyour business. For information on making thisreader to do your work, both at and away from costs of installing or moving newly purchasedallocation, see section 1.162-28 of the regula-your place of work. The reader’s services are machinery.tions.only for your work. You can deduct your ex-
You cannot take a charitable or businesspenses for the reader as a business expense. Outplacement services.You can deduct the
expense deduction for amounts paid to an or-costs of outplacement services you provide toInterview expense allowances.Reimburse- ganization if both the following apply. your employees to help them find new employ-ments you make to job candidates for transpor- ment, such as career counseling, resum´e assis-• The organization conducts lobbying activi-tation or other expenses related to interviews for tance, skills assessment, etc.ties on matters of direct financial interestpossible employment are not wages. You can The costs of outplacement services mayto your business.deduct the reimbursements as a business ex- cover more than one deduction category. Forpense. However, expenses for food, beverages,• A principal purpose of your contribution isexample, deduct as a utilities expense the costand entertainment are subject to the 50% limitto avoid the rules discussed earlier thatof telephone calls made under this service anddiscussed earlier under Meals and Entertain- prohibit a business deduction for lobbyingdeduct as rental expense the cost of rentingment. expenses. machinery and equipment for this service.
For information on whether the value of out-Legal and professional fees.Legal and pro- If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec-placement services is includable in your employ-fessional fees, such as fees charged by ac-tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with aees’ income, see Publication 15–B.countants, that are ordinary and necessarynotice on the part of dues that is allocable toexpenses directly related to operating your busi-nondeductible lobbying and political expenses,Penalties and fines.Penalties you pay forness are deductible as business expenses.you cannot deduct that part of the dues. late performance or nonperformance of a con-However, you usually cannot deduct legal fees
tract are generally deductible. For instance, ifyou pay to acquire business assets. Add them toCovered executive branch official.For
you contracted to construct a building by a cer-the basis of the property. purposes of this discussion, a covered executive
tain date and had to pay an amount for each dayIf the fees include payments for work of abranch official is any of the following. 
the building was not finished after that date, youpersonal nature (such as making a will), you
can deduct the amounts paid or incurred.take a business deduction only for the part of the1) The President.
On the other hand, you cannot deduct penal-fee related to your business. The personal por-2) The Vice President. ties or fines you pay to any government agencytion of legal fees for producing or collecting tax-
or instrumentality because of a violation of anyable income, doing or keeping your job, or for tax 3) Any officer or employee of the White
law. These fines or penalties include the follow-advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form House Office of the Executive Office of the
ing amounts.1040) if you itemize deductions. See Publication President and the two most senior level
529. officers of each of the other agencies in • Paid because of a conviction for a crime orthe Executive Office.Tax preparation fees.You can deduct as a after a plea of guilty or no contest in a
trade or business expense the cost of preparing 4) Any individual who: criminal proceeding.
Page 56 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 57 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Paid as a penalty imposed by federal, talize the cost of removing a component of aMethod 2. Figure your tax for 2003 claiming
state, or local law in a civil action, includ- depreciable asset if the replacement adds to the a credit for the prepaid amount. Follow these
ing certain additions to tax and additional value or usefulness of the asset or significantly steps.
amounts and assessable penalties im- increases its useful life.
1) Figure your tax for 2003 without deduct-posed by the Internal Revenue Code.
ing the repaid amount.Repairs. The cost of repairing or improving
• Paid in settlement of actual or possibleproperty used in your trade or business is either2) Refigure your tax from the earlier yearliability for a fine or penalty, whether civila deductible or capital expense. You can deductwithout including in income the amountor criminal. repairs that keep your property in a normal effi-you repaid in 2003.cient operating condition, but that do not add to• Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro-
3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownits value or usefulness or appreciably lengthenceeding that could result in a fine or pen-
on your return for the earlier year. This isits life. If the repairs add to the value or useful-alty.
the credit.ness of your property or significantly increase its
life, you must capitalize them. Although you can-Examples of nondeductible penalties and 4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax fornot deduct capital expenses as current ex-fines include the following. 2003 figured without the deduction (steppenses, you can usually deduct them over a 1).• Fines for violating city housing codes.period of time as depreciation.
If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct theThe cost of repairs includes the costs of• Fines paid by truckers for violating state
amount repaid as discussed earlier under Typelabor, supplies, and certain other items. Youmaximum highway weight laws.
of deduction.cannot deduct the value of your own labor.• Fines for violating air quality laws. If Method 2 results in less tax, claim theExamples of repairs include the following.
credit on line 67 of Form 1040, and write “I.R.C.• Civil penalties for violating federal laws re-• Patching and repairing floors. 1341” next to line 67.garding mining safety standards and dis-
charges into navigable waters. • Repainting the inside and outside of a
Example. For 2002, you filed a return andbuilding.
reported your income on the cash method. InA fine or penalty does not include any of the• Repairing roofs and gutters. 2003, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2002following.
gross income under a claim of right. Your filing• Mending leaks.• Legal fees and related expenses to defend status in 2003 and 2002 is single. Your income
yourself in a prosecution or civil action for and tax for both years are as follows:You cannot deduct the cost of repairs youa violation of the law imposing the fine oradded to the cost of goods sold as a separatecivil penalty. 2002 2002business expense. With Income Without Income• Court costs or stenographic and printing TaxableRepayments. If you had to repay an amountcharges. Income $15,000 $10,000you included in your income in an earlier year,• Compensatory damages paid to a govern-you may be able to deduct the amount repaid forTax $ 1,954 $ 1,204ment. the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amount
2003 2003you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be ableNonconformance penalty. You can deduct Without Deduction With Deductionto take a credit against your tax for the year ina nonconformance penalty assessed by the En- Taxablewhich you repaid it.vironmental Protection Agency for failing to Income $49,950 $44,950
Type of deduction.The type of deductionmeet certain emission standards. Tax  $9,304  $ 8,054you are allowed in the year of repayment de-
pends on the type of income you included in thePolitical contributions.You cannot deduct Your tax under Method 1 is $8,054. Your tax
earlier year. For instance, if you repay ancontributions or gifts to political parties or candi- under Method 2 is $8,554, figured as follows:
amount you previously reported as a capitaldates as business expenses. In addition, you
gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss oncannot deduct expenses you pay or incur to take Tax previously determined for 2002 $ 1,954
Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it aspart in any political campaign of a candidate for Less: Tax as refigured.......... − 1,204
self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-public office. Decrease in 2002 tax $ 750
ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedule Regular tax liability for 2003....... $9,304Indirect political contributions.You can- C–EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). Less: Decrease in 2002 tax....... − 750not deduct indirect political contributions and Refigured tax for 2003 $ 8,554If you reported the amount as wages, unem-costs of taking part in political activities as busi-ployment compensation, or other nonbusinessBecause you pay less tax under Method 1, youness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex-ordinary income, enter it on line 22 of Scheduleshould take a deduction for the repayment inpenses include the following. A (Form 1040). However, if the repayment is2003.over $3,000 and Method 1 (discussed later) ap-• Advertising in a convention program of a
Repayment does not apply. This discus-plies, deduct it on line 27 of Schedule A (Formpolitical party, or in any other publication if
sion does not apply to the following.1040).any of the proceeds from the publication
are for, or intended for, the use of a politi-Repayment—$3,000 or less. If the • Deductions for bad debts.cal party or candidate. amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it• Deductions from sales to customers, suchfrom your income in the year you repaid it.• Admission to a dinner or program (includ- as returns and allowances, and similaring, but not limited to, galas, dances, filmRepayment—over $3,000. If the amount items.presentations, parties, and sporting you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-• Deductions for legal and other expensesevents) if any of the proceeds from theduct the repayment, as described earlier. How-of contesting the repayment.function are for, or intended for, the use ofever, you can instead choose to take a tax credita political party or candidate. for the year of repayment if you included theYear of deduction (or credit).If you useincome under a claim of right. This means that• Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, the cash method of accounting, you can take theat the time you included the income, it appearedparade, concert, or similar event if identi- deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the taxthat you had an unrestricted right to it. If youfied with a political party or candidate. year in which you actually make the repayment.qualify for this choice, figure your tax under bothIf you use any other accounting method, you canmethods and use the method that results in lessRemoval costs. You can deduct the cost of deduct the repayment or claim a credit for it onlytax.retiring and removing a depreciable asset in for the tax year in which it is a proper deduction
connection with the installation or production ofMethod 1. Figure your tax for 2003 claiming under your accounting method. For example, if
a replacement asset. However, you must capi- a deduction for the repaid amount. you use an accrual method, you are entitled to
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 57

Page 58 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the deduction or credit in the tax year in which not change the tax law or make a technical tax ber for the form you need. The items you request
the obligation for the repayment accrues. will be faxed to you.decision, they can clear up problems that re-
sulted from previous contacts and ensure that For help with transmission problems, callSubscriptions. You can deduct as a business 703–487–4608.your case is given a complete and impartialexpense subscriptions to professional, techni- Long-distance charges may apply.review.cal, and trade journals that deal with your busi-To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:ness field. Phone. Many services are available by
phone.• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free atSupplies and materials.Unless you have de- 1–877–777–4778.ducted the cost in any earlier year, you generally
can deduct the cost of materials and supplies • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate
actually consumed and used during the tax year. tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to orderoffice in your area.
If you keep incidental materials and supplies current-year forms, instructions, and publi-• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are aon hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden- cations and prior-year forms and instruc-TTY/TDD user.tal materials and supplies you bought during the tions. You should receive your order within
tax year if all the following requirements are met. 10 days.• Visit the web site at www.irs.gov/advo-
cate.• You do not keep a record of when they are • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
used. your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.
For more information, see Publication 1546,
• You do not take an inventory of the • Solving problems. You can getThe Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.
amount on hand at the beginning and end face-to-face help solving tax problems
of the tax year. every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-Free tax services.To find out what services sistance Centers. An employee can ex-are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free• This method does not distort your income. plain IRS letters, request adjustments toTax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-your account, or help you set up a pay-cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-You can also deduct the cost of books, profes- ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-scribes other free tax information services,sional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor- tance Center for an appointment. To findmally use them up within a year. However, if theincluding tax education and assistance pro- the number, go to www.irs.gov or look inusefulness of these items extends substantiallygrams and a list of TeleTax topics. the phone book under “United States Gov-beyond the year they are placed in service, you ernment, Internal Revenue Service.”Internet. You can access the IRS web-generally must recover their costs through de- site 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, atpreciation. See Depreciation, earlier. • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesswww.irs.gov to: to TTY/TDD equipment, callUtilities.Your business expenses for heat, 1–800–829–4059  to ask tax or account• E-file. Access commercial tax preparationlights, power, and telephone service are deduct- questions or to order forms and publica-and e-file services available for free to eli-ible. However, any part due to personal use is tions.gible taxpayers.not deductible.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477  to• Check the amount of advance child taxTelephone. You cannot deduct the cost of listen to pre-recorded messages coveringcredit payments you received in 2003.basic local telephone service (including any various tax topics.• Check the status of your 2003 refund.taxes) for the first telephone line you have in
• Refund information. If you would like toyour home, even though you have an office in Click on “Where’s My Refund.” Be sure to
check the status of your 2003 refund, callyour home. However, charges for business wait at least 6 weeks from the date you
1–800–829–4477  for automated refundlong-distance phone calls on that line, as well asfiled your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-
information and follow the recorded in-the cost of a second line into your home usedtronically) and have your 2003 tax return
structions or call 1–800–829–1954 . Beexclusively for business, are deductible busi-available because you will need to know
sure to wait at least 6 weeks from the dateness expenses. your filing status and the exact whole dol-
you filed your return (3 weeks if you filedlar amount of your refund.
electronically) and have your 2003 tax re-
• Download forms, instructions, and publica-turn available because you will need to
tions. know your filing status and the exact
whole dollar amount of your refund.• Order IRS products online.
• See answers to frequently asked tax ques-14. Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-tions. ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give
• Search publications online by topic oraccurate, courteous, and professional answers,
keyword. we use several methods to evaluate the qualityHow To Get Tax
of our telephone services. One method is for a• Figure your withholding allowances usingsecond IRS representative to sometimes listenour Form W-4 calculator.Help in on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask
• Send us comments or request help by some callers to complete a short survey at the
email. end of the call.You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-• Sign up to receive local and national tax
tions, and get more information from the IRS in Walk-in. Many products and servicesnews by email.
several ways. By selecting the method that is are available on a walk-in basis.• Get information on starting and operatingbest for you, you will have quick and easy ac-
a small business.cess to tax help. • Products. You can walk in to many post
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upYou can also reach us using File Transfer
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem certain forms, instructions, and publica-Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
Fax. You can get over 100 of the mostpayer Advocate. stores, copy centers, city and county gov-
requested forms and instructions 24The Taxpayer Advocate independently rep- ernment offices, credit unions, and office
hours a day, 7 days a week, by fax.resents your interests and concerns within the supply stores have a collection of products
Just call 703–368–9694  from your fax ma-IRS by protecting your rights and resolving available to print from a CD-ROM or pho-
chine. Follow the directions from the prompts.problems that have not been fixed through nor- tocopy from reproducible proofs. Also,
When you order forms, enter the catalog num-mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can- some IRS offices and libraries have the
Page 58 Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help

Page 59 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter-• Central part of U.S.: fee) or call 1–877–233–6767  toll free to buy
nal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative Central Area Distribution Center the CD-ROM for $22 (plus a $5 handling fee).
Bulletins available for research purposes. P.O. Box 8903 The first release is available in early January
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903 and the final release is available in late Febru-
• Services. You can walk in to your local ary.Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- • Eastern part of U.S. and foreign
ness day to ask tax questions or get helpaddresses: CD-ROM for small businesses. IRS
with a tax problem. An employee can ex- Eastern Area Distribution Center Publication 3207, Small Business Re-
plain IRS letters, request adjustments to P.O. Box 85074 source Guide, is a must for every small
your account, or help you set up a pay- Richmond, VA 23261–5074 business owner or any taxpayer about to start a
ment plan. You can set up an appointment business. This handy, interactive CD contains
by calling your local Center and, at the CD-ROM for tax products. You can all the business tax forms, instructions and pub-
prompt, leaving a message requesting order IRS Publication 1796, Federal lications needed to successfully manage a busi-
Everyday Tax Solutions help. A represen- Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain: ness. In addition, the CD provides an
tative will call you back within 2 business abundance of other helpful information, such as• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-days to schedule an in-person appoint- how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-lications.ment at your convenience. To find the ing for your business, and much more. The de-
number, go to www.irs.gov or look in the • Prior-year forms and instructions. sign of the CD makes finding information easy
phone book under “United States Govern- and quick and incorporates file formats and• Frequently requested tax forms that mayment, Internal Revenue Service.” browsers that can be run on virtually anybe filled in electronically, printed out fordesktop or laptop computer.submission, and saved for recordkeeping.Mail. You can send your order for  It is available in early April. You can get a
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.forms, instructions, and publications to free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676  or by
the Distribution Center nearest to you visiting the website at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In-and receive a response within 10 workdays after
formation Service (NTIS) on the Internet atyour request is received. Use the address that
www.irs.gov/cdorders for $22 (no handlingapplies to your part of the country.
• Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help Page 59

Page 60 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Car and truck Dues, membership ....... 5 5A H
expenses ...........4 ,  5 4Accountable plan........ 5 2 Health insurance,
Carrying charges........ 2 8 deduction forAchievement awards ...... 7 E self-employed......... 2 5Charitable:Advertising.......... 53, 54 Economic interest....... 4 0Contributions.......... 5 4 Heating equipment........ 4Amortization: Economic performance .... 5Sports event.......... 5 4 Help (See Tax help)Anti-abuse rule......... 3 7 Education expenses.....7 ,  5 5Circulation costs,Anti-churning rules...... 3 6 Hobby losses, not forElderly, improvementsnewspapers andCorporate organization profit................ 5f o r................. 3 0periodicals........... 2 9costs.............. 3 4 Home, business use....... 4Election:Clean-fuelDispositions of section 197 SIMPLE IRA period...... 1 1property........ 48, 49, 50intangibles.......... 3 8 IElectric vehicle credit..... 5 0Experimental costs...... 4 0 Cleanup costs, Impairment-relatedEmployee benefitGoing into business environmental ...... 30, 55 expenses ............ 5 6programs ............. 7costs.............. 3 3 Club dues ............. 5 5 Improvements:Employees’ pay .......... 6How to amortize........ 3 4 Comments ............. 1 By lessee............ 1 7How to deduct......... 3 3 Employment taxes ....... 2 4Commitment fees ........ 2 0 For disabled and elderly . . . 30Incorrect amount Entertainment .......... 5 1Compensation .......... 1 1 To business assets....... 3deducted ........... 3 7 Entertainment tickets..... 5 4Computer software ...... 3 6 Income taxes........... 2 4Partnership organization Environmental cleanupConstant-yield method, Incorrect amount ofcosts.............. 3 4 costs ............. 30, 55O I D ................ 2 0 amortization deducted . . . 37Pollution control facilities . . 39 Environmental remediationContested liability........ 5Reforestation costs...... 3 8 Individual retirementcosts (See EnvironmentalContributions:Related person........ 3 7 arrangements (IRAs).... 1 4cleanup costs)Charitable............ 5 4Research costs........ 4 0 Insurance:Excise taxes........... 2 4Political.............. 5 7Section 197 intangibles Capitalized premiums.... 2 7Experimentationdefined ............ 3 5 Copyrights ............ 3 5 Deductible premiums.... 2 5costs ............. 28, 40Start-up costs......... 3 3 Cost depletion.......... 4 0 NondeductibleExploration costs........ 2 9Anticipated liabilities..... 5 4 premiums ........... 2 6Cost of getting lease . . . 16, 35
Self-employedAssessments, local...... 2 3 Cost of goods sold........ 3
individuals.......... 2 5Assistance (See Tax help) FCovenant not to
Intangible drilling costs . . . 28At-risk limits............ 4 compete ............. 3 6 Fees:
Intangibles, amortization . . 35Commitment .......... 2 0Attorney fees........... 5 6 Credit, electric vehicle.... 5 0
Legal and professional . . . 56Interest:Awards:
Loan origination........ 2 0 Allocation of........... 1 7Achievement ........... 7
D Regulatory ........... 5 6 Below-market.......... 2 1Length-of-service........ 7
De minimis OID ......... 2 0 Tax return preparation.... 5 6 Business expense for.... 1 7Safety achievement...... 7
Capitalized......... 20, 21Debt-financed: Fines ................ 5 6
Carrying charge........ 2 8Acquisition........... 1 9 Forgone interest........ 2 2
B Deductible............ 1 9Distributions.......... 1 9 Form:
Forgone ............. 2 2Bad debts (See Business bad Definitions: 1098 ............... 1 9
Life insurance policies.... 2 1debts) Achievement award ...... 7 3115 ............... 2 4
Not deductible......... 2 0Black lung payments..... 5 4 Business bad debt...... 4 5 4562 ............. 33, 34
Refunds of ........... 2 1Clean-burning fuel...... 4 8Bonuses: 4952 ............... 1 9
When to deduct........ 2 1Clean-fuel vehicleEmployee ............. 7 5213 ................ 5
Interview expenses...... 5 6property............ 4 8Royalties............. 4 4 5304–SIMPLE ......... 1 1
Clean-fuel vehicle refueling I R A.................. 1 45 3 0 5 – S ............. 1 1Bribes................ 5 4
property............ 4 8 5 3 0 5 – S A ............ 1 1Brownfields (See Environmental
Motor vehicle.......... 4 8 5 3 0 5 – S E P ............ 9cleanup costs) KNecessary expense ...... 3 5305–SIMPLE ......... 1 1Business: Keogh plan (See QualifiedNonqualifying property.... 4 8 8582 ............... 1 9Assets ............... 3 retirement plan)Ordinary expense........ 3 8826 ............... 3 3Books and records...... 3 5 Key person ............ 2 1Qualified electric vehicle . . 508834 ............... 5 0Meal expenses......... 5 3 Kickbacks ............. 5 4Section 197 intangibles . . . 358885 ............... 2 6Use of car...........4 ,  5 4
Demolition expenses..... 5 5 T .................. 4 5Use of home ........... 4
W – 2 ............... 1 2Depletion: LBusiness bad debts:
Mineral property........ 4 0 Franchise ........... 36, 55 Leases:Defined.............. 4 5
Oil and gas wells....... 4 1 Franchise taxes......... 2 4 Canceling............ 1 5How to treat........... 4 6
Percentage table....... 4 3 Cost of getting....... 16, 35Free tax services........ 5 8Recovery ............ 4 7
Timber .............. 4 4 Improvements by lessee . . 17Types of............. 4 6 Fringe benefits.......... 7
Who can claim......... 4 0 Leveraged............ 1 6When worthless........ 4 6 Fuel taxes............. 2 4
Depreciation........... 5 5 Mineral.............. 4 4Where to deduct........ 4 7
Development costs, Oil and gas........... 4 4
Gminers .............. 2 9 Sales distinguished...... 1 5
C Gas wells ............. 4 3 Taxes on............. 1 6Disabled, improvements
Campaign contribution.... 5 7 Geothermal wells...... 28, 43f o r................. 3 0 Legal and professional
Capital expenses......... 3 Gifts, nominal value....... 7 fees ................ 5 6Drilling and development
Capitalization of interest . . . 21 costs............... 2 8 Going into business.....3 ,  3 3Licenses ............ 36, 56
Car allowance .......... 5 2 Driveways .............. 3 Goodwill .............. 3 5 Line of credit........... 1 9
Page 60

Page 61 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Loans: Oil and gas wells: Exploration expenses.... 2 9 Sick pay ............... 8
Below-market interest Depletion ............ 4 1 Timber property........ 3 9 SIMPLE plans ........ 11, 12
rate............... 2 1 Drilling costs.......... 2 8 Recovery of amount Standard meal allowance . . 52
Discounted ........... 2 1 Partnerships.......... 4 3 deducted ............. 4 Standard mileage rate.... 5 2
Origination fees........ 2 0 S  corporations......... 4 3 Reforestation costs...... 3 8 Standby charges ........ 2 0To employees .......... 8 Ordinary expense ........ 3 Regulatory fees......... 5 6 Start-up costs.......... 3 3Lobbying expenses ...... 5 6 Organization costs: Reimbursements ........ 5 1 Subscriptions ........ 55, 58Lodging and meals ....... 8 Corporate............ 3 4 Accountable plan....... 5 2 Suggestions ............ 1Partnership........... 3 4Long-term care Mileage.............. 5 2 Supplies and materials.... 5 8insurance............ 2 5 Original issue discount . . . 20Nonaccountable plan.... 5 3
Losses: Outplacement services .... 5 6 Per diem............. 5 2
TAt-risk limits............ 4 Qualifying requirements . . . 52
Tax help .............. 5 8Limits................ 4 Related persons:PNet operating........... 4 Tax preparation fees..... 5 6Anti-churning rules...... 3 7Passive activities......... 4Not-for-profit rules........ 5 Clean-fuel vehicle Taxes:Payments in kind......... 4Passive activities........ 4 deduction........... 4 9 Carrying charge........ 2 8Penalties: Coal or iron ore........ 4 4 Employment .......... 2 4Deductible............ 5 6 Payments to .........5 ,  2 1 Excise .............. 2 4M Nondeductible......... 5 6 Refiners............. 4 1 Franchise............ 2 4Machinery parts.......... 4 Prepayment ........... 2 0 Unreasonable rent...... 1 5 Fuel ................ 2 4Materials and supplies.... 5 8 Per diem and car allowances: Income .............. 2 4Removal:Meals ................ 5 1 High-low rate.......... 5 2 Leased property........ 1 6Barrier.............. 3 0Meals and entertainment . . 53 Regular rate.......... 5 2 Personal property....... 2 4Costs ............... 5 7Reporting allowance..... 5 2Meals and lodging........ 8 Real estate........... 2 3Retired asset.......... 3 0Standard mealMedical expenses ....... 5 6 Sales ............... 2 4Rent expense,allowance........... 5 2Mining: Unemployment fund ..... 2 4capitalizing........... 1 7Standard mileage rate.... 5 2Depletion............ 4 3 Taxpayer Advocate ...... 5 8Repairs ............... 5 7Percentage depletion..... 4 1Development costs...... 2 9 Telephone ............. 5 8Repayments (claim ofPersonal expenses........ 4Exploration costs....... 2 9 Timber ............. 38, 44right)............... 5 7Personal property tax..... 2 4Money purchase pension Tools ................. 3Replacements ........... 3plan ................ 1 3 Points................ 2 0 Trademark, tradeResearch costs ....... 28, 40More information (See Tax help) Political contributions.... 5 7 name ............. 36, 55Retirement plans:Mortgage: Pollution control Travel................ 5 1Defined benefit......... 1 3Cost of acquiring....... 2 0 facilities............. 3 9 Defined contribution..... 1 3 TTY/TDD information..... 5 8Interest.............. 1 9 Prepaid expense: I R A ................ 1 4
Moving expenses, Extends useful life...... 2 7 Money purchase........ 1 3 Umachinery ........... 5 6 General rule........... 5 Profit-sharing.......... 1 3 Unemployment fundInterest.............. 2 1 Qualified............. 1 2 taxes ............... 2 4Rent ................ 1 5 Salary reductionN Unpaid expenses, relatedPrepayment penalty...... 2 0 arrangement......... 1 0Natural gas............ 4 3 person .............5 ,  2 1Profit-sharing plans...... 1 3 S E P................. 9Necessary expense ....... 3 Utilities............... 5 8SIMPLE ............. 1 0Publications (See Tax help)Net operating loss........ 4 Roads ................. 3Nonaccountable plan..... 5 3 VQNonqualifying Vacation pay............ 8SQualified retirement plan . . 12intangibles........... 3 6
Salaries and wages....... 6Not-for-profit activities..... 5
Sales taxes............ 2 4 WNotification requirement: R
Self-employed health Wages and salaries ....... 6SIMPLE IRA .......... 1 1 Rate Worksheet for
insurance deduction.... 2 5 Welfare benefit funds...... 8Self-Employed ........ 1 4
Self-employment tax..... 2 4Real estate taxes........ 2 3O ■Self-insurance, reserveRecapture:Office in home........... 4 f o r................. 2 6Clean-fuel deductions.... 4 9
SEP plans .............. 9Electric vehicle credit.... 5 0
Page 61

Page 62 of 62 of Publication 535 10:09 - 28-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Business Taxpayers
General Guides
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Spanish Language Publications
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2004
Highlights of 2003 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guide
Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide
Circular A, Agricultural Employer’s Tax
Guide
Circular SS, Federal Tax Guide For
Employers in the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Guam, American Samoa, and the
Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Circular PR Guía Contributiva Federal
Para Patronos Puertorriqueños
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Excise Taxes for 2004
Withholding of Tax on Nonresident
Aliens and Foreign Entities
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
Residential Rental Property
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Business Expenses
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Installment Sales
Accounting Periods and Methods
Corporations
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Basis of Assets
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Retirement Plans for Small Business
(SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans)
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Starting a Business and Keeping
Records
The IRS Collection Process
Information on the United States-
Canada Income Tax Treaty
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
How To Depreciate Property
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
Tax on Unrelated Business Income of
Exempt Organizations
Wage and Tax Statement
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends*
Profit or Loss From Business*
Net Profit From Business*
Capital Gains and Losses*
Supplemental Income and Loss*
Profit or Loss From Farming*
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled*
Estimated Tax for Individuals*
Self-Employment Tax*
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*
Capital Gains and Losses
Partner’s Share of Income,
Credits, Deductions, etc.
U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return
U.S. Income Tax Return for an S Corporation
Employee Business Expenses*
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses*
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative*
Child and Dependent Care Expenses*
General Business Credit
Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*
Moving Expenses*
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts*
Installment Sale Income*
Noncash Charitable Contributions*
Change of Address*
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home*
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
Nondeductible IRAs*
Passive Activity Loss Limitations*
15
15-A
51
80
179
926
378
463
505
510
515
517
527
533
534
535
536
537
541
538
542
Partnerships
544
551
556
560
561
583
594
597
598
901
911
925
946
947
908
1544
1546
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
10134
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes*
Sch R
Sch SE
1040-ES
1040X
Sch D
Sch K-1
1120
1120S
1065 U.S. Return of Partnership Income
2106
2106-EZ
2441
2848
3800
4868
3903
5329
6252
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Specialized Publications
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Employee’s Withholding Allowance Certificate*W-4
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return*
940
940-EZ
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*1040
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return*
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
587
U.S. Tax Treaties
Practice Before the IRS and Power of
Attorney
Tax Incentives for Distressed
Communities
Employer’s Guides
Certification for Reduced Tax Rates in
Tax Treaty Countries
686
954
Capital Gains and Losses and Built-In Gains
Shareholder’s Share of Income, Credits,
Deductions, etc.
Sch D
Sch K-1
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals,
Estates, and Trusts*
2210
Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000 Received
in a Trade or Business*
8300
Depreciation and Amortization*4562
Sales of Business Property*4797
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
U.S. Corporation Short-Form Income
Tax Return
1120-A
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by
computer, phone, and mail.
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. Items with an asterisk are available by fax. For these orders only, use the catalog number
when ordering.
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
W-2
10220
11234
10983
17001
11320
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
11346
12187
11358
11340
11360
Employer’s Quarterly Federal Tax Return941
11359
Sch J Farm Income Averaging* 25513
11510
Catalog
Number
20604
11744
11862
11980
12392
12490
12906
13086
13141
13329
13601
62299
63966
12081
13232
63704
6213311390
11393
11394
11450
11456
11700
11520
11516
Form Number and Title
Continuation Sheet for Schedule D*Sch D-1 10424
Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits
15-B
Page 62