Contents
What's New .................. 1
Reminders ................... 1
Introduction .................. 2
Who Must File ................. 2
Who Should File ............... 5
Filing Status .................. 5
Dependents ................. 11
Social Security Numbers for 
Dependents .............. 22
Standard Deduction ............ 23
2021 Standard Deduction Tables .... 24
How To Get Tax Help ........... 26
Index ..................... 29
What's New
Who must file.  In some cases, the amount of 
income you can receive before you must file a 
tax return has increased. Table 1 shows the fil-
ing requirements for most taxpayers.
Standard deduction increased.  The stand-
ard deduction for taxpayers who don't itemize 
their deductions on Schedule A of Form 1040 or 
1040-SR is higher for 2021 than it was for 2020. 
The amount depends on your filing status. You 
can use the 2021 Standard Deduction Tables 
near the end of this publication to figure your 
standard deduction.
Charitable contribution deduction.  In 2021, 
you are allowed a charitable contribution de-
duction for cash contributions of up to $300 
($600 if your filing status is married filing jointly) 
if you don't itemize your deductions. For more 
information, see Line 12b in the Instructions for 
Form 1040.
Reminders
Future developments.  Information about any 
future developments affecting Pub. 501 (such 
as legislation enacted after we release it) will be 
posted at IRS.gov/Pub501.
Taxpayer identification number for aliens.
If you are a nonresident or resident alien and 
you don't have and aren't eligible to get a social 
security number (SSN), you must apply for an 
individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). 
Your spouse may also need an ITIN if he or she 
doesn't have and isn't eligible to get an SSN. 
See Form W -7, Application for IRS Individual 
Taxpayer Identification Number. Also see So-
cial Security Numbers for Dependents, later.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC) . Photographs of missing 
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 501
Cat. No. 15000U
Dependents,
Standard
Deduction,
and Filing 
Information
For use in preparing
2021 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 30  15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jan 28, 2022

children selected by the Center may appear in 
this publication on pages that would otherwise 
be blank. You can help bring these children 
home by looking at the photographs and calling 
800-THE-LOST (800 -843-5678) if you recog-
nize a child.
Introduction
This publication discusses some tax rules that 
affect every person who may have to file a fed-
eral income tax return. It answers some basic 
questions: who must file, who should file, what 
filing status to use, and the amount of the stand-
ard deduction.
Who Must File  explains who must file an in-
come tax return. If you have little or no gross in-
come, reading this section will help you decide 
if you have to file a return.
Who Should File  helps you decide if you 
should file a return, even if you aren't required 
to do so.
Filing Status helps you determine which fil-
ing status to use. Filing status is important in 
determining whether you must file a return and 
whether you may claim certain deductions and 
credits. It also helps determine your standard 
deduction and tax rate.
Dependents explains the difference be-
tween a qualifying child  and a qualifying rela-
tive. Other topics include the social security 
number requirement for dependents, the rules 
for multiple support agreements, and the rules 
for divorced or separated parents.
Standard Deduction gives the rules and dol-
lar amounts for the standard deduction —a ben-
efit for taxpayers who don't itemize their deduc-
tions. This section also discusses the standard 
deduction for taxpayers who are blind or age 65 
or older, as well as special rules that limit the 
standard deduction available to dependents. In 
addition, this section helps you decide whether 
you would be better off taking the standard de-
duction or itemizing your deductions.
How To Get Tax Help  explains how to get 
tax help from the IRS.
This publication is for U.S. citizens and resi-
dent aliens only. If you are a resident alien for 
the entire year, you must follow the same tax 
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules to de-
termine if you are a resident or nonresident 
alien are discussed in chapter 1 of Pub. 519.
Nonresident aliens. If you were a nonresident 
alien at any time during the year, the rules and 
tax forms that apply to you may be different 
from those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Pub. 
519.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and sug-
gestions for future editions.
You can send us comments through 
IRS.gov/FormComments. Or, you can write to 
the Internal Revenue Service, Tax Forms and 
Publications, 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, 
IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments and 
suggestions as we revise our tax forms, instruc-
tions, and publications. Don’t send tax ques-
tions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions. 
If you have a tax question not answered by this 
publication or the How To Get Tax Help  section 
at the end of this publication, go to the IRS In-
teractive Tax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the 
search feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications. Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download 
current and prior -year forms, instructions, and 
publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and 
publications. Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to 
order current forms, instructions, and publica-
tions; call 800 -829-3676 to order prior -year 
forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon 
as possible. Don’t resubmit requests you’ve al-
ready sent us. You can get forms and publica-
tions faster online.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
559 Survivors, Executors, and 
Administrators
929 Tax Rules for Children and 
Dependents
Form (and Instructions)
1040-X Amended U.S. Individual Income 
Tax Return
2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration 
of Representative
8332 Release/Revocation of Release of 
Claim to Exemption for Child by 
Custodial Parent
8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's 
Interest and Dividends
Who Must File
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, 
whether you must file a federal income tax re-
turn depends on your gross income, your filing 
   559
   929
  1040-X
   2848
   8332
   8814
Table 1. 2021 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers
IF your filing status is...
AND at the end of 2021 you 
were...*
THEN file a return 
if your gross 
income was at 
least...**
single under 65 $12,550
65 or older $14,250
head of household under 65 $18,800
65 or older $20,500
married, filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $25,100
65 or older (one spouse) $26,450
65 or older (both spouses) $27,800
married, filing separately any age   $5
qualifying widow(er) under 65 $25,100
65 or older $26,450
* If you were born before January 2, 1957, you're considered to be 65 or older at the 
end of 2021. (If your spouse died in 2021, see Death of spouse, later. If you're 
preparing a return for someone who died in 2021, see Death of taxpayer, later.
** Gross income means all income you receive in the form of money, goods, 
property, and services that isn't exempt from tax, including any income from sources 
outside the United States or from the sale of your main home (even if you can exclude 
part or all of it). Don't include any social security benefits unless (a) you're married 
filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during 2021, or (b) 
one-half of your social security benefits plus your other gross income and any 
tax-exempt interest is more than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) 
applies, see the Form 1040 and 1040-SR instructions to figure the taxable part of 
social security benefits you must include in gross income. Gross income includes 
gains, but not losses, reported on Form 8949 or Schedule D. Gross income from a 
business means, for example, the amount on Schedule C, line 7; or Schedule F, 
line 9. But in figuring gross income, don't reduce your income by any losses, including 
any loss on Schedule C, line 7; or Schedule F, line 9.
*** If you didn't live with your spouse at the end of 2021 (or on the date your spouse 
died) and your gross income was at least $5, you must file a return regardless of your 
age.
Page 2 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 Publication 501 (2021)

status, your age, and whether you are a de-
pendent. For details, see Table 1 and Table 2. 
You must also file if one of the situations descri-
bed in Table 3 applies. The filing requirements 
apply even if you owe no tax.
You may have to pay a penalty if you are re-
quired to file a return but fail to do so. If you will-
fully fail to file a return, you may be subject to 
criminal prosecution.
Gross income.  Gross income is all income 
you receive in the form of money, goods, prop-
erty, and services that isn't exempt from tax. If 
you are married and live with your spouse in a 
community property state, half of any income 
defined by state law as community income may 
be considered yours. For a list of community 
property states, see Community property states 
under Married Filing Separately, later.
Self-employed persons.  If you are 
self-employed in a business that provides serv-
ices (where products aren't a factor), your gross 
income from that business is the gross receipts. 
If you are self -employed in a business involving 
manufacturing, merchandising, or mining, your 
gross income from that business is the total 
sales minus the cost of goods sold. In either 
case, you must add any income from invest-
ments and from incidental or outside operations 
or sources.
Filing status.  Your filing status generally de-
pends on whether you are single or married. 
Whether you are single or married is deter-
mined at the end of your tax year, which is De-
cember 31 for most taxpayers. Filing status is 
discussed in detail later in this publication.
Age. Age is a factor in determining if you must 
file a return only if you are 65 or older at the end 
of your tax year. For 2021, you are 65 or older if 
you were born before January 2, 1957.
Filing Requirements
for Most Taxpayers
You must file a return if your gross income for 
the year was at least the amount shown on the 
appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents should 
see Table 2 instead.
Deceased Persons
You must file an income tax return for a dece-
dent (a person who died) if both of the following 
are true.
1. You are the surviving spouse, executor, 
administrator, or legal representative.
2. The decedent met the filing requirements 
described in this publication at the time of 
his or her death.
For more information, see Final Income Tax 
Return for Decedent —Form 1040 or 1040 -SR 
in Pub. 559.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died in 2021, 
read this before using Table 1 or Table 2 to find 
whether you must file a 2021 return. Consider 
your spouse to be 65 or older at the end of 2021 
only if he or she was 65 or older at the time of 
death. Even if your spouse was born before 
January 2, 1957, he or she isn't considered 65 
or older at the end of 2021 unless he or she was 
65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before his or her 65th birthday.
Example. Your spouse was born on Febru-
ary 14, 1956, and died on February 13, 2021. 
Your spouse is considered age 65 at the time of 
death. However, if your spouse died on Febru-
ary 12, 2021, your spouse isn't considered age 
65 at the time of death and is not 65 or older at 
the end of 2021.
Death of taxpayer.  If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2021, read this 
before using Table 1 or Table 2. Consider the 
taxpayer to be 65 or older at the end of 2021 
only if he or she was 65 or older at the time of 
death. Even if the taxpayer was born before 
January 2, 1957, he or she isn't considered 65 
or older at the end of 2021 unless he or she was 
65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before his or her 65th birthday.
U.S. Citizens or Resident Aliens 
Living Abroad
To determine whether you must file a return, in-
clude in your gross income any income you 
earned or received abroad, including any in-
come you can exclude under the foreign earned 
income exclusion. For more information on spe-
cial tax rules that may apply to you, see Pub. 
54.
Residents of Puerto Rico
If you are a U.S. citizen and also a bona fide 
resident of Puerto Rico, you must generally file 
a U.S. income tax return for any year in which 
you meet the income requirements. This is in 
addition to any legal requirement you may have 
to file an income tax return with Puerto Rico.
If you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico 
for the whole year, your U.S. gross income 
doesn't include income from sources within Pu-
erto Rico. It does, however, include any income 
you received for your services as an employee 
of the United States or any U.S. agency. If you 
receive income from Puerto Rican sources that 
isn't subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your 
standard deduction, which reduces the amount 
of income you can have before you must file a 
U.S. income tax return.
For more information, see Pub. 570, Tax 
Guide for Individuals With Income From U.S. 
Possessions.
Individuals With Income From U.S. 
Possessions
If you had income from Guam, the Common-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-
can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special 
rules may apply when determining whether you 
must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In ad-
dition, you may have to file a return with the in-
dividual possession government. See Pub. 570 
for more information.
Dependents
A person who is a dependent may still have to 
file a return. It depends on his or her earned in-
come, unearned income, and gross income. 
For details, see Table 2. A dependent must also 
file if one of the situations described in Table 3 
applies.
Responsibility of parent. If a dependent child 
must file an income tax return but can't file due 
to age or any other reason, a parent, guardian, 
or other legally responsible person must file it 
for the child. If the child can't sign the return, the 
parent or guardian must sign the child's name 
followed by the words “By (your signature), pa-
rent for minor child.”
Earned income.  Earned income includes sal-
aries, wages, professional fees, and other 
amounts received as pay for work you actually 
perform. Earned income (only for purposes of 
filing requirements and the standard deduction) 
also includes any part of a taxable scholarship. 
See chapter 1 of Pub. 970 for more information 
on taxable and nontaxable scholarships.
Child's earnings.  Amounts a child earns 
by performing services are included in his or her 
gross income and not the gross income of the 
parent. This is true even if under local law the 
child's parent has the right to the earnings and 
may actually have received them. But if the 
child doesn't pay the tax due on this income, 
the parent is liable for the tax.
Unearned income.  Unearned income in-
cludes income such as interest, dividends, and 
capital gains. Trust distributions of interest, divi-
dends, capital gains, and survivor annuities are 
also considered unearned income.
Election to report child's unearned income 
on parent's return.  You may be able to in-
clude your child's interest and dividend income 
on your tax return. If you do this, your child 
won't have to file a return. To make this elec-
tion, all of the following conditions must be met.
• Your child was under age 19 (or under age 
24 if a student) at the end of 2021. (A child 
born on January 1, 2003, is considered to 
be age 19 at the end of 2021; you can't 
make the election for this child unless the 
child was a student. Similarly, a child born 
on January 1, 1998, is considered to be 
age 24 at the end of 2021; you can't make 
the election for this child.)
• Your child had gross income only from in-
terest and dividends (including capital gain 
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends).
• The interest and dividend income was less 
than $11,000.
• Your child is required to file a return for 
2021 unless you make this election.
• Your child doesn't file a joint return for 
2021.
Page 3 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 3

2021 Filing Requirements for Dependents 
See Dependents to find out if you are a dependent.
If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see if you must file a return.
In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes 
unemployment compensation, taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income from a 
trust. Earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income 
is the total of your unearned and earned income.
CAUTION
!
If your gross income was $4,300 or more, you usually can't be claimed as a dependent unless you are a qualifying child. 
For details, see Dependents.
Single dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your unearned income was more than $1,100.
2. Your earned income was more than $12,550.
3. Your gross income was more than the larger of— 
a. $1,100, or
b. Your earned income (up to $12,200) plus $350.
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your unearned income was more than $2,800 ($4,500 if 65 or older and blind).
2. Your earned income was more than $14,250 ($15,950 if 65 or older and blind).
3. Your gross income was more than the larger of—
a. $2,800 ($4,500 if 65 or older and blind), or 
b. Your earned income (up to $12,200) plus $2,050 ($3,750 if 65 or older and blind).
Married dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions.
2. Your unearned income was more than $1,100.
3. Your earned income was more than $12,550.
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of—
a. $1,100, or
b.  Your earned income (up to $12,200) plus $350. 
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions.
2. Your unearned income was more than $2,450 ($3,800 if 65 or older and blind).
3. Your earned income was more than $13,900 ($15,250 if 65 or older and blind).
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of—
a. $2,450 ($3,800 if 65 or older and blind), or 
b. Your earned income (up to $12,200) plus $1,700 ($3,050 if 65 or older and blind).
Table 2.
Page 4 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4 Publication 501 (2021)

• No estimated tax payment was made for 
2021 and no 2020 overpayment was ap-
plied to 2021 under your child's name and 
social security number.
• No federal income tax was withheld from 
your child's income under the backup with-
holding rules.
• You are the parent whose return must be 
used when making the election to report 
your child's unearned income.
For more information, see Form 8814 and 
Parent's Election To Report Child's Interest and 
Dividends in Pub. 929.
Other Situations
You may have to file a tax return even if your 
gross income is less than the amount shown in 
Table 1 or Table 2 for your filing status. See Ta-
ble 3 for those other situations when you must 
file.
Who Should File
Even if you don't have to file, you should file a 
tax return if you can get money back. For exam-
ple, you should file if one of the following ap-
plies.
1. You had income tax withheld from your 
pay.
2. You made estimated tax payments for the 
year or had any of your overpayment for 
last year applied to this year's estimated 
tax.
3. You qualify for the earned income credit. 
See Pub. 596 for more information.
4. You qualify for the refundable child tax 
credit or additional child tax credit. See the 
Instructions for Form 1040 for more infor-
mation.
5. You qualify for the refundable American 
opportunity credit. See Form 8863.
6. You qualify for the health coverage tax 
credit. For information on this credit, see 
Form 8885.
7. You qualify for the credit for federal tax on 
fuels. See Form 4136.
8. You qualify for the premium tax credit. See 
Form 8962.
9. You qualify for the recovery rebate credit. 
See the instructions for Form 1040, 
line 30.
10. You qualify for the credits for sick and fam-
ily leave. See Form 7202.
11. You qualify for the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses. See Form 2441.
Form 1099-B received. Even if you aren't re-
quired to file a return, you should consider filing 
if all of the following apply.
• You received a Form 1099-B, Proceeds 
From Broker and Barter Exchange Trans-
actions (or substitute statement).
• The amount in box 1d of Form 1099-B (or 
substitute statement), when added to your 
other gross income, means you have to file 
a tax return because of the filing require-
ment in Table 1 or Table 2 that applies to 
you.
• Box 1e of Form 1099-B (or substitute 
statement) is blank.
In this case, filing a return may keep you from 
getting a notice from the IRS.
Filing Status
You must determine your filing status before 
you can determine whether you must file a tax 
return, your standard deduction (discussed 
later), and your tax. You also use your filing sta-
tus to determine whether you are eligible to 
claim certain other deductions and credits.
Table 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2021 Return
You must file a return if any of the conditions below apply.
1. You owe any special taxes reported on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), including any of the following (see the instructions for 
Schedule 2 (Form 1040)).
a. Alternative minimum tax.
b. Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA), or other tax-favored account.
c. Social security or Medicare tax on tips you didn't report to your employer or on wages you received from an 
employer who didn't withhold these taxes.
d. Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer or on 
group-term life insurance and additional taxes on health savings accounts.
e. Household employment taxes.
f. Recapture taxes.
2. You (or your spouse if filing jointly) received Archer MSA, Medicare Advantage MSA, or health savings account 
distributions.
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400.
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer 
social security and Medicare taxes.
5. Advance payments of the premium tax credit were made for you, your spouse, or a dependent who enrolled in coverage 
through the Health Insurance Marketplace. You or whoever enrolled you should have received Form(s) 1095-A showing the 
amount of the advance payments. 
6. Advance payments of the health coverage tax credit were made for you, your spouse, or a dependent. You or whoever 
enrolled you should have received Form(s) 1099-H showing the amount of the advance payments.
7. You are required to include amounts in income under section 965 or you have a net tax liability under section 965 that you 
are paying in installments under section 965(h) or deferred by making an election under section 965(i).
Page 5 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 5

There are five filing statuses.
• Single.
• Married filing jointly.
• Married filing separately.
• Head of household.
• Qualifying widow(er).
If more than one filing status applies to you, 
choose the one that will give you the lowest tax.
Marital Status
In general, your filing status depends on 
whether you are considered unmarried or mar-
ried.
Unmarried persons.  You are considered un-
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you are either:
• Unmarried, or
• Legally separated from your spouse under 
a divorce or separate maintenance decree.
State law governs whether you are married 
or legally separated under a divorce or separate 
maintenance decree.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced un-
der a final decree by the last day of the year, 
you are considered unmarried for the whole 
year.
Divorce and remarriage.  If you obtain a 
divorce for the sole purpose of filing tax returns 
as unmarried individuals, and at the time of di-
vorce you intend to and do, in fact, remarry 
each other in the next tax year, you and your 
spouse must file as married individuals in both 
years.
Annulled marriages.  If you obtain a court 
decree of annulment, which holds that no valid 
marriage ever existed, you are considered un-
married even if you filed joint returns for earlier 
years. File amended returns (Form 1040 -X) 
claiming single or head of household status for 
all tax years that are affected by the annulment 
and not closed by the statute of limitations for 
filing a tax return. Generally, for a credit or re-
fund, you must file Form 1040 -X within 3 years 
(including extensions) after the date you filed 
your original return or within 2 years after the 
date you paid the tax, whichever is later. If you 
filed your original tax return early (for example, 
March 1), your return is considered filed on the 
due date (generally April 15). However, if you 
had an extension to file (for example, until Octo-
ber 15) but you filed earlier and we received it 
on July 1, your return is considered filed on July 
1.
Head of household or qualifying 
widow(er). If you are considered unmarried, 
you may be able to file as head of household or 
as qualifying widow(er). See Head of House-
hold and Qualifying Widow(er)  to see if you 
qualify.
Married persons.  If you are considered mar-
ried, you and your spouse can file a joint return 
or separate returns.
Considered married.  You are considered 
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you and your spouse meet any 
one of the following tests.
1. You are married and living together.
2. You are living together in a common law 
marriage recognized in the state where 
you now live or in the state where the com-
mon law marriage began.
3. You are married and living apart but not le-
gally separated under a decree of divorce 
or separate maintenance.
4. You are separated under an interlocutory 
(not final) decree of divorce.
Spouse died during the year.  If your 
spouse died during the year, you are consid-
ered married for the whole year for filing status 
purposes.
If you didn't remarry before the end of the 
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself 
and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 
years, you may be entitled to the special bene-
fits described, later, under Qualifying 
Widow(er).
If you remarried before the end of the tax 
year, you can file a joint return with your new 
spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status is 
married filing separately for that year.
Married persons living apart.  If you live 
apart from your spouse and meet certain tests, 
you may be able to file as head of household 
even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. 
If you qualify to file as head of household in-
stead of as married filing separately, your 
standard deduction will be higher and your tax 
may be lower. See Head of Household, later.
Single
Your filing status is single if you are considered 
unmarried and you don't qualify for another fil-
ing status. To determine your marital status, 
see Marital Status, earlier.
Widow(er). Your filing status may be single if 
you were widowed before January 1, 2021, and 
didn't remarry before the end of 2021. You may, 
however, be able to use another filing status 
that will give you a lower tax. See Head of 
Household and Qualifying Widow(er) , later, to 
see if you qualify.
On Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, show your filing 
status as single by checking the “Single” box on 
the Filing Status line at the top of the form. Use 
the Single column of the Tax Table, or Sec-
tion A of the Tax Computation Worksheet, to 
figure your tax.
Married Filing Jointly
You can choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status if you are considered married and 
both you and your spouse agree to file a joint 
return. On a joint return, you and your spouse 
report your combined income and deduct your 
combined allowable expenses. You can file a 
joint return even if one of you had no income or 
deductions.
If you and your spouse decide to file a joint 
return, your tax may be lower than your com-
bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your 
standard deduction (if you don't itemize deduc-
tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for 
tax benefits that don't apply to other filing sta-
tuses.
On Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, show your filing 
status as married filing jointly by checking the 
“Married filing jointly” box on the Filing Status 
line at top of the form. Use the Married filing 
jointly column of the Tax Table, or Section B of 
the Tax Computation Worksheet, to figure your 
tax.
If you and your spouse each have in-
come, you may want to figure your tax 
both on a joint return and on separate 
returns (using the filing status of married filing 
separately). You can choose the method that 
gives the two of you the lower combined tax un-
less you are required to file separately.
Spouse died.  If your spouse died during the 
year, you are considered married for the whole 
year and can choose married filing jointly as 
your filing status. See Spouse died during the 
year, under Married persons, earlier.
If your spouse died in 2022 before filing a 
2021 return, you can choose married filing 
jointly as your filing status on your 2021 return.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced under a 
final decree by the last day of the year, you are 
considered unmarried for the whole year and 
you can't choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status.
Filing a Joint Return
Both you and your spouse must include all of 
your income and deductions on your joint re-
turn.
Accounting period. Both of you must use the 
same accounting period, but you can use differ-
ent accounting methods.
Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held 
responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax 
and any interest or penalty due on your joint re-
turn. This means that if one spouse doesn't pay 
the tax due, the other may have to. Or, if one 
spouse doesn't report the correct tax, both 
spouses may be responsible for any additional 
taxes assessed by the IRS. One spouse may 
be held responsible for all the tax due even if all 
the income was earned by the other spouse.
You may want to file separately if:
• You believe your spouse isn't reporting all 
of his or her income, or
• You don't want to be responsible for any 
taxes due if your spouse doesn't have 
enough tax withheld or doesn't pay enough 
estimated tax.
Divorced taxpayer.  You may be held 
jointly and individually responsible for any tax, 
interest, and penalties due on a joint return filed 
before your divorce. This responsibility may ap-
ply even if your divorce decree states that your 
former spouse will be responsible for any 
amounts due on previously filed joint returns.
Relief from joint responsibility.  In some 
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint re-
sponsibility for tax, interest, and penalties on a 
joint return for items of the other spouse that 
were incorrectly reported on the joint return. 
TIP
Page 6 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6 Publication 501 (2021)

You can ask for relief no matter how small the 
liability.
There are three types of relief available.
1. Innocent spouse relief.
2. Separation of liability (available only to 
joint filers who are divorced, widowed, le-
gally separated, or who haven't lived to-
gether for the 12 months ending on the 
date the election for this relief is filed).
3. Equitable relief.
You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-
cent Spouse Relief, to request relief from joint 
responsibility. Pub. 971 explains the kinds of re-
lief and who may qualify for them.
Signing a joint return.  For a return to be con-
sidered a joint return, both spouses must gener-
ally sign the return.
Spouse died before signing.  If your 
spouse died before signing the return, the exec-
utor or administrator must sign the return for 
your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has 
been appointed as executor or administrator, 
you can sign the return for your spouse and en-
ter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the area 
where you sign the return.
Spouse away from home.  If your spouse 
is away from home, you should prepare the re-
turn, sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign 
so it can be filed on time.
Injury or disease prevents signing.  If 
your spouse can't sign because of injury or dis-
ease and tells you to sign for him or her, you 
can sign your spouse's name in the proper 
space on the return followed by the words “By 
(your name), Husband (or Wife).” Be sure to 
sign in the space provided for your signature. 
Attach a dated statement, signed by you, to the 
return. The statement should include the form 
number of the return you are filing, the tax year, 
and the reason your spouse can't sign, and it 
should state that your spouse has agreed to 
your signing for him or her.
Signing as guardian of spouse. If you are 
the guardian of your spouse who is mentally in-
competent, you can sign the return for your 
spouse as guardian.
Spouse in combat zone.  You can sign a 
joint return for your spouse if your spouse can't 
sign because he or she is serving in a combat 
zone (such as the Persian Gulf area, Serbia, 
Montenegro, Albania, or Afghanistan), even if 
you don't have a power of attorney or other 
statement. Attach a signed statement to your 
return explaining that your spouse is serving in 
a combat zone. For more information on special 
tax rules for persons who are serving in a com-
bat zone, or who are in missing status as a re-
sult of serving in a combat zone, see Pub. 3, 
Armed Forces' Tax Guide.
Power of attorney. In order for you to sign 
a return for your spouse in any of these cases, 
you must attach to the return a power of attor-
ney (POA) that authorizes you to sign for your 
spouse. You can use a POA that states that you 
have been granted authority to sign the return, 
or you can use Form 2848. Part I of Form 2848 
must state that you are granted authority to sign 
the return.
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. Gen-
erally, a married couple can't file a joint return if 
either one is a nonresident alien at any time 
during the tax year. However, if one spouse 
was a nonresident alien or dual -status alien 
who was married to a U.S. citizen or resident 
alien at the end of the year, the spouses can 
choose to file a joint return. If you do file a joint 
return, you and your spouse are both treated as 
U.S. residents for the entire tax year. See chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 519. 
Married Filing Separately
You can choose married filing separately as 
your filing status if you are married. This filing 
status may benefit you if you want to be respon-
sible only for your own tax or if it results in less 
tax than filing a joint return.
If you and your spouse don't agree to file a 
joint return, you must use this filing status un-
less you qualify for head of household status, 
discussed later.
You may be able to choose head of house-
hold filing status if you are considered unmar-
ried because you live apart from your spouse 
and meet certain tests (explained later, under 
Head of Household ). This can apply to you 
even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. 
If you qualify to file as head of household, in-
stead of as married filing separately, your tax 
may be lower, you may be able to claim certain 
tax benefits, and your standard deduction will 
be higher. The head of household filing status 
allows you to choose the standard deduction 
even if your spouse chooses to itemize deduc-
tions. See Head of Household , later, for more 
information.
You will generally pay more combined 
tax on separate returns than you would 
on a joint return for the reasons listed 
under Special Rules , later. However, unless 
you are required to file separately, you should 
figure your tax both ways (on a joint return and 
on separate returns). This way you can make 
sure you are using the filing status that results in 
the lowest combined tax. When figuring the 
combined tax of a married couple, you may 
want to consider state taxes as well as federal 
taxes.
How to file.  If you file a separate return, you 
generally report only your own income, credits, 
and deductions.
Select this filing status by checking the 
“Married filing separately” box on the Filing Sta-
tus line at the top of Form 1040 or 1040-SR. En-
ter your spouse's full name in the entry space at 
the bottom of the Filing Status section and enter 
your spouse's SSN or ITIN in the space for 
spouse's SSN on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If 
your spouse doesn't have and isn't required to 
have an SSN or ITIN, enter “NRA” in the entry 
space below the filing status checkboxes. For 
electronic filing, enter the spouse's name or 
“NRA” if the spouse doesn't have an SSN or 
ITIN in the entry space below the filing status 
checkboxes. Use the Married filing separately 
TIP
column of the Tax Table or Section C of the Tax 
Computation Worksheet to figure your tax.
Special Rules
If you choose married filing separately as your 
filing status, the following special rules apply. 
Because of these special rules, you usually pay 
more tax on a separate return than if you use 
another filing status you qualify for.
1. Your tax rate is generally higher than on a 
joint return.
2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al-
ternative minimum tax is half that allowed 
on a joint return.
3. You can't take the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses in most cases, 
and the amount you can exclude from in-
come under an employer's dependent 
care assistance program is limited to 
$5,250 (instead of $10,500 on a joint re-
turn). However, if you are legally separa-
ted or living apart from your spouse, you 
may be able to file a separate return and 
still take the credit. See What’s Your Filing 
Status? in Pub. 503, Child and Dependent 
Care Expenses, for more information.
4. You can't take the earned income credit 
unless you meet certain other require-
ments.
5. You can't take the exclusion or credit for 
adoption expenses in most cases.
6. You can't take the education credits (the 
American opportunity credit and lifetime 
learning credit), or the deduction for stu-
dent loan interest.
7. You can't exclude any interest income 
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you 
used for higher education expenses.
8. If you lived with your spouse at any time 
during the tax year:
a. You can't claim the credit for the eld-
erly or the disabled, and
b. You must include in income a greater 
percentage (up to 85%) of any social 
security or equivalent railroad retire-
ment benefits you received.
9. The following credits and deductions are 
reduced at income levels half those for a 
joint return:
a. The nonrefundable child tax credit, 
the credit for other dependents, and 
the refundable child tax credit; and
b. The retirement savings contributions 
credit.
10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 
(instead of $3,000 on a joint return).
11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you 
can't claim the standard deduction. If you 
can claim the standard deduction, your 
basic standard deduction is half the 
amount allowed on a joint return.
Page 7 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 7

There are special rules that allow a 
separated spouse to claim the earned 
income credit under certain circum-
stances. See the line 27a instructions in the In-
structions for Form 1040 and Schedule EIC 
(Form 1040) to see if you meet the qualifica-
tions to claim the earned income credit even 
though you are married filing a separate return.
Adjusted gross income (AGI) limits.  If your 
AGI on a separate return is lower than it would 
have been on a joint return, you may be able to 
deduct a larger amount for certain deductions 
that are limited by AGI, such as medical expen-
ses.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
You may not be able to deduct all or part of your 
contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your 
spouse were covered by an employee retire-
ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc-
tion is reduced or eliminated if your income is 
more than a certain amount. This amount is 
much lower for married individuals who file sep-
arately and lived together at any time during the 
year. For more information, see How Much Can 
You Deduct? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.
Rental activity losses.  If you actively partici-
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that 
produced a loss, you can generally deduct the 
loss from your nonpassive income up to 
$25,000. This is called a special allowance. 
However, married persons filing separate re-
turns who lived together at any time during the 
year can't claim this special allowance. Married 
persons filing separate returns who lived apart 
at all times during the year are each allowed a 
$12,500 maximum special allowance for losses 
from passive real estate activities. See Rental 
Activities in Pub. 925, Passive Activity and 
At-Risk Rules.
Community property states.  Community 
property states include Arizona, California, 
Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, 
Washington, and Wisconsin. If you live in a 
community property state and file separately, 
your income may be considered separate in-
come or community income for income tax pur-
poses. See Pub. 555.
Joint Return After
Separate Returns
You can change your filing status from a sepa-
rate return to a joint return by filing an amended 
return using Form 1040-X.
You can generally change to a joint return 
any time within 3 years from the due date of the 
separate return or returns. This doesn't include 
any extensions. A separate return includes a re-
turn filed by you or your spouse claiming mar-
ried filing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
Separate Returns
After Joint Return
Once you file a joint return, you can't choose to 
file separate returns for that year after the due 
date of the return.
TIP
Exception. A personal representative for a de-
cedent can change from a joint return elected 
by the surviving spouse to a separate return for 
the decedent. The personal representative has 
1 year from the due date (including extensions) 
of the return to make the change. See Pub. 559 
for more information on filing income tax returns 
for a decedent.
Head of Household
You may be able to file as head of household if 
you meet all the following requirements.
1. You are unmarried or considered unmar-
ried on the last day of the year. See Mari-
tal Status, earlier, and Considered Unmar-
ried, later.
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
ing up a home for the year.
3. A qualifying person lived with you in the 
home for more than half the year (except 
for temporary absences, such as school). 
However, if the qualifying person is your 
dependent parent, he or she doesn't have 
to live with you. See Special rule for pa-
rent, later, under Qualifying Person.
If you qualify to file as head of house-
hold, your tax rate will usually be lower 
than the rates for single or married fil-
ing separately. You will also receive a higher 
standard deduction than if you file as single or 
married filing separately.
How to file.  Indicate your choice of this filing 
status by checking the “Head of household” box 
on the Filing Status line at the top of Form 1040 
or 1040 -SR. If the child who qualifies you for 
this filing status isn't claimed as your dependent 
in the Dependents section of Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, enter the child's name in the entry 
space at the bottom of the Filing Status section. 
Use the Head of a household column of the Tax 
Table or Section D of the Tax Computation 
Worksheet to figure your tax.
TIP
Considered Unmarried
To qualify for head of household status, you 
must be either unmarried or considered unmar-
ried on the last day of the year. You are consid-
ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if 
you meet all the following tests.
1. You file a separate return. A separate re-
turn includes a return claiming married fil-
ing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
ing up your home for the tax year.
3. Your spouse didn't live in your home dur-
ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your 
spouse is considered to live in your home 
even if he or she is temporarily absent due 
to special circumstances. See Temporary 
absences, later.
4. Your home was the main home of your 
child, stepchild, or foster child for more 
than half the year. (See Home of qualifying 
person, later, for rules applying to a child's 
birth, death, or temporary absence during 
the year.)
5. You must be able to claim the child as a 
dependent. However, you meet this test if 
you can't claim the child as a dependent 
only because the noncustodial parent can 
claim the child using the rules described, 
later, in Children of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart) under 
Qualifying Child or in Support Test for 
Children of Divorced or Separated Parents 
(or Parents Who Live Apart) under Qualify-
ing Relative. The general rules for claiming 
a child as a dependent are explained, 
later, under Dependents.
Cost of Keeping Up a HomeWorksheet 1. Keep for Your Records
   
Amount You
Paid
Total
Cost
Property taxes .............................. $ $ 
Mortgage interest expense .....................   
Rent .....................................   
Utility charges ..............................   
Repairs/maintenance .........................   
Property insurance ...........................   
Food eaten in the home ........................   
Other household expenses .....................   
Totals .................................... $ $ 
Minus total amount you paid ................... (  )
Amount others paid .......................... $ 
If the total amount you paid is more than the amount others paid, you meet the requirement of paying more than 
half the cost of keeping up the home.
Page 8 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8 Publication 501 (2021)

If you were considered married for part 
of the year and lived in a community 
property state  (listed, earlier, under 
Married Filing Separately ), special rules may 
apply in determining your income and expen-
ses. See Pub. 555 for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse.  You are consid-
ered unmarried for head of household purposes 
if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any 
time during the year and you don't choose to 
treat your nonresident spouse as a resident 
alien. However, your spouse isn't a qualifying 
person for head of household purposes. You 
must have another qualifying person and meet 
the other tests to be eligible to file as head of 
household.
Choice to treat spouse as resident.  You 
are considered married if you choose to treat 
your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1 
of Pub. 519.
Keeping Up a Home
To qualify for head of household status, you 
must pay more than half of the cost of keeping 
up a home for the year. You can determine 
whether you paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home by using Worksheet 1.
Costs you include.  Include in the cost of 
keeping up a home expenses such as rent, 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, insurance 
on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in 
the home.
Costs you don't include.  Don't include the 
cost of clothing, education, medical treatment, 
vacations, life insurance, or transportation. Also 
don't include the value of your services or those 
of a member of your household.
Qualifying Person
See Table 4 to see who is a qualifying person. 
Any person not described in Table 4  isn't a 
qualifying person.
Example 1 —child. Your unmarried son 
lived with you all year and was 18 years old at 
the end of the year. He didn't provide more than 
half of his own support and doesn't meet the 
tests to be a qualifying child of anyone else. As 
a result, he is your qualifying child (see Qualify-
ing Child, later) and, because he is single, your 
qualifying person for head of household purpo-
ses.
Example 2 —child who isn't qualifying 
person. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 1 except your son was 25 years old at the 
end of the year and his gross income was 
$5,000. Because he doesn't meet the age test 
(explained, later, under Qualifying Child ), your 
son isn't your qualifying child. Because he 
doesn't meet the gross income test  (explained, 
later, under Qualifying Relative ), he isn't your 
qualifying relative. As a result, he isn't your 
qualifying person for head of household purpo-
ses.
CAUTION
!
Example 3 —girlfriend. Your girlfriend 
lived with you all year. Even though she may be 
your qualifying relative if the gross income and 
support tests (explained later) are met, she isn't 
your qualifying person for head of household 
purposes because she isn't related to you in 
one of the ways listed under Relatives who 
don't have to live with you. See Table 4.
Example 4 —girlfriend's child.  The facts 
are the same as in Example 3 except your girl-
friend's 10 -year-old son also lived with you all 
year. He isn't your qualifying child and, because 
he is your girlfriend's qualifying child, he isn't 
your qualifying relative (see Not a Qualifying 
Child Test, later). As a result, he isn't your quali-
fying person for head of household purposes.
Home of qualifying person.  Generally, the 
qualifying person must live with you for more 
than half of the year.
Special rule for parent.  If your qualifying 
person is your father or mother, you may be eli-
gible to file as head of household even if your 
father or mother doesn't live with you. However, 
you must be able to claim your father or mother 
as a dependent. Also, you must pay more than 
half the cost of keeping up a home that was the 
main home for the entire year for your father or 
mother.
If you pay more than half the cost of keeping 
your parent in a rest home or home for the eld-
erly, that counts as paying more than half the 
cost of keeping up your parent's main home.
Death or birth.  You may be eligible to file 
as head of household even if the qualifying per-
son who qualifies you for this filing status is 
born or dies during the year. To qualify you for 
head of household filing status, the qualifying 
person (as defined in Table 4 ) must be one of 
the following.
• Your qualifying child or qualifying relative 
who lived with you for more than half the 
part of the year he or she was alive.
• Your parent for whom you paid, for the en-
tire part of the year he or she was alive, 
more than half the cost of keeping up the 
home he or she lived in.
Example. You are unmarried. Your mother, 
who you claim as a dependent, lived in an 
apartment by herself. She died on September 
2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartment for 
the year until her death was $6,000. You paid 
$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your 
brother made no other payments toward your 
mother's support. Your mother had no income. 
Because you paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up your mother's apartment from Janu-
ary 1 until her death, and you can claim her as a 
dependent, you can file as head of household.
Temporary absences. You and your quali-
fying person are considered to live together 
even if one or both of you are temporarily ab-
sent from your home due to special circumstan-
ces such as illness, education, business, vaca-
tion, military service, or detention in a juvenile 
facility. It must be reasonable to assume the ab-
sent person will return to the home after the 
temporary absence. You must continue to keep 
up the home during the absence.
Adopted child or foster child.  You may 
be eligible to file as head of household if the 
person who qualifies you for this filing status 
was an adopted child or foster child and you 
kept up a home for this person in 2021, the per-
son was lawfully placed with you for legal adop-
tion by you in 2021, or the person was an eligi-
ble foster child placed with you during 2021. 
The person is considered to have lived with you 
for more than half of 2021 if your main home 
was this person's main home for more than half 
the time since he or she was adopted or placed 
with you in 2021.
Kidnapped child.  You may be eligible to 
file as head of household even if the child who 
is your qualifying person has been kidnapped. 
You can claim head of household filing status if 
all the following statements are true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year before the kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year following the date of the child’s 
return.
4. You would have qualified for head of 
household filing status if the child hadn't 
been kidnapped.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Qualifying Widow(er)
If your spouse died in 2021, you can use mar-
ried filing jointly as your filing status for 2021 if 
you otherwise qualify to use that status. The 
year of death is the last year for which you can 
file jointly with your deceased spouse. See Mar-
ried Filing Jointly, earlier.
You may be eligible to use qualifying 
widow(er) as your filing status for 2 years fol-
lowing the year your spouse died. For example, 
if your spouse died in 2020 and you haven't re-
married, you may be able to use this filing sta-
tus for 2021 and 2022. The rules for using this 
filing status are explained in detail here.
This filing status entitles you to use joint re-
turn tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
tion amount (if you don't itemize deductions). It 
doesn't entitle you to file a joint return.
How to file.  Indicate your choice of this filing 
status by checking the “Qualifying widow(er)” 
box on the Filing Status line at the top of Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR. If the child who qualifies you 
for this filing status isn’t claimed as your de-
pendent in the Dependents section of Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child’s name in the 
entry space at the bottom of the Filing Status 
Page 9 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 9

section. Use the Married filing jointly column of 
the Tax Table or Section B of the Tax Computa-
tion Worksheet to figure your tax.
Eligibility rules.  You are eligible to file your 
2021 return as a qualifying widow(er) if you 
meet all the following tests.
1. You were entitled to file a joint return with 
your spouse for the year your spouse died. 
It doesn't matter whether you actually filed 
a joint return.
2. Your spouse died in 2019 or 2020 and you 
didn't remarry before the end of 2021.
3. You have a child or stepchild (not a foster 
child) whom you can claim as a dependent 
or could claim as a dependent except that, 
for 2021:
a. The child had gross income of $4,300 
or more,
b. The child filed a joint return, or
c. You could be claimed as a dependent 
on someone else’s return.
If the child isn’t claimed as your de-
pendent in the Dependents section on 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child’s 
name in the entry space at the bottom of 
the Filing Status section. If you don’t enter 
the name, it will take us longer to process 
your return.
4. This child lived in your home all year, ex-
cept for temporary absences. See Tempo-
rary absences, earlier, under Head of 
Household. There are also exceptions, de-
scribed later, for a child who was born or 
died during the year and for a kidnapped 
child.
5. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
ing up a home for the year. See Keeping 
Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House-
hold.
Example. John's wife died in 2019. John 
hasn't remarried. He has continued during 2020 
and 2021 to keep up a home for himself and his 
child who lives with him and who he can claim 
as a dependent. For 2019, he was entitled to 
file a joint return for himself and his deceased 
wife. For 2020 and 2021, he can file as a quali-
fying widower. After 2021, he can file as head of 
household if he qualifies.
Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as a 
qualifying widow(er) if the child who qualifies 
you for this filing status is born or dies during 
the year. You must have provided more than 
half of the cost of keeping up a home that was 
the child's main home during the entire part of 
the year he or she was alive.
Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
CAUTION
!
See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
qualifying child (such as a son, daughter, 
or grandchild who lived with you more than 
half the year and meets certain other tests)2
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not 
the child meets the Citizen or 
Resident Test.
he or she is married and you can claim him 
or her as a dependent
a qualifying person.
he or she is married and you can't claim him 
or her as a dependent
not a qualifying person.3
qualifying relative4 who is your father or 
mother
you can claim him or her as a dependent5 a qualifying person.6
you can't claim him or her as a dependent not a qualifying person.
qualifying relative4 other than your father or 
mother (such as a grandparent, brother, or 
sister who meets certain tests) 
he or she lived with you more than half the 
year, and he or she is related to you in one 
of the ways listed under Relatives who don't 
have to live with you, later, and you can 
claim him or her as a dependent5
a qualifying person.
he or she didn't live with you more than half 
the year
not a qualifying person.
he or she isn't related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don't have 
to live with you, later, and is your qualifying 
relative only because he or she lived with 
you all year as a member of your household 
not a qualifying person.
you can't claim him or her as a dependent not a qualifying person.
1 A person can't qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2 The term qualifying child is defined under Dependents, later. Note: If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head of 
household filing status doesn't include a child who is your qualifying child only because of the rules described under Children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart) under Qualifying Child, later. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child is 
generally your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child isn't a qualifying child you can claim as a dependent.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you can't claim the person as a dependent is that you, or your spouse if filing jointly, can be 
claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer's return.
4 The term qualifying relative is defined under Dependents, later.
5 If you can claim a person as a dependent only because of a multiple support agreement, that person isn't a qualifying person. See Multiple 
Support Agreement.
6 See Special rule for parent.
Table 4.
Page 10 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10 Publication 501 (2021)

Adopted child. You may be eligible to file as a 
qualifying widow(er) if the child who qualifies 
you for this filing status you adopted in 2021 or 
was lawfully placed with you for legal adoption 
by you in 2021. The child is considered to have 
lived with you for all of 2021 if your main home 
was this child's main home for the entire time 
since he or she was adopted or placed with you 
in 2021.
Kidnapped child.  You may be eligible to file 
as a qualifying widow(er) even if the child who 
qualifies you for this filing status has been kid-
napped. You can claim qualifying widow(er) fil-
ing status if all the following statements are true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year before the kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year following the date of the child’s 
return.
4. You would have qualified for qualifying 
widow(er) filing status if the child had not 
been kidnapped.
As mentioned earlier, this filing status 
is available for only 2 years following 
the year your spouse died.
CAUTION
!
Dependents
The term “dependent” means:
• A qualifying child, or
• A qualifying relative.
The terms qualifying child  and qualifying rela-
tive are defined later.
All the requirements for claiming a depend-
ent are summarized in Table 5.
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.  If these 
people work for you, you can't claim them as 
dependents.
Refundable or nonrefundable child tax 
credit. You may be entitled to a refundable or 
Overview of the Rules for Claiming a Dependent
CAUTION
!
This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this publication.
• You can't claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
• You can't claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax paid. 
• You can't claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of 
Canada or Mexico.1
• You can't claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, 
sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of 
any of them.
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year and younger 
than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), (b) under age 24 at the end of the 
year, a student, and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), or 
(c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. 
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of the year.2
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or her own support 
for the year.
5. The child must not be filing a joint return for the year (unless that joint 
return is filed only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or estimated 
tax paid).
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than one 
person, generally only one person can actually treat the child as a 
qualifying child. See Qualifying Child of More Than One Person, later, 
to find out which person is the person entitled to claim the child as a 
qualifying child. 
1. The person can't be your qualifying child or the qualifying 
child of any other taxpayer.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don't have to live with you, or 
(b) must live with you all year as a member of your 
household2 (and your relationship must not violate local law).
3. The person's gross income for the year must be less than 
$4,300.3
4. You must provide more than half of the person's total support 
for the year.4
1 There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2 There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or 
parents who live apart), and kidnapped children.
3 There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4 There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), and kidnapped 
children.
Table 5.
Page 11 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 11

nonrefundable child tax credit for each qualify-
ing child who was under age 18 at the end of 
the year if you claimed that child as a depend-
ent. For more information, see the Instructions 
for Form 1040.
Credit for other dependents. You may be en-
titled to a credit for other dependents for each 
qualifying child who does not qualify you for the 
refundable or nonrefundable child tax credit and 
for each qualifying relative. For more informa-
tion, see the Instructions for Form 1040.
Exceptions
Even if you have a qualifying child or qualifying 
relative, you can claim that person as a depend-
ent only if these three tests are met.
1. Dependent taxpayer test.
2. Joint return test.
3. Citizen or resident test.
These three tests are explained in detail here.
Dependent Taxpayer Test
If you can be claimed as a dependent by an-
other taxpayer, you can't claim anyone else as 
a dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child 
or qualifying relative, you can't claim that per-
son as a dependent.
If you are filing a joint return and your 
spouse can be claimed as a dependent by an-
other taxpayer, you and your spouse can't claim 
any dependents on your joint return.
Joint Return Test
You generally can't claim a married person as a 
dependent if he or she files a joint return.
Exception. You can claim a person as a de-
pendent who files a joint return if that person 
and his or her spouse file the joint return only to 
claim a refund of income tax withheld or estima-
ted tax paid.
Example 1 —child files joint return.  You 
supported your 18 -year-old daughter, and she 
lived with you all year while her husband was in 
the Armed Forces. He earned $35,000 for the 
year. The couple files a joint return. You can't 
claim your daughter as a dependent.
Example 2 —child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Your 
18-year-old son and his 17 -year-old wife had 
$800 of wages from part -time jobs and no other 
income. They lived with you all year. Neither is 
required to file a tax return. They don't have a 
child. Taxes were taken out of their pay so they 
file a joint return only to get a refund of the with-
held taxes. The exception to the joint return test 
applies, so you aren't disqualified from claiming 
each of them as a dependent just because they 
file a joint return. You can claim each of them as 
dependents if all the other tests to do so are 
met.
Example 3 —child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in Example 2 except no 
taxes were taken out of your son's pay or his 
wife's pay. However, they file a joint return to 
claim an American opportunity credit of $124 
and get a refund of that amount. Because 
claiming the American opportunity credit is their 
reason for filing the return, they aren't filing it 
only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid. The exception to the joint 
return test doesn't apply, so you can't claim ei-
ther of them as a dependent.
Citizen or Resident Test
You generally can't claim a person as a de-
pendent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, 
U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident 
of Canada or Mexico. However, there is an ex-
ception for certain adopted children, as ex-
plained next.
Exception for adopted child.  If you are a 
U.S. citizen or U.S. national who has legally 
adopted a child who isn't a U.S. citizen, U.S. 
resident alien, or U.S. national, this test is met if 
the child lived with you as a member of your 
household all year. This exception also applies 
if the child was lawfully placed with you for legal 
adoption and the child lived with you for the rest 
of the year after placement.
Child's place of residence.  Children usually 
are citizens or residents of the country of their 
parents.
If you were a U.S. citizen when your child 
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen and 
meet this test even if the other parent was a 
nonresident alien and the child was born in a 
foreign country.
Foreign students' place of residence.  For-
eign students brought to this country under a 
qualified international education exchange pro-
gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
porary period generally aren't U.S. residents 
and don't meet this test. You can't claim them 
as dependents. However, if you provided a 
home for a foreign student, you may be able to 
take a charitable contribution deduction. See 
Expenses Paid for Student Living With You in 
Pub. 526.
U.S. national.  A U.S. national is an individual 
who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or 
her allegiance to the United States. U.S. nation-
als include American Samoans and Northern 
Mariana Islanders who chose to become U.S. 
nationals instead of U.S. citizens.
Qualifying Child
Five tests must be met for a child to be your 
qualifying child. The five tests are:
1. Relationship,
2. Age,
3. Residency,
4. Support, and
5. Joint return.
These tests are explained next.
If a child meets the five tests to be the 
qualifying child of more than one per-
son, there are rules you must use to 
determine which person can actually treat the 
child as a qualifying child. See Qualifying Child 
of More Than One Person, later.
Relationship Test
To meet this test, a child must be:
• Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, 
or a descendant (for example, your grand-
child) of any of them; or
• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descend-
ant (for example, your niece or nephew) of 
any of them.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual who 
is placed with you by an authorized placement 
agency or by judgment, decree, or other order 
of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Age Test
To meet this test, a child must be:
• Under age 19 at the end of the year and 
younger than you (or your spouse if filing 
jointly),
• A student under age 24 at the end of the 
year and younger than you (or your spouse 
if filing jointly), or
• Permanently and totally disabled at any 
time during the year, regardless of age.
Example. Your son turned 19 on Decem-
ber 10. Unless he was permanently and totally 
disabled or a student, he doesn't meet the age 
test because, at the end of the year, he wasn't 
under age 19.
Child must be younger than you or your 
spouse. To be your qualifying child, a child 
who isn't permanently and totally disabled must 
be younger than you. However, if you are mar-
ried filing jointly, the child must be younger than 
you or your spouse but doesn't have to be 
younger than both of you.
Example 1—child not younger than you 
or your spouse.  Your 23 -year-old brother, 
who is a student and unmarried, lives with you 
and your spouse, who provide more than half of 
his support. He isn't disabled. Both you and 
your spouse are 21 years old, and you file a 
joint return. Your brother isn't your qualifying 
child because he isn't younger than you or your 
spouse.
Example 2 —child younger than your 
spouse but not younger than you.  The facts 
are the same as in  Example 1  except your 
spouse is 25 years old. Because your brother is 
younger than your spouse and you and your 
spouse are filing a joint return, your brother is 
your qualifying child, even though he isn't 
younger than you.
CAUTION
!
Page 12 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12 Publication 501 (2021)

Student defined. To qualify as a student, your 
child must be, during some part of each of any 5 
calendar months of the year:
1. A full-time student at a school that has a 
regular teaching staff, course of study, and 
a regularly enrolled student body at the 
school; or
2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
ing course given by a school described in 
(1), or by a state, county, or local govern-
ment agency.
The 5 calendar months don't have to be con-
secutive.
Full-time student.  A full -time student is a 
student who is enrolled for the number of hours 
or courses the school considers to be full -time 
attendance.
School defined.  A school can be an ele-
mentary school, junior or senior high school, 
college, university, or technical, trade, or me-
chanical school. However, an on -the-job train-
ing course, correspondence school, or school 
offering courses only through the Internet 
doesn't count as a school.
Vocational high school students.  Stu-
dents who work on “co-op” jobs in private indus-
try as a part of a school's regular course of 
classroom and practical training are considered 
full-time students.
Permanently and totally disabled. Your child 
is permanently and totally disabled if both of the 
following apply.
• He or she can't engage in any substantial 
gainful activity because of a physical or 
mental condition.
• A doctor determines the condition has las-
ted or can be expected to last continuously 
for at least a year or can lead to death.
Residency Test
To meet this test, your child must have lived 
with you for more than half the year. There are 
exceptions for temporary absences, children 
who were born or died during the year, adopted 
or foster children, kidnapped children, and chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents.
Temporary absences.  Your child is consid-
ered to have lived with you during periods of 
time when one of you, or both, are temporarily 
absent due to special circumstances, such as:
• Illness,
• Education,
• Business,
• Vacation,
• Military service, or
• Detention in a juvenile facility.
Death or birth of child.  A child who was born 
or died during the year is treated as having lived 
with you more than half the year if your home 
was the child's home more than half the time he 
or she was alive during the year. The same is 
true if the child lived with you more than half the 
year except for any required hospital stay fol-
lowing birth.
Child born alive. You may be able to claim 
as a dependent a child born alive during the 
year, even if the child lived only for a moment. 
State or local law must treat the child as having 
been born alive. There must be proof of a live 
birth shown by an official document, such as a 
birth certificate. The child must be your qualify-
ing child or qualifying relative, and all the other 
tests to claim the child as a dependent must be 
met.
Stillborn child.  You can't claim a stillborn 
child as a dependent.
Adopted child or foster child.  You can treat 
your adopted child or foster child as meeting 
the residency test as follows if you adopted the 
child in 2021, the child was lawfully placed with 
you for legal adoption by you in 2021, or the 
child was an eligible foster child placed with you 
during 2021. This child is considered to have 
lived with you for more than half of 2021 if your 
main home was this child's main home for more 
than half the time since he or she was adopted 
or placed with you in 2021.
Kidnapped child. You can treat your child as 
meeting the residency test even if the child has 
been kidnapped, but the following statements 
must be true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the 
child lived with you for more than half of 
the part of the year before the date of the 
kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year following the date of the child’s 
return.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Children of divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart).  In most cases, 
because of the residency test, a child of di-
vorced or separated parents is the qualifying 
child of the custodial parent. However, the child 
will be treated as the qualifying child of the non-
custodial parent if all four of the following state-
ments are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her 
support for the year from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that he or 
she won't claim the child as a depend-
ent for the year, and the noncustodial 
parent attaches this written declara-
tion to his or her return. (If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
1984 and before 2009, see Post-1984 
and pre-2009 divorce decree or sepa-
ration agreement, later. If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
2008, see Post-2008 divorce decree 
or separation agreement, later.)
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance or written separa-
tion agreement that applies to 2021 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement wasn't 
changed after 1984 to say the non-
custodial parent can't claim the child 
as a dependent, and the noncustodial 
parent provides at least $600 for the 
child's support during the year.
If statements (1) through (4) are all true, only 
the noncustodial parent can:
• Claim the child as a dependent, and
• Claim the child as a qualifying child for the 
nonrefundable child tax credit, the credit 
for other dependents, the refundable child 
tax credit, or the additional child tax credit.
However, this doesn’t allow the noncustodial 
parent to claim head of household filing status, 
the credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses, the exclusion for dependent care benefits, 
the earned income credit, or the health cover-
age tax credit. See Applying the tiebreaker rules 
to divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), later.
Example—earned income credit.  Even if 
statements (1) through (4) are all true and the 
custodial parent signs Form 8332 or a substan-
tially similar statement that he or she won’t 
claim the child as a dependent for 2021, this 
doesn’t allow the noncustodial parent to claim 
the child as a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit. The custodial parent or another 
taxpayer, if eligible, can claim the child for the 
earned income credit.
Custodial parent and noncustodial pa-
rent. The custodial parent is the parent with 
whom the child lived for the greater number of 
nights during the year. The other parent is the 
noncustodial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
• At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present; or
• In the company of the parent, when the 
child doesn't sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca-
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
Page 13 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 13

during the year, the custodial parent is the pa-
rent with the higher adjusted gross income 
(AGI).
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which it begins. For 
example, the night of December 31, 2021, is 
treated as part of 2021.
Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa-
ted under state law, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6.
Absences. If a child wasn't with either pa-
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night, except for the absence. But if it can't 
be determined with which parent the child nor-
mally would have lived or if the child would not 
have lived with either parent that night, the child 
is treated as not living with either parent that 
night.
Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi-
dence registered with the school.
Example 1 —child lived with one parent 
for a greater number of nights. You and your 
child’s other parent are divorced. In 2021, your 
child lived with you 210 nights and with the 
other parent 155 nights. You are the custodial 
parent.
Example 2 —child is away at camp.  In 
2021, your daughter lives with each parent for 
alternate weeks. In the summer, she spends 6 
weeks at summer camp. During the time she is 
at camp, she is treated as living with you for 3 
weeks and with her other parent, your 
ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how 
long she would have lived with each parent if 
she had not attended summer camp.
Example 3—child lived same number of 
nights with each parent.  Your son lived with 
you 180 nights during the year and lived the 
same number of nights with his other parent, 
your ex -spouse. Your AGI is $40,000. Your 
ex-spouse's AGI is $25,000. You are treated as 
your son's custodial parent because you have 
the higher AGI.
Example 4 —child is at parent’s home 
but with other parent. Your son normally lives 
with you during the week and with his other pa-
rent, your ex -spouse, every other weekend. 
You become ill and are hospitalized. The other 
parent lives in your home with your son for 10 
consecutive days while you are in the hospital. 
Your son is treated as living with you during this 
10-day period because he was living in your 
home.
Example 5 —child emancipated in May. 
When your son turned age 18 in May 2021, he 
became emancipated under the law of the state 
where he lives. As a result, he isn't considered 
in the custody of his parents for more than half 
of the year. The special rule for children of di-
vorced or separated parents doesn't apply.
Example 6 —child emancipated in Au-
gust. Your daughter lives with you from Janu-
ary 1, 2021, until May 31, 2021, and lives with 
her other parent, your ex -spouse, from June 1, 
2021, through the end of the year. She turns 18 
and is emancipated under state law on August 
1, 2021. Because she is treated as not living 
with either parent beginning on August 1, she is 
treated as living with you the greater number of 
nights in 2021. You are the custodial parent.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
must use either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release a claim to an exemption for a child to 
the noncustodial parent. Although the exemp-
tion amount is zero for tax year 2021, this re-
lease allows the noncustodial parent to claim 
the nonrefundable child tax credit, credit for 
other dependents, refundable child tax credit, or 
additional child tax credit, if applicable, for the 
child. The noncustodial parent must attach a 
copy of the form or statement to his or her tax 
return.
The release can be for 1 year, for a number 
of specified years (for example, alternate 
years), or for all future years, as specified in the 
declaration.
Post-1984 and pre -2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de-
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent won't claim the child 
as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa-
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to his or her tax return.
• The cover page (write the other parent's 
social security number on this page).
• The pages that include all of the informa-
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
• The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent can't at-
tach pages from the decree or agreement in-
stead of Form 8332 if the decree or agreement 
went into effect after 2008. The custodial parent 
must sign either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment whose only purpose is to release the cus-
todial parent's claim to an exemption, and the 
noncustodial parent must attach a copy to his or 
her return. The form or statement must release 
the custodial parent's claim to the child without 
any conditions. For example, the release must 
not depend on the noncustodial parent paying 
support.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a 
release of claim to an exemption. For the revo-
cation to be effective for 2021, the custodial pa-
rent must have given (or made reasonable ef-
forts to give) written notice of the revocation to 
the noncustodial parent in 2020 or earlier. The 
custodial parent can use Part III of Form 8332 
for this purpose and must attach a copy of the 
revocation to his or her return for each tax year 
he or she claims the child as a dependent as a 
result of the revocation.
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-
port provided by your new spouse is treated as 
provided by you.
Parents who never married.  This rule for 
divorced or separated parents also applies to 
parents who never married and lived apart at all 
times during the last 6 months of the year.
Support Test (To Be a
Qualifying Child)
To meet this test, the child can't have provided 
more than half of his or her own support for the 
year.
This test is different from the support test to 
be a qualifying relative, which is described later. 
However, to see what is or isn't support, see 
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) , 
later. If you aren't sure whether a child provided 
more than half of his or her own support, you 
may find Worksheet 2 helpful.
Example. You provided $4,000 toward 
your 16-year-old son's support for the year. He 
has a part -time job and provided $6,000 to his 
own support. He provided more than half of his 
own support for the year. He isn't your qualify-
ing child.
Foster care payments and expenses.  Pay-
ments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a child placement agency are consid-
ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, 
payments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a state or county are considered sup-
port provided by the state or county.
If you aren't in the trade or business of pro-
viding foster care and your unreimbursed 
out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster 
child were mainly to benefit an organization 
qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-
butions, the expenses are deductible as chari-
table contributions but aren't considered sup-
port you provided. For more information about 
the deduction for charitable contributions, see 
Pub. 526. If your unreimbursed expenses aren't 
deductible as charitable contributions, they may 
qualify as support you provided.
If you are in the trade or business of provid-
ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses 
aren't considered support provided by you.
CAUTION
!
Page 14 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14 Publication 501 (2021)

Example 1.  Lauren, a foster child, lived 
with Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of 
the year. The Smiths cared for Lauren because 
they wanted to adopt her (although she had not 
been placed with them for adoption). They 
didn't care for her as a trade or business or to 
benefit the agency that placed her in their 
home. The Smiths' unreimbursed expenses 
aren't deductible as charitable contributions but 
are considered support they provided for Lau-
ren.
Example 2.  You provided $3,000 toward 
your 10 -year-old foster child's support for the 
year. The state government provided $4,000, 
which is considered support provided by the 
state, not by the child. See Support provided by 
the state (welfare, food benefits, housing, etc.) , 
later. Your foster child didn't provide more than 
half of her own support for the year.
Scholarships. A scholarship received by a 
child who is a student isn't taken into account in 
determining whether the child provided more 
than half of his or her own support.
TANF and other governmental payments. 
Under proposed Treasury regulations, if you re-
ceived Temporary Assistance to Needy Fami-
lies (TANF) payments or other similar payments 
and used the payment to support another per-
son, those payments are considered support 
you provided for that person, rather than sup-
port provided by the government or other third 
party.
Joint Return Test (To Be a 
Qualifying Child)
To meet this test, the child can't file a joint re-
turn for the year.
Exception. An exception to the joint return test 
applies if your child and his or her spouse file a 
joint return only to claim a refund of income tax 
withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1 —child files joint return.  You 
supported your 18 -year-old daughter, and she 
lived with you all year while her husband was in 
the Armed Forces. He earned $35,000 for the 
year. The couple files a joint return. Because 
your daughter and her husband file a joint re-
turn, she isn't your qualifying child.
Example 2 —child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Your 
18-year-old son and his 17 -year-old wife had 
$800 of wages from part -time jobs and no other 
income. They lived with you all year. Neither is 
required to file a tax return. They don't have a 
child. Taxes were taken out of their pay, so they 
file a joint return only to get a refund of the with-
held taxes. The exception to the joint return test 
applies, so your son may be your qualifying 
child if all the other tests are met.
Example 3 —child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in  Example 2 except no 
taxes were taken out of your son's pay or his 
wife's pay. However, they file a joint return to 
claim an American opportunity credit of $124 
and get a refund of that amount. Because 
claiming the American opportunity credit is their 
reason for filing the return, they aren't filing it 
only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid. The exception to the joint 
return test doesn't apply, so your son isn't your 
qualifying child.
Qualifying Child of More Than One 
Person
If your qualifying child isn't a qualifying 
child of anyone else, this topic doesn't 
apply to you and you don't need to 
read about it. This is also true if your qualifying 
child isn't a qualifying child of anyone else ex-
cept your spouse with whom you plan to file a 
joint return.
If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under 
the rules for children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart), 
described earlier, see Applying the tiebreaker 
rules to divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart), later.
Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, age, 
residency, support, and joint return tests to be a 
qualifying child of more than one person. Al-
though the child is a qualifying child of each of 
these persons, generally only one person can 
actually treat the child as a qualifying child to 
take all of the following tax benefits (provided 
the person is eligible for each benefit).
1. The nonrefundable child tax credit, credit 
for other dependents, refundable child tax 
credit, or additional child tax credit .
2. Head of household filing status.
3. The credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
4. The exclusion from income for dependent 
care benefits.
5. The earned income credit.
The other person can’t take any of these 
benefits based on this qualifying child. In other 
words, you and the other person can’t agree to 
divide these tax benefits between you.
Tiebreaker rules. To determine which person 
can treat the child as a qualifying child to claim 
these five tax benefits, the following tiebreaker 
rules apply.
• If only one of the persons is the child's pa-
rent, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the parent.
• If the parents file a joint return together and 
can claim the child as a qualifying child, 
the child is treated as the qualifying child of 
the parents.
• If the parents don't file a joint return to-
gether but both parents claim the child as a 
qualifying child, the IRS will treat the child 
as the qualifying child of the parent with 
whom the child lived for the longer period 
of time during the year. If the child lived 
with each parent for the same amount of 
time, the IRS will treat the child as the qual-
ifying child of the parent who had the 
higher adjusted gross income (AGI) for the 
year.
TIP
CAUTION
!
• If no parent can claim the child as a quali-
fying child, the child is treated as the quali-
fying child of the person who had the high-
est AGI for the year.
• If a parent can claim the child as a qualify-
ing child but no parent does so claim the 
child, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the person who had the highest 
AGI for the year, but only if that person's 
AGI is higher than the highest AGI of any of 
the child's parents who can claim the child.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and 
the other person may be able to choose which 
of you claims the child as a qualifying child.
You may be able to qualify for the 
earned income credit under the rules 
for taxpayers without a qualifying child 
if you have a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit who is claimed as a qualifying child 
by another taxpayer. For more information, see 
Pub. 596.
Example 1 —child lived with parent and 
grandparent. You and your 3 -year-old daugh-
ter Jane lived with your mother all year. You are 
25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is 
$9,000. Your mother's AGI is $15,000. Jane's 
father didn't live with you or your daughter. You 
haven't signed Form 8832 (or a similar state-
ment).
Jane is a qualifying child of both you and 
your mother because she meets the relation-
ship, age, residency, support, and joint return 
tests for both you and your mother. However, 
only one of you can claim her. Jane isn't a quali-
fying child of anyone else, including her father. 
You agree to let your mother claim Jane. This 
means your mother can claim Jane as a qualify-
ing child for all of the five tax benefits listed ear-
lier, if she qualifies for each of those benefits 
(and if you don't claim Jane as a qualifying child 
for any of those tax benefits).
Example 2—parent has higher AGI than 
grandparent. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 1  except your AGI is $18,000. Because 
your mother's AGI isn't higher than yours, she 
can't claim Jane. Only you can claim Jane.
Example 3 —two persons claim same 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except you and your mother both claim Jane as 
a qualifying child. In this case, you, as the 
child's parent, will be the only one allowed to 
claim Jane as a qualifying child. The IRS will 
disallow your mother's claim to the five tax ben-
efits listed earlier based on Jane. However, 
your mother may qualify for the earned income 
credit as a taxpayer without a qualifying child.
Example 4—qualifying children split be-
tween two persons.  The facts are the same 
as in Example 1 except you also have two other 
young children who are qualifying children of 
both you and your mother. Only one of you can 
claim each child. However, if your mother's AGI 
is higher than yours, you can allow your mother 
to claim one or more of the children. For exam-
ple, if you claim one child, your mother can 
claim the other two.
Example 5—taxpayer who is a qualifying 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
TIP
Page 15 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 15

Worksheet for Determining SupportWorksheet 2. Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable 
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other 
accounts at the beginning of the year. Don't include funds provided by the state; include those 
amounts on line 23 instead .......................................................... 1.  
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support .......................... 2.  
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ............................... 3.  
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ........ 4.  
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ................................. 5.  
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
a. Enter the total rent paid ........................................................... 6a.  
b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21 .................................................. 6b.  
7. Enter the total food expenses ........................................................ 7.  
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc., not included in line 6a or 6b) .......... 8.  
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ............................. 9.  
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Don't include expenses of maintaining the home, such as 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance ...................................... 10.  
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses .......................... 11.  
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ................................. 12.  
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............... 13.  
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses .............................................. 14.  
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ............................................ 15.  
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by 
insurance ........................................................................ 16.  
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ................................... 17.  
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses ........................................... 18.  
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ............. 19.  
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (0.50) ........................................................ 20.  
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b, if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support ................. 21.  
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a 
qualifying child, stop here; don't complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to 
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 Yes. You don't meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop 
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state, 
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Don't include any amounts included on 
line 1 ............................................................................ 23.  
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ................................................................ 24.  
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ......... 25.  
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. You don't meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You can't claim this person as a 
dependent unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or separated 
parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children of Divorced 
or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart), or Kidnapped child under Qualifying Relative.
Page 16 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16 Publication 501 (2021)

except you are only 18 years old and didn't pro-
vide more than half of your own support for the 
year. This means you are your mother's qualify-
ing child. If she can claim you as a dependent, 
then you can't claim your daughter as a de-
pendent because of the Dependent Taxpayer 
Test, explained earlier.
Example 6 —separated parents.  You, 
your husband, and your 10 -year-old son all 
lived in the United States for all of 2021. On Au-
gust 1, 2021, your husband moved out of the 
household. In August and September, your son 
lived with you. For the rest of the year, your son 
lived with your husband, the boy's father. Your 
son is a qualifying child of both you and your 
husband because your son lived with each of 
you for more than half the year and because he 
met the relationship, age, support, and joint re-
turn tests for both of you. At the end of the year, 
you and your husband still weren't divorced, le-
gally separated, or separated under a written 
separation agreement, so the rule for children of 
divorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart) doesn't apply.
You and your husband will file separate re-
turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your 
son as a qualifying child. This means, if your 
husband doesn't claim your son as a qualifying 
child, you can claim your son as a qualifying 
child for the refundable child tax credit and the 
exclusion for dependent care benefits (assum-
ing you otherwise qualify for both tax benefits). 
However, you can't claim head of household fil-
ing status because you and your husband didn't 
live apart for the last 6 months of the year. As a 
result, your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately. You can't claim the earned income credit 
because you don't meet the requirements to 
claim the earned income credit as a married 
person filing a separate return. You and your 
husband didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 
2021 and while you did live apart at the end of 
2021, you aren't legally separated under a writ-
ten separation agreement or decree of separate 
maintenance. Therefore, you don't meet the re-
quirements to take the earned income credit as 
a married taxpayer filing a separate return. You 
also can't take the credit for child and depend-
ent care expenses because your fling status is 
married filing separately and you and your hus-
band didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 
2021.
Example 7 —separated parents claim 
same child.  The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 6  except you and your husband both 
claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case, 
only your husband will be allowed to treat your 
son as a qualifying child. This is because, dur-
ing 2021, the boy lived with him longer than with 
you. If you claimed the refundable child tax 
credit for your son, the IRS will disallow your 
claim to the refundable child tax credit. If you 
don't have another qualifying child or depend-
ent, the IRS will also disallow your claim to the 
exclusion for dependent care benefits. In addi-
tion, because you and your husband didn't live 
apart for the last 6 months of the year, your hus-
band can't claim head of household filing sta-
tus. As a result, his filing status is married filing 
separately. Your husband can't claim the 
earned income credit because he doesn't meet 
the requirements to claim the earned income 
credit as a married person filing a separate re-
turn. You and your husband didn't live apart for 
the last 6 months of 2021 and, while you did live 
apart at the end of 2021, you aren't legally sep-
arated under a written separation agreement or 
decree of separate maintenance. Therefore, he 
doesn’t meet the requirements to take the 
earned income credit as a married taxpayer fil-
ing a separate return. He also can't take the 
credit for child and dependent care expenses 
because his filing status is married filing sepa-
rately and you and your husband didn't live 
apart for the last 6 months of 2021.
Example 8 —unmarried parents.  You, 
your 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived 
together in the United States all year. You and 
your son's father aren't married. Your son is a 
qualifying child of both you and his father be-
cause he meets the relationship, age, resi-
dency, support, and joint return tests for both 
you and his father. Your AGI is $12,000 and 
your son's father's AGI is $14,000. Your son's 
father agrees to let you claim the child as a 
qualifying child. This means you can claim him 
as a qualifying child for the refundable child tax 
credit, head of household filing status, credit for 
child and dependent care expenses, exclusion 
for dependent care benefits, and the earned in-
come credit, if you qualify for each of those tax 
benefits (and if your son's father doesn't claim 
your son as a qualifying child for any of those 
tax benefits).
Example 9 —unmarried parents claim 
same child. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 8 except you and your son's father both 
claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case, 
only your son's father will be allowed to treat 
your son as a qualifying child. This is because 
his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI, 
$12,000. If you claimed the refundable child tax 
credit for your son, the IRS will disallow your 
claim to this credit. If you don't have another 
qualifying child or dependent, the IRS will also 
disallow your claim to head of household filing 
status, the credit for child and dependent care 
expenses, and the exclusion for dependent 
care benefits. However, you may be able to 
claim the earned income credit as a taxpayer 
without a qualifying child.
Example 10—child didn't live with a pa-
rent. You and your 7 -year-old niece, your si-
ster's child, lived with your mother all year. You 
are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your 
mother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece's parents 
file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, and 
don't live with you or their child. Your niece is a 
qualifying child of both you and your mother be-
cause she meets the relationship, age, resi-
dency, support, and joint return tests for both 
you and your mother. However, only your 
mother can treat her as a qualifying child. This 
is because your mother's AGI, $15,000, is more 
than your AGI, $9,300.
Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live 
apart). If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under the rules 
described earlier for children of divorced or sep-
arated parents (or parents who live apart) , only 
the noncustodial parent can claim the child as a 
dependent and claim the refundable child tax 
credit, nonrefundable child tax credit, additional 
child tax credit, or credit for other dependents 
for the child. However, only the custodial parent 
can claim the credit for child and dependent 
care expenses or the exclusion for dependent 
care benefits for the child, and only the custo-
dial parent can treat the child as a dependent 
for the health coverage tax credit. Also, gener-
ally the noncustodial parent can't claim the child 
as a qualifying child for head of household filing 
status or the earned income credit. Instead, 
generally the custodial parent, if eligible, or 
other eligible person can claim the child as a 
qualifying child for those two benefits. If the 
child is the qualifying child of more than one 
person for these benefits, then the tiebreaker 
rules determine whether the custodial parent or 
another eligible person can treat the child as a 
qualifying child.
The noncustodial parent may be able 
to claim the self -only earned income 
credit if they meet other requirements. 
See Pub. 596 and Schedule EIC and its instruc-
tions for more information.
Example 1.  You and your 5 -year-old son 
lived all year with your mother in the United 
States. Your mother paid the entire cost of 
keeping up the home. Your AGI is $10,000. 
Your mother's AGI is $25,000. Your son's father 
lived in the United States all year, but didn't live 
with you or your son.
Under the rules explained earlier for children 
of divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), your son is treated as the quali-
fying child of his father, who can claim the re-
fundable child tax credit for him. Because of 
this, you can't claim the refundable child tax 
credit for your son. However, those rules don't 
allow your son's father to claim your son as a 
qualifying child for head of household filing sta-
tus, the credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses, the exclusion for dependent care bene-
fits, the earned income credit, or the health 
coverage tax credit.
You and your mother didn't have any child 
care expenses or dependent care benefits, so 
neither of you can claim the credit for child and 
dependent care expenses or the exclusion for 
dependent care benefits. Also, neither of you 
qualifies for the health coverage tax credit. But 
the boy is a qualifying child of both you and your 
mother for head of household filing status and 
the earned income credit because he meets the 
relationship, age, residency, support, and joint 
return tests for both you and your mother. (The 
support test doesn't apply for the earned in-
come credit.) However, you agree to let your 
mother claim your son. This means she can 
claim him for head of household filing status 
and the earned income credit if she qualifies for 
each and if you don't claim him as a qualifying 
child for the earned income credit. (You can't 
claim head of household filing status because 
your mother paid the entire cost of keeping up 
the home.) You may be able to claim the earned 
income credit as a taxpayer without a qualifying 
child.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 except your AGI is $25,000 and your 
mother's AGI is $21,000. Your mother can't 
TIP
Page 17 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 17

claim your son as a qualifying child for any pur-
pose because her AGI isn't higher than yours.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1  except you and your mother both 
claim your son as a qualifying child for the 
earned income credit. Your mother also claims 
him as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status. You, as the child's parent, will be 
the only one allowed to claim your son as a 
qualifying child for the earned income credit. 
The IRS will disallow your mother's claim to 
head of household filing status unless she has 
another qualifying child or dependent. Your 
mother can’t claim the earned income credit as 
a taxpayer without a qualifying child because 
her AGI is more than $21,430.
Qualifying Relative
Four tests must be met for a person to be your 
qualifying relative. The four tests are:
1. Not a qualifying child test,
2. Member of household or relationship test,
3. Gross income test, and
4. Support test.
Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rela-
tive can be any age. There is no age test for a 
qualifying relative.
Kidnapped child.  You can treat a child as 
your qualifying relative even if the child has 
been kidnapped, but the following statements 
must be true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the 
child met the tests to be your qualifying 
relative for the part of the year before the 
date of the kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
met the tests to be your qualifying relative 
for the part of the year following the date of 
the child’s return.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Not a Qualifying Child Test
A child isn't your qualifying relative if the child is 
your qualifying child or the qualifying child of 
any other taxpayer.
Example 1.  Your 22 -year-old daughter, 
who is a student, lives with you and meets all 
the tests to be your qualifying child. She isn't 
your qualifying relative.
Example 2.  Your 2 -year-old son lives with 
your parents and meets all the tests to be their 
qualifying child. He isn't your qualifying relative.
Example 3. Your son lives with you but isn't 
your qualifying child because he is 30 years old 
and doesn't meet the age test. He may be your 
qualifying relative if the gross income test and 
the support test are met.
Example 4.  Your 13 -year-old grandson 
lived with his mother for 3 months, with his un-
cle for 4 months, and with you for 5 months dur-
ing the year. He isn't your qualifying child be-
cause he doesn't meet the residency test. He 
may be your qualifying relative if the gross in-
come test and the support test are met.
Child of person not required to file a return. 
A child isn't the qualifying child of any other tax-
payer and so may qualify as your qualifying rel-
ative if the child's parent (or other person for 
whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) 
isn't required to file an income tax return and ei-
ther:
• Doesn't file an income tax return, or
• Files a return only to get a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1 —return not required.  You 
support an unrelated friend and her 3 -year-old 
child, who lived with you all year in your home. 
Your friend has no gross income, isn't required 
to file a 2021 tax return, and doesn't file a 2021 
tax return. Both your friend and her child are 
your qualifying relatives if the support test is 
met.
Example 2—return filed to claim refund. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1 except 
your friend had wages of $1,500 during the year 
and had income tax withheld from her wages. 
She files a return only to get a refund of the in-
come tax withheld and doesn't claim the earned 
income credit or any other tax credits or deduc-
tions. Both your friend and her child are your 
qualifying relatives if the support test is met.
Example 3 —earned income credit 
claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 2  except your friend had wages of $8,000 
during the year and claimed the earned income 
credit on her return. Your friend's child is the 
qualifying child of another taxpayer (your 
friend), so you can't claim your friend's child as 
your qualifying relative. Also, you can't claim 
your friend as your qualifying relative because 
of the gross income test explained later.
Child in Canada or Mexico.  You may be able 
to claim your child as a dependent even if the 
child lives in Canada or Mexico. If the child 
doesn't live with you, the child doesn't meet the 
residency test to be your qualifying child. How-
ever, the child may still be your qualifying rela-
tive. If the persons the child does live with aren't 
U.S. citizens and have no U.S. gross income, 
those persons aren't “taxpayers,” so the child 
isn't the qualifying child of any other taxpayer. If 
the child isn't the qualifying child of any other 
taxpayer, the child is your qualifying relative as 
long as the gross income test and the support 
test are met.
You can't claim as a dependent a child who 
lives in a foreign country other than Canada or 
Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S. 
resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an ex-
ception for certain adopted children who lived 
with you all year. See Citizen or Resident Test , 
earlier.
Example. You provide all the support of 
your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in 
Mexico with your mother and have no income. 
You are single and live in the United States. 
Your mother isn't a U.S. citizen and has no U.S. 
income, so she isn't a “taxpayer.” Your children 
aren't your qualifying children because they 
don't meet the residency test. But because they 
aren't the qualifying children of any other tax-
payer, they may be your qualifying relatives and 
you may be permitted to claim them as depend-
ents. You may also be able to claim your 
mother as a dependent if the gross income and 
support tests are met.
Member of Household or 
Relationship Test
To meet this test, a person must either:
1. Live with you all year as a member of your 
household, or
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed 
under Relatives who don't have to live with 
you.
If at any time during the year the person was 
your spouse, that person can't be your qualify-
ing relative.
Relatives who don't have to live with you. A 
person related to you in any of the following 
ways doesn't have to live with you all year as a 
member of your household to meet this test.
• Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de-
scendant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild). (A legally adopted child is 
considered your child.)
• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
ter, stepbrother, or stepsister.
• Your father, mother, grandparent, or other 
direct ancestor, but not foster parent.
• Your stepfather or stepmother.
• A son or daughter of your brother or sister.
• A son or daughter of your half brother or 
half sister.
• A brother or sister of your father or mother.
• Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-
ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, 
or sister-in-law.
Any of these relationships that were established 
by marriage aren't ended by death or divorce.
Example. You and your wife began sup-
porting your wife's father, a widower, in 2015. 
Your wife died in 2020. Despite your wife's 
death, your father -in-law continues to meet this 
test, even if he doesn't live with you. You can 
claim him as a dependent if all other tests are 
met, including the gross income test and sup-
port test.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual 
who is placed with you by an authorized place-
ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other 
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Joint return.  If you file a joint return, the per-
son can be related to either you or your spouse. 
Also, the person doesn't need to be related to 
the spouse who provides support.
Page 18 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18 Publication 501 (2021)

For example, your spouse's uncle who re-
ceives more than half of his support from you 
may be your qualifying relative, even though he 
doesn't live with you. However, if you and your 
spouse file separate returns, your spouse's un-
cle can be your qualifying relative only if he lives 
with you all year as a member of your house-
hold.
Temporary absences. A person is considered 
to live with you as a member of your household 
during periods of time when one of you, or both, 
are temporarily absent due to special circum-
stances, such as:
• Illness,
• Education,
• Business,
• Vacation,
• Military service, or
• Detention in a juvenile facility.
If the person is placed in a nursing home for 
an indefinite period of time to receive constant 
medical care, the absence may be considered 
temporary.
Death or birth.  A person who died during the 
year, but lived with you as a member of your 
household until death, will meet this test. The 
same is true for a child who was born during the 
year and lived with you as a member of your 
household for the rest of the year. The test is 
also met if a child lived with you as a member of 
your household except for any required hospital 
stay following birth. The test is also met for an 
adopted or foster child if you adopted the per-
son in 2021, the person was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption by you in 2021, or 
the person was an eligible foster child placed 
with you during 2021 and your main home was 
the person’s main home for the entire time 
since he or she was adopted or placed with you 
in 2021.
If your dependent died during the year and 
you otherwise qualify to claim that person as a 
dependent, you can still claim that person as a 
dependent.
Example. Your mother died on January 15. 
She met the tests to be your qualifying relative. 
You can claim her as a dependent on your re-
turn.
Local law violated.  A person doesn't meet 
this test if at any time during the year the rela-
tionship between you and that person violates 
local law.
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a 
member of your household all year. However, 
your relationship with her violated the laws of 
the state where you live because she was mar-
ried to someone else. Therefore, she doesn't 
meet this test and you can't claim her as a de-
pendent.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if he 
or she lives with you all year as a member of 
your household. A cousin is a descendant of a 
brother or sister of your father or mother.
Gross Income Test
To meet this test, a person's gross income for 
the year must be less than $4,300.
Gross income defined.  Gross income is all 
income in the form of money, property, and 
services that isn't exempt from tax.
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
ing business, gross income is the total net sales 
minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-
neous income from the business.
Gross receipts from rental property are 
gross income. Don't deduct taxes, repairs, or 
other expenses to determine the gross income 
from rental property.
Gross income includes a partner's share of 
the gross (not net) partnership income.
Gross income also includes all taxable un-
employment compensation, taxable social se-
curity benefits, and certain amounts received as 
scholarship and fellowship grants. Scholarships 
received by degree candidates and used for tui-
tion, fees, supplies, books, and equipment re-
quired for particular courses aren’t generally in-
cluded in gross income. For more information 
about scholarships, see chapter 1 of Pub. 970.
Disabled dependent working at sheltered 
workshop. For purposes of the gross income 
test, the gross income of an individual who is 
permanently and totally disabled at any time 
during the year doesn't include income for serv-
ices the individual performs at a sheltered work-
shop. The availability of medical care at the 
workshop must be the main reason for the indi-
vidual's presence there. Also, the income must 
come solely from activities at the workshop that 
are incident to this medical care.
A “sheltered workshop” is a school that:
• Provides special instruction or training de-
signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-
vidual; and
• Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-
zations or by a state, a U.S. possession, a 
political subdivision of a state or posses-
sion, the United States, or the District of 
Columbia.
Permanently and totally disabled  has the 
same meaning here as under Qualifying Child, 
earlier.
Support Test (To Be a
Qualifying Relative)
To meet this test, you must generally provide 
more than half of a person's total support during 
the calendar year.
However, if two or more persons provide 
support, but no one person provides more than 
half of a person's total support, see Multiple 
Support Agreement, later.
How to determine if support test is met. 
You figure whether you have provided more 
than half of a person's total support by compar-
ing the amount you contributed to that person's 
support with the entire amount of support that 
person received from all sources. This includes 
support the person provided from his or her 
own funds.
You may find Worksheet 2 helpful in figuring 
whether you provided more than half of a per-
son's support.
Person's own funds not used for support. 
A person's own funds aren't support unless they 
are actually spent for support.
Example. Your mother received $2,400 in 
social security benefits and $300 in interest. 
She paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recre-
ation. She put $300 in a savings account.
Even though your mother received a total of 
$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400 
($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If you 
spent more than $2,400 for her support and no 
other support was received, you have provided 
more than half of her support.
Child's wages used for own support.  You 
can't include in your contribution to your child's 
support any support paid for by the child with 
the child's own wages, even if you paid the wa-
ges.
Year support is provided.  The year you pro-
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even 
if you do so with borrowed money that you re-
pay in a later year.
If you use a fiscal year to report your in-
come, you must provide more than half of the 
dependent's support for the calendar year in 
which your fiscal year begins.
Armed Forces dependency allotments.  The 
part of the allotment contributed by the govern-
ment and the part taken out of your military pay 
are both considered provided by you in figuring 
whether you provide more than half of the sup-
port. If your allotment is used to support per-
sons other than those you name, you can claim 
them as dependents if they otherwise qualify.
Example. You are in the Armed Forces. 
You authorize an allotment for your widowed 
mother that she uses to support herself and her 
sister. If the allotment provides more than half of 
each person's support, you can claim each of 
them as a dependent, if they otherwise qualify, 
even though you authorize the allotment only 
for your mother.
Tax-exempt military quarters allowan-
ces. These allowances are treated the same 
way as dependency allotments in figuring sup-
port. The allotment of pay and the tax -exempt 
basic allowance for quarters are both consid-
ered as provided by you for support.
Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's to-
tal support, include tax -exempt income, sav-
ings, and borrowed amounts used to support 
that person. Tax -exempt income includes cer-
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, 
nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed 
Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, 
and tax-exempt interest.
Example 1.  You provide $4,000 toward 
your mother's support during the year. She has 
earned income of $600, nontaxable social se-
curity benefits of $4,800, and tax -exempt inter-
est of $200. She uses all these for her support. 
Page 19 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 19

You can't claim your mother as a dependent be-
cause the $4,000 you provide isn't more than 
half of her total support of $9,600 ($4,000 + 
$600 + $4,800 + $200).
Example 2. Your niece takes out a student 
loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her college tui-
tion. She is personally responsible for the loan. 
You provide $2,000 toward her total support. 
You can't claim her as a dependent because 
you provide less than half of her support.
Social security benefits.  If spouses each 
receive benefits that are paid by one check 
made out to both of them, half of the total paid 
is considered to be for the support of each 
spouse, unless they can show otherwise.
If a child receives social security benefits 
and uses them toward his or her own support, 
the benefits are considered as provided by the 
child.
Support provided by the state (welfare, 
food benefits, housing, etc.).  Benefits provi-
ded by the state to a needy person are gener-
ally considered support provided by the state. 
However, payments based on the needs of the 
recipient won't be considered as used entirely 
for that person's support if it is shown that part 
of the payments weren't used for that purpose.
TANF and other governmental pay-
ments. Under proposed Treasury regulations, 
if you received Temporary Assistance to Needy 
Families (TANF) payments or other similar pay-
ments and used the payment to support an-
other person, those payments are considered 
support you provided for that person, rather 
than support provided by the government or 
other third party.
Foster care.  Payments you receive for the 
support of a foster child from a child placement 
agency are considered support provided by the 
agency. See Foster care payments and expen-
ses, earlier.
Home for the aged.  If you make a lump -sum 
advance payment to a home for the aged to 
take care of your relative for life and the pay-
ment is based on that person's life expectancy, 
the amount of support you provide each year is 
the lump-sum payment divided by the relative's 
life expectancy. The amount of support you pro-
vide also includes any other amounts you provi-
ded during the year.
Total Support
To figure if you provided more than half of a 
person's support, you must first determine the 
total support provided for that person. Total 
support includes amounts spent to provide 
food, lodging, clothing, education, medical and 
dental care, recreation, transportation, and sim-
ilar necessities.
Generally, the amount of an item of support 
is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support 
is the fair rental value of the lodging.
Expenses not directly related to any one 
member of a household, such as the cost of 
food for the household, must be divided among 
the members of the household.
Example 1.  Grace Brown, mother of Mary 
Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and their 
two children. Grace gets social security benefits 
of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-
portation, and recreation. Grace has no other 
income. Frank and Mary's total food expense 
for the household is $5,200. They pay Grace's 
medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair 
rental value of the lodging provided for Grace is 
$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar 
rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support 
as follows.
Fair rental value of lodging ........... $ 1,800 
Clothing, transportation, and 
recreation ....................... 2,400 
Medical expenses ................. 1,200 
Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) .......... 1,040 
Total support ............... $6,440 
The support Frank and Mary provide 
($1,800 lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + 
$1,040 food = $4,040) is more than half of 
Grace's $6,440 total support.
Example 2. Your parents live with you, your 
spouse, and your two children in a house you 
own. The fair rental value of your parents' share 
of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each), 
which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa-
ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200, 
which he spends equally between your mother 
and himself for items of support such as cloth-
ing, transportation, and recreation. Your total 
food expense for the household is $6,000. Your 
heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Your 
mother has hospital and medical expenses of 
$600, which you pay during the year. Figure 
your parents' total support as follows.
Support provided Father Mother 
Fair rental value of lodging .... $1,000 $1,000 
Pension spent for their 
support ................. 2,100 2,100 
Share of food (1/6 of 
$6,000) ................. 1,000 1,000 
Medical expenses for 
mother ................. 600 
Parents' total support .... $4,100 $4,700 
You must apply the support test separately 
to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000 
lodging + $1,000 food) of your father's total sup-
port of $4,100 —less than half. You provide 
$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging + $1,000 
food + $600 medical)—more than half of her to-
tal support of $4,700. You meet the support test 
for your mother, but not your father. Heat and 
utility costs are included in the fair rental value 
of the lodging, so these aren't considered sepa-
rately.
Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, 
you are considered to provide support equal to 
the fair rental value of the room, apartment, 
house, or other shelter in which the person 
lives. Fair rental value includes a reasonable al-
lowance for the use of furniture and appliances, 
and for heat and other utilities that are provided.
Fair rental value defined. Fair rental value 
is the amount you could reasonably expect to 
receive from a stranger for the same kind of 
lodging. It is used instead of actual expenses 
such as taxes, interest, depreciation, paint, in-
surance, utilities, and the cost of furniture and 
appliances. In some cases, fair rental value 
may be equal to the rent paid.
If you provide the total lodging, the amount 
of support you provide is the fair rental value of 
the room the person uses, or a share of the fair 
rental value of the entire dwelling if the person 
has use of your entire home. If you don't provide 
the total lodging, the total fair rental value must 
be divided depending on how much of the total 
lodging you provide. If you provide only a part 
and the person supplies the rest, the fair rental 
value must be divided between both of you ac-
cording to the amount each provides.
Example. Your parents live rent free in a 
house you own. It has a fair rental value of 
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair 
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 
for the furniture. This doesn't include heat and 
utilities. The house is completely furnished with 
furniture belonging to your parents. You pay 
$600 for their utility bills. Utilities aren't usually 
included in rent for houses in the area where 
your parents live. Therefore, you consider the 
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished 
house + $1,800 allowance for the furnishings 
provided by your parents + $600 cost of utilities) 
of which you are considered to provide $4,200 
($3,600 + $600).
Person living in his or her own home. 
The total fair rental value of a person's home 
that he or she owns is considered support con-
tributed by that person.
Living with someone rent free.  If you live 
with a person rent free in his or her home, you 
must reduce the amount you provide for sup-
port of that person by the fair rental value of 
lodging he or she provides you.
Property. Property provided as support is 
measured by its fair market value. Fair market 
value is the price that property would sell for on 
the open market. It is the price that would be 
agreed upon between a willing buyer and a will-
ing seller, with neither being required to act, and 
both having reasonable knowledge of the rele-
vant facts.
Capital expenses.  Capital items, such as 
furniture, appliances, and cars, bought for a 
person during the year can be included in total 
support under certain circumstances.
The following examples show when a capi-
tal item is or isn't support.
Example 1.  You buy a $200 power lawn 
mower for your 13 -year-old child. The child is 
given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. Be-
cause the lawn mower benefits all members of 
the household, don't include the cost of the 
lawn mower in the support of your child.
Example 2.  You buy a $150 television set 
as a birthday present for your 12 -year-old child. 
Page 20 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20 Publication 501 (2021)

The television set is placed in your child's bed-
room. You can include the cost of the television 
set in the support of your child.
Example 3.  You pay $5,000 for a car and 
register it in your name. You and your 
17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-
cause you own the car and don't give it to your 
daughter but merely let her use it, don't include 
the cost of the car in your daughter's total sup-
port. However, you can include in your daugh-
ter's support your out -of-pocket expenses of 
operating the car for her benefit.
Example 4.  Your 17 -year-old son, using 
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-
vide the rest of your son's support—$4,000. Be-
cause the car is bought and owned by your son, 
the car's fair market value ($4,500) must be in-
cluded in his support. Your son has provided 
more than half of his own total support of 
$8,500 ($4,500 + $4,000), so he isn't your quali-
fying child. You didn't provide more than half of 
his total support, so he isn't your qualifying rela-
tive. You can't claim your son as a dependent.
Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur-
ance premiums you pay, including premiums for 
supplementary Medicare coverage, are inclu-
ded in the support you provide.
Medical insurance benefits.  Medical in-
surance benefits, including basic and supple-
mentary Medicare benefits, aren't part of sup-
port.
Tuition payments and allowances under the 
GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the GI 
Bill for tuition payments and allowances while 
they attend school are included in total support.
Example. During the year, your son re-
ceives $2,200 from the government under the 
GI Bill. He uses this amount for his education. 
You provide the rest of his support —$2,000. 
Because GI benefits are included in total sup-
port, your son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 
+ $2,000). You haven't provided more than half 
of his support.
Child care expenses.  If you pay someone to 
provide child or dependent care, you can in-
clude these payments in the amount you provi-
ded for the support of your child or disabled de-
pendent, even if you claim a credit for the 
payments. For information on the credit, see 
Pub. 503.
Other support items.  Other items may be 
considered as support depending on the facts 
in each case.
Don't Include in Total Support
The following items aren't included in total sup-
port.
1. Federal, state, and local income taxes 
paid by persons from their own income. 
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid 
by persons from their own income. 
3. Life insurance premiums. 
4. Funeral expenses. 
5. Scholarships received by your child if your 
child is a student. 
6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educational 
Assistance payments used for the support 
of the child who receives them.
Multiple Support Agreement
Sometimes no one provides more than half of 
the support of a person. Instead, two or more 
persons, each of whom would be able to claim 
the person as a dependent but for the support 
test, together provide more than half of the per-
son's support.
When this happens, you can agree that any 
one of you who individually provides more than 
10% of the person's support, but only one, can 
claim that person as a dependent. Each of the 
others must sign a statement agreeing not to 
claim the person as a dependent for that year. 
The person who claims the person as a de-
pendent must keep these signed statements for 
his or her records. A multiple support declara-
tion identifying each of the others who agreed 
not to claim the person as a dependent must be 
attached to the return of the person claiming the 
person as a dependent. Form 2120, Multiple 
Support Declaration, can be used for this pur-
pose.
You can claim someone as a dependent un-
der a multiple support agreement for someone 
related to you or for someone who lived with 
you all year as a member of your household.
Example 1. You, your sister, and your two 
brothers provide the entire support of your 
mother for the year. You provide 45%, your sis-
ter 35%, and your two brothers each provide 
10%. Either you or your sister can claim your 
mother as a dependent. The other must sign a 
statement agreeing not to claim your mother as 
a dependent. The one who claims your mother 
as a dependent must attach Form 2120, or a 
similar declaration, to his or her return and must 
keep the statement signed by the other for his 
or her records. Because neither brother pro-
vides more than 10% of the support, neither can 
claim your mother as a dependent and neither 
has to sign a statement.
Example 2. You and your brother each pro-
vide 20% of your mother's support for the year. 
The remaining 60% of her support is provided 
equally by two persons who aren't related to 
her. She doesn't live with them. Because more 
than half of her support is provided by persons 
who can't claim her as a dependent, no one can 
claim her as a dependent.
Example 3.  Your father lives with you and 
receives 25% of his support from social secur-
ity, 40% from you, 24% from his brother (your 
uncle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or 
your uncle can claim your father as a depend-
ent if the other signs a statement agreeing not 
to. The one who claims your father as a de-
pendent must attach Form 2120, or a similar 
declaration, to his return and must keep for his 
records the signed statement from the one 
agreeing not to claim your father as a depend-
ent.
Support Test for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or 
Parents Who Live Apart)
In most cases, a child of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart) will be a 
qualifying child of one of the parents. See Chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart)  under Qualifying Child, 
earlier. However, if the child doesn't meet the 
requirements to be a qualifying child of either 
parent, the child may be a qualifying relative of 
one of the parents. In that case, the following 
rules must be used in applying the support test.
A child who doesn’t meet the requirements 
to be a qualifying child of either parent will be 
treated as the qualifying relative of his or her 
noncustodial parent if all four of the following 
statements are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her 
support for the year from the parents (and 
the rules on multiple support agreements, 
explained earlier, don't apply).
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that he or 
she won't claim the child as a depend-
ent for the year, and the noncustodial 
parent attaches this written declara-
tion to his or her return. (If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
1984 and before 2009, see Post-1984 
and pre-2009 divorce decree or sepa-
ration agreement, later. If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
2008, see Post-2008 divorce decree 
or separation agreement, later.)
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance or written separa-
tion agreement that applies to 2021 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement wasn't 
changed after 1984 to say the non-
custodial parent can't claim the child 
as a dependent, and the noncustodial 
parent provides at least $600 for the 
child's support during the year.
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent. 
The custodial parent is the parent with whom 
the child lived for the greater number of nights 
during the year. The other parent is the noncus-
todial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
Page 21 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 21

the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
• At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present; or
• In the company of the parent, when the 
child doesn't sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca-
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
during the year, the custodial parent is the pa-
rent with the higher adjusted gross income.
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which it begins. For 
example, the night of December 31, 2021, is 
treated as part of 2021.
Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa-
ted under state law, the child is not under the 
custody of either parent and time lived with a 
parent after emancipation does not count for 
purposes of determining who is the custodial 
parent.
Absences. If a child wasn't with either pa-
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night. But if it can't be determined with 
which parent the child normally would have 
lived or if the child wouldn't have lived with ei-
ther parent that night, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent that night.
Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi-
dence registered with the school.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
must use either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release a claim to an exemption for a child to 
the noncustodial parent. Although the exemp-
tion amount is zero for tax year 2021, this re-
lease allows the noncustodial parent to claim 
the nonrefundable child tax credit, credit for 
other dependents, refundable child tax credit, or 
additional child tax credit, if applicable, based 
on the child being a qualifying child. The non-
custodial parent must attach a copy of the form 
or statement to his or her tax return.
The release can be for 1 year, for a number 
of specified years (for example, alternate 
years), or for all future years, as specified in the 
declaration.
Post-1984 and pre -2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de-
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent won't claim the child 
as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa-
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to his or her tax return.
• The cover page (write the other parent's 
social security number on this page).
• The pages that include all of the informa-
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
• The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent can't at-
tach pages from the decree or agreement to the 
tax return instead of Form 8332 if the decree or 
agreement went into effect after 2008. The cus-
todial parent must sign either Form 8332 or a 
similar statement whose only purpose is to re-
lease the custodial parent's claim to an exemp-
tion, and the noncustodial parent must attach a 
copy to his or her return. The form or statement 
must release the custodial parent's claim to the 
child without any conditions. For example, the 
release must not depend on the noncustodial 
parent paying support.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a 
release of claim to an exemption that he or she 
previously released to the noncustodial parent. 
For the revocation to be effective for 2021, the 
custodial parent must have given (or made rea-
sonable efforts to give) written notice of the rev-
ocation to the noncustodial parent in 2020 or 
earlier. The custodial parent can use Part III of 
Form 8332 for this purpose and must attach a 
copy of the revocation to his or her return for 
each tax year he or she claims the child as a 
dependent as a result of the revocation.
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the support 
provided by your new spouse is treated as pro-
vided by you.
Child support under pre -1985 agreement.
All child support payments actually received 
from the noncustodial parent under a pre -1985 
agreement are considered used for the support 
of the child.
Example. Under a pre -1985 agreement, 
the noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for the 
child's support. This amount is considered sup-
port provided by the noncustodial parent even if 
the $1,200 was actually spent on things other 
than support.
Alimony. Payments to a spouse that are 
alimony or separate maintenance payments, or 
similar payments from an estate or trust, aren't 
treated as a payment for the support of a de-
pendent.
CAUTION
!
Parents who never married. This special rule 
for divorced or separated parents also applies 
to parents who never married and lived apart at 
all times during the last 6 months of the year.
Multiple support agreement. If the support of 
the child is determined under a multiple support 
agreement, this special support test for di-
vorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart) doesn't apply.
Social Security
Numbers for 
Dependents
You must show the social security number 
(SSN) of any dependent you list in the Depend-
ents section of your Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
If you don't show the dependent's SSN 
when required or if you show an incor-
rect SSN, certain tax benefits may be 
disallowed.
No SSN. If a person whom you expect to claim 
as a dependent on your return doesn't have an 
SSN, either you or that person should apply for 
an SSN as soon as possible by filing Form 
SS-5, Application for a Social Security Card, 
with the Social Security Administration (SSA). 
You can get Form SS -5 online at SSA.gov/
forms/ss-5.pdf or at your local SSA office.
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN 
once the SSA has all the information it needs. If 
you don't have a required SSN by the filing due 
date, you can file Form 4868, Application for 
Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Indi-
vidual Income Tax Return, for an extension of 
time to file.
Born and died in 2021.  If your child was 
born and died in 2021, and you don't have an 
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the 
child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-
pital records instead. The document must show 
the child was born alive. If you do this, enter 
“DIED” in column (2) of the Dependents section 
of your Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Alien or adoptee with no SSN.  If your de-
pendent doesn't have and can't get an SSN, 
you must show the individual taxpayer identifi-
cation number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer iden-
tification number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.
Taxpayer identification numbers for ali-
ens. If your dependent is a resident or nonresi-
dent alien who doesn't have and isn't eligible to 
get an SSN, your dependent must apply for an 
individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). 
For details on how to apply, see Form W -7, Ap-
plication for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identifica-
tion Number.
Taxpayer identification numbers for 
adoptees. If you have a child who was placed 
with you by an authorized placement agency, 
you may be able to claim the child as a depend-
ent. However, if you can't get an SSN or an ITIN 
for the child, you must get an adoption taxpayer 
identification number (ATIN) for the child from 
CAUTION
!
Page 22 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22 Publication 501 (2021)

the IRS. See Form W -7A, Application for Tax-
payer Identification Number for Pending U.S. 
Adoptions, for details.
Standard Deduction
In 2021, you are allowed a charitable 
contribution deduction for cash contri-
butions of up to $300 ($600 if married 
filing jointly) if you don't itemize your deduc-
tions. For more information, see Line 12b in the 
Instructions for Form 1040.
Most taxpayers have a choice of either tak-
ing a standard deduction or itemizing their de-
ductions. If you have a choice, you can use the 
method that gives you the lower tax.
The standard deduction is a dollar amount 
that reduces your taxable income. It is a benefit 
that eliminates the need for many taxpayers to 
itemize actual deductions, such as medical ex-
penses, charitable contributions, and taxes, on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). The standard deduc-
tion is higher for taxpayers who:
• Are 65 or older, or
• Are blind.
You benefit from the standard deduc-
tion if your standard deduction is more 
than the total of your allowable item-
ized deductions.
Persons not eligible for the standard de-
duction. Your standard deduction is zero and 
you should itemize any deductions you have if:
1. Your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, and your spouse itemizes deduc-
tions on his or her return;
2. You are filing a tax return for a short tax 
year because of a change in your annual 
accounting period; or
3. You are a nonresident or dual-status alien 
during the year. You are considered a 
dual-status alien if you were both a non-
resident and resident alien during the 
year.
If you are a nonresident alien who is married to 
a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of the 
year, you can choose to be treated as a U.S. 
resident (see Pub. 519). If you make this 
choice, you can take the standard deduction.
If you can be claimed as a dependent 
on another person's return (such as 
your parents' return), your standard de-
duction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-
tion for Dependents, later.
Standard Deduction Amount
The standard deduction amount depends on 
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or 
blind, and whether another taxpayer can claim 
you as a dependent. Generally, the standard 
deduction amounts are adjusted each year for 
inflation. The standard deduction amounts for 
most people are shown in Table 6.
Decedent's final return. The standard deduc-
tion for a decedent's final tax return is the same 
TIP
TIP
CAUTION
!
as it would have been had the decedent contin-
ued to live. However, if the decedent wasn't 65 
or older at the time of death, the higher stand-
ard deduction for age can't be claimed.
Higher Standard Deduction for 
Age (65 or Older)
If you are age 65 or older on the last day of the 
year and don't itemize deductions, you are enti-
tled to a higher standard deduction. You are 
considered 65 on the day before your 65th 
birthday. Therefore, you can take a higher 
standard deduction for 2021 if you were born 
before January 2, 1957.
Use Table 7 to figure the standard deduction 
amount.
Death of taxpayer.  If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2021, consider 
the taxpayer to be 65 or older at the end of 
2021 only if he or she was 65 or older at the 
time of death. Even if the taxpayer was born be-
fore January 2, 1957, he or she isn't considered 
65 or older at the end of 2021 unless he or she 
was 65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before his or her 65th birthday.
Higher Standard Deduction for 
Blindness
If you are blind on the last day of the year and 
you don't itemize deductions, you are entitled to 
a higher standard deduction.
Not totally blind. If you aren't totally blind, you 
must get a certified statement from an eye doc-
tor (ophthalmologist or optometrist) stating that:
1. You can't see better than 20/200 in the 
better eye with glasses or contact lenses, 
or
2. Your field of vision is 20 degrees or less.
If your eye condition isn't likely to improve 
beyond these limits, the statement should in-
clude this fact. Keep the statement in your re-
cords.
If your vision can be corrected beyond these 
limits only by contact lenses that you can wear 
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers, 
you can take the higher standard deduction for 
blindness if you otherwise qualify.
Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
You can take the higher standard deduction if 
your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
1. You file a joint return, or
2. You file a separate return and your spouse 
had no gross income and can't be claimed 
as a dependent by another taxpayer.
Death of spouse.  If your spouse died in 2021 
before reaching age 65, you can't take a higher 
standard deduction because of your spouse. 
Even if your spouse was born before January 2, 
1957, he or she isn't considered 65 or older at 
the end of 2021 unless he or she was 65 or 
older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before his or her 65th birthday.
Example. Your spouse was born on Febru-
ary 14, 1956, and died on February 13, 2021. 
Your spouse is considered age 65 at the time of 
death. However, if your spouse died on Febru-
ary 12, 2021, your spouse isn't considered age 
65 at the time of death and isn't 65 or older at 
the end of 2021.
You can't claim the higher standard de-
duction for an individual other than 
yourself and your spouse.
Examples
The following examples illustrate how to deter-
mine your standard deduction using Table 6 
and Table 7.
Example 1.  Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are 
filing a joint return for 2021. Neither is blind, and 
neither can be claimed as a dependent. They 
decide not to itemize their deductions. They use 
Table 6. Their standard deduction is $25,100.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the end 
of 2021. Larry and Donna use Table 7 . Their 
standard deduction is $26,450.
Example 3. Bill and Lisa are filing a joint re-
turn for 2021. Both are over age 65. Neither is 
blind, and neither can be claimed as a depend-
ent. If they don't itemize deductions, they use 
Table 7. Their standard deduction is $27,800.
Standard Deduction for 
Dependents
The standard deduction for an individual who 
can be claimed as a dependent on another per-
son's tax return is generally limited to the 
greater of:
1. $1,100, or
2. The individual's earned income for the 
year plus $350 (but not more than the reg-
ular standard deduction amount, generally 
$12,550).
However, if the individual is 65 or older or blind, 
the standard deduction may be higher.
If you (or your spouse if filing jointly) can be 
claimed as a dependent on someone else's re-
turn, use Table 8  to determine your standard 
deduction.
Earned income defined.  Earned income 
is salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and 
other amounts received as pay for work you ac-
tually perform.
For purposes of the standard deduction, 
earned income also includes any part of a taxa-
ble scholarship or fellowship grant. See chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 970 for more information on what 
qualifies as a scholarship or fellowship grant.
Example 1.  Michael is 16 years old and 
single. His parents can claim him as a depend-
ent on their 2021 tax return. He has interest in-
come of $780 and wages of $150. He has no 
itemized deductions. Michael uses Table 8  to 
CAUTION
!
Page 23 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 23

find his standard deduction. He enters $150 
(his earned income) on line 1, $500 ($150 + 
$350) on line 3, $1,100 (the larger of $500 and 
$1,100) on line 5, and $12,550 on line 6. His 
standard deduction, on line 7a, is $1,100 (the 
smaller of $1,100 and $12,550).
Example 2. Joe, a 22 -year-old college stu-
dent, can be claimed as a dependent on his pa-
rents' 2021 tax return. Joe is married and files a 
separate return. His wife doesn't itemize deduc-
tions on her separate return. Joe has $1,500 in 
interest income and wages of $3,800. He has 
no itemized deductions. Joe finds his standard 
deduction by using Table 8 . He enters his 
earned income, $3,800, on line 1. He adds lines 
1 and 2 and enters $4,150 on line 3. On line 5, 
he enters $4,150, the larger of lines 3 and 4. 
Because Joe is married filing a separate return, 
he enters $12,550 on line 6. On line 7a, he en-
ters $4,150 as his standard deduction because 
it is smaller than $12,550, the amount on line 6.
Example 3.  Amy, who is single, can be 
claimed as a dependent on her parents' 2021 
tax return. She is 18 years old and blind. She 
has interest income of $1,300 and wages of 
$2,900. She has no itemized deductions. Amy 
uses Table 8  to find her standard deduction. 
She enters her wages of $2,900 on line 1. She 
adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $3,250 on line 3. 
On line 5, she enters $3,250, the larger of lines 
3 and 4. Because she is single, Amy enters 
$12,550 on line 6. She enters $3,250 on line 7a. 
This is the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 
and 6. Because she checked one box in the top 
part of the worksheet, she enters $1,700 on 
line 7b. She then adds the amounts on lines 7a 
and 7b and enters her standard deduction of 
$4,950 on line 7c.
Example 4. Ed is 18 years old and single. 
His parents can claim him as a dependent on 
their 2021 tax return. He has wages of $7,000, 
interest income of $500, and a business loss of 
$3,000. He has no itemized deductions. Ed 
uses Table 8  to figure his standard deduction. 
He enters $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000) on line 1. 
He adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $4,350 on 
line 3. On line 5, he enters $4,350, the larger of 
lines 3 and 4. Because he is single, Ed enters 
$12,550 on line 6. On line 7a, he enters $4,350 
as his standard deduction because it is smaller 
than $12,550, the amount on line 6.
Who Should Itemize
You should itemize deductions if your total de-
ductions are more than the standard deduction 
amount. Also, you should itemize if you don't 
qualify for the standard deduction, as dis-
cussed, earlier, under Persons not eligible for 
the standard deduction.
You should first figure your itemized deduc-
tions and compare that amount to your stand-
ard deduction to make sure you are using the 
method that gives you the greater benefit.
When to itemize.  You may benefit from 
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040) if you:
1. Don't qualify for the standard deduction,
2. Had large uninsured medical and dental 
expenses during the year,
3. Paid interest and taxes on your home,
4. Had large uninsured casualty or theft los-
ses,
5. Made large contributions to qualified chari-
ties, or
6. Have total itemized deductions that are 
more than the standard deduction to 
which you otherwise are entitled.
If you decide to itemize your deductions, 
complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR. Enter the amount from 
Schedule A, line 17, on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, 
line 12a.
In 2021, you are allowed a charitable 
contribution deduction for cash contri-
butions of up to $300 ($600 if married 
filing jointly) if you don't itemize your deduc-
tions.
TIP
Electing to itemize for state tax or other 
purposes. Even if your itemized deductions 
are less than your standard deduction, you can 
elect to itemize deductions on your federal re-
turn rather than take the standard deduction. 
You may want to do this if, for example, the tax 
benefit of itemizing your deductions on your 
state tax return is greater than the tax benefit 
you lose on your federal return by not taking the 
standard deduction. To make this election, you 
must check the box on line 18 of Schedule A.
Changing your mind. If you don't itemize your 
deductions and later find that you should have 
itemized—or if you itemize your deductions and 
later find you shouldn't have —you can change 
your return by filing Form 1040-X.
Married persons who filed separate re-
turns. You can change methods of taking de-
ductions only if you and your spouse both make 
the same changes. Both of you must file a con-
sent to assessment for any additional tax either 
one may owe as a result of the change.
You and your spouse can use the method 
that gives you the lower total tax, even though 
one of you may pay more tax than you would 
have paid by using the other method. You both 
must use the same method of claiming deduc-
tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other 
should itemize because he or she won't qualify 
for the standard deduction. See Persons not eli-
gible for the standard deduction, earlier.
2021 Standard 
Deduction Tables
If you are married filing a separate re-
turn and your spouse itemizes deduc-
tions, or if you are a dual -status alien, 
you can't take the standard deduction even if 
you were born before January 2, 1957, or are 
blind.
CAUTION
!
Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*Table 6.
IF your filing status is... YOUR standard deduction is...
Single or Married filing separately $12,550
Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)   25,100
Head of household  18,800
*Don't use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1957, or are blind, or if someone else can claim you (or your spouse if filing jointly) as a dependent. 
Use Table 7 or Table 8 instead.
Page 24 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24 Publication 501 (2021)

Standard Deduction Chart for People Born Before January 2, 1957, or Who Are Blind*Table 7.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You: Born before January 2, 1957  
  Blind 
Your spouse: Born before January 2, 1957 
  Blind 
Total number of boxes you checked 
IF your filing status is... AND the number in the box above is... THEN your standard deduction is...
Single
 1 $14,250
2  15,950
Married filing jointly 
 1 $26,450
2  27,800
3  29,150
4  30,500
Qualifying widow(er)
 1 $26,450
 2  27,800
Married filing separately**
 1  $13,900
2  15,250
3  16,600
4  17,950
Head of household
 1 $20,500
 2  22,200
*If someone else can claim you (or your spouse if filing jointly) as a dependent, use Table 8 instead. 
**You can check the boxes for “Your spouse” if your filing status is married filing separately and your spouse had no income, isn't filing a return, and can't be claimed as a 
dependent on another person's return.
Page 25 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 25

Standard Deduction Worksheet for Dependents
Use this worksheet only if someone else can claim you (or your spouse if 
filing jointly) as a dependent.
Table 8.
Keep for Your Records
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You: Born before January 2, 1957 
 Blind 
Your spouse: Born before January 2, 1957 
 Blind 
Total number of boxes you checked 
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If none, enter -0-. 1.  
2. Additional amount. 2. $350
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.  
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $1,100
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.  
6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status. 
• Single or Married filing separately—$12,550
• Married filing jointly—$25,100
• Head of household—$18,800
6.  
7. Standard deduction. 
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after January 1, 1957, and not blind, stop here. This is your 
standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to line 7b. 7a.  
b. If born before January 2, 1957, or blind, multiply $1,700 ($1,350 if married) by the number in the box above. 7b.  
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard deduction for 2021. 7c.  
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also includes any 
taxable scholarship or fellowship grant.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need 
help preparing your tax return; or want to down-
load free publications, forms, or instructions, go 
to IRS.gov to find resources that can help you 
right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After 
receiving all your wage and earnings state-
ments (Forms W-2, W-2G, 1099-R, 1099-MISC, 
1099-NEC, etc.); unemployment compensation 
statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 
1099-G); and interest, dividend, and retirement 
statements from banks and investment firms 
(Forms 1099), you have several options to 
choose from to prepare and file your tax return. 
You can prepare the tax return yourself, see if 
you qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax 
professional to prepare your return.
For 2021, if you received an Economic 
Impact Payment (EIP), refer to your 
Notice 1444 -C, Your 2021 Economic 
Impact Payment. If you received Advance Child 
Tax Credit payments, refer to your Letter 6419.
Free options for tax preparation.  Go to 
IRS.gov to see your options for preparing and 
CAUTION
!
filing your return online or in your local commun-
ity, if you qualify, which include the following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare 
and file your federal individual income tax 
return for free using brand-name tax-prep-
aration-and-filing software or Free File filla-
ble forms. However, state tax preparation 
may not be available through Free File. Go 
to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify for 
free online federal tax preparation, e-filing, 
and direct deposit or payment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income Tax Assis-
tance (VITA) program offers free tax help 
to people with low-to-moderate incomes, 
persons with disabilities, and limited-Eng-
lish-speaking taxpayers who need help 
preparing their own tax returns. Go to 
IRS.gov/VITA, download the free IRS2Go 
app, or call 800-906-9887 for information 
on free tax return preparation.
• TCE. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program offers free tax help for all 
taxpayers, particularly those who are 60 
years of age and older. TCE volunteers 
specialize in answering questions about 
pensions and retirement-related issues 
unique to seniors. Go to IRS.gov/TCE, 
download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
888-227-7669 for information on free tax 
return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed 
Forces and qualified veterans may use Mil-
Tax, a free tax service offered by the De-
partment of Defense through Military One-
Source. For more information go to 
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/
Tax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable 
Forms, which can be completed online and 
then filed electronically regardless of in-
come.
Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn.  Go to IRS.gov/Tools for the following.
• The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant 
(IRS.gov/EITCAssistant) determines if 
you’re eligible for the earned income credit 
(EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) 
helps you get an employer identification 
number (EIN) at no cost.
• The Tax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/
W4app) makes it easier for everyone to 
pay the correct amount of tax during the 
year. The tool is a convenient, online way 
to check and tailor your withholding. It’s 
more user-friendly for taxpayers, including 
retirees and self-employed individuals. The 
features include the following.
▶ Easy to understand language.
Page 26 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26 Publication 501 (2021)

▶ The ability to switch between 
screens, correct previous entries, and skip 
screens that don’t apply.
▶ Tips and links to help you determine 
if you qualify for tax credits and deduc-
tions.
▶ A progress tracker.
▶ A self-employment tax feature.
▶ Automatic calculation of taxable so-
cial security benefits.
• The First-Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look-up (IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool pro-
vides information on your repayments and 
account balance.
• The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator 
(IRS.gov/SalesTax) figures the amount you 
can claim if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax ques-
tions. On IRS.gov, you can get 
up-to-date information on current 
events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you 
get answers to some of the most common 
tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive Tax Assistant, 
a tool that will ask you questions and, 
based on your input, provide answers on a 
number of tax law topics.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, 
and publications. You will find details on 
2021 tax changes and hundreds of interac-
tive links to help you find answers to your 
questions.
• You may also be able to access tax law in-
formation in your electronic filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return? 
There are various types of tax return preparers, 
including tax preparers, enrolled agents, certi-
fied public accountants (CPAs), attorneys, and 
many others who don’t have professional cre-
dentials. If you choose to have someone pre-
pare your tax return, choose that preparer 
wisely. A paid tax preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall sub-
stantive accuracy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax iden-
tification number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the 
return, you're ultimately responsible for provid-
ing all the information required for the preparer 
to accurately prepare your return. Anyone paid 
to prepare tax returns for others should have a 
thorough understanding of tax matters. For 
more information on how to choose a tax pre-
parer, go to Tips for Choosing a Tax Preparer 
on IRS.gov.
Advance child tax credit payments.  From 
July through December 2021, advance pay-
ments were sent automatically to taxpayers with 
qualifying children who met certain criteria. The 
advance child tax credit payments were early 
payments of up to 50% of the estimated child 
tax credit that taxpayers may properly claim on 
their 2021 returns. Go to IRS.gov/AdvCTC for 
more information about these payments and 
how they can affect your taxes.
Coronavirus. Go to IRS.gov/Coronavirus for 
links to information on the impact of the corona-
virus, as well as tax relief available for individu-
als and families, small and large businesses, 
and tax-exempt organizations.
Employers can register to use Business 
Services Online. The Social Security Adminis-
tration (SSA) offers online service at SSA.gov/
employer for fast, free, and secure online W -2 
filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled 
agents, and individuals who process Form W -2, 
Wage and Tax Statement, and Form W -2c, 
Corrected Wage and Tax Statement.
IRS social media.  Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia 
to see the various social media tools the IRS 
uses to share the latest information on tax 
changes, scam alerts, initiatives, products, and 
services. At the IRS, privacy and security are 
our highest priority. We use these tools to share 
public information with you. Don’t post your so-
cial security number (SSN) or other confidential 
information on social media sites. Always pro-
tect your identity when using any social net-
working site.
The following IRS YouTube channels pro-
vide short, informative videos on various tax -re-
lated topics in English, Spanish, and ASL.
• Youtube.com/irsvideos.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio pre-
sentations for individuals, small businesses, 
and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other languages. 
You can find information on IRS.gov/
MyLanguage if English isn’t your native lan-
guage.
Free Over-the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Serv-
ice. The IRS is committed to serving our multi-
lingual customers by offering OPI services. The 
OPI service is a federally funded program and 
is available at Taxpayer Assistance Centers 
(TACs), other IRS offices, and every VITA/TCE 
return site. OPI service is accessible in more 
than 350 languages.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpay-
ers with disabilities.  Taxpayers who need in-
formation about accessibility services can call 
833-690-0598. The Accessibility Helpline can 
answer questions related to current and future 
accessibility products and services available in 
alternative media formats (for example, braille, 
large print, audio, etc.).
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Forms to view, download, or print all of 
the forms, instructions, and publications you 
may need. Or, you can go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to place an order.
Getting tax publications and instructions in 
eBook format.  You can also download and 
view popular tax publications and instructions 
(including the Instructions for Form 1040) on 
mobile devices as eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
Note. IRS eBooks have been tested using 
Apple's iBooks for iPad. Our eBooks haven’t 
been tested on other dedicated eBook readers, 
and eBook functionality may not operate as in-
tended.
Access your online account (individual tax-
payers only).  Go to IRS.gov/Account to se-
curely access information about your federal tax 
account.
• View the amount you owe and a break-
down by tax year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a 
new payment plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of pay-
ment history and any pending or sched-
uled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key 
data from your most recent tax return, your 
EIP amounts, and transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from 
the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests 
from tax professionals.
• View your address on file or manage your 
communication preferences.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax pro-
fessional submit an authorization request to ac-
cess your individual taxpayer IRS online 
account. For more information, go to IRS.gov/
TaxProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to file electronically and 
choose direct deposit, which securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund directly into your 
financial account. Direct deposit also avoids the 
possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 10 
taxpayers use direct deposit to receive their re-
funds. If you don’t have a bank account, go to 
IRS.gov/DirectDeposit for more information on 
where to find a bank or credit union that can 
open an account online.
Getting a transcript of your return.  The 
quickest way to get a copy of your tax transcript 
is to go to IRS.gov/Transcripts. Click on either 
“Get Transcript Online” or “Get Transcript by 
Mail” to order a free copy of your transcript. If 
you prefer, you can order your transcript by call-
ing 800-908-9946.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related 
identity theft issues. 
• Tax-related identity theft happens when 
someone steals your personal information 
to commit tax fraud. Your taxes can be af-
fected if your SSN is used to file a fraudu-
lent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with tax-
payers by email, text messages, telephone 
calls, or social media channels to request 
personal or financial information. This in-
cludes requests for personal identification 
numbers (PINs), passwords, or similar in-
formation for credit cards, banks, or other 
financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Iden-
tity Theft Central webpage, for information 
on identity theft and data security protec-
tion for taxpayers, tax professionals, and 
businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
Page 27 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 27

stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of 
tax-related identity theft, you can learn 
what steps you should take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP 
PINs are six-digit numbers assigned to tax-
payers to help prevent the misuse of their 
SSNs on fraudulent federal income tax re-
turns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return 
with your SSN. To learn more, go to 
IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 
800-829-1954.
Note. The IRS can’t issue refunds before 
mid-February 2022 for returns that claimed the 
EIC or the additional child tax credit (ACTC). 
This applies to the entire refund, not just the 
portion associated with these credits.
Making a tax payment.  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for information on how to make a 
payment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill 
or estimated tax payment directly from 
your checking or savings account at no 
cost to you.
• Debit or Credit Card: Choose an approved 
payment processor to pay online or by 
phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a 
payment when filing your federal taxes us-
ing tax return preparation software or 
through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal Tax Payment System: 
Best option for businesses. Enrollment is 
required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment 
to the address listed on the notice or in-
structions.
• Cash: You may be able to pay your taxes 
with cash at a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: You may be able to do 
same-day wire from your financial institu-
tion. Contact your financial institution for 
availability, cost, and time frames.
Note. The IRS uses the latest encryption 
technology to ensure that the electronic pay-
ments you make online, by phone, or from a 
mobile device using the IRS2Go app are safe 
and secure. Paying electronically is quick, easy, 
and faster than mailing in a check or money or-
der.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for more information about your op-
tions.
• Apply for an online payment agreement 
(IRS.gov/OPA) to meet your tax obligation 
in monthly installments if you can’t pay 
your taxes in full today. Once you complete 
the online process, you will receive imme-
diate notification of whether your agree-
ment has been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier 
to see if you can settle your tax debt for 
less than the full amount you owe. For 
more information on the Offer in Compro-
mise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  You can now file 
Form 1040 -X electronically with tax filing soft-
ware to amend 2019 or 2020 Forms 1040 and 
1040-SR. To do so, you must have e -filed your 
original 2019 or 2020 return. Amended returns 
for all prior years must be mailed. Go to 
IRS.gov/Form1040X for information and up-
dates.
Checking the status of your amended re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status 
of Form 1040-X amended returns.
Note. It can take up to 3 weeks from the 
date you filed your amended return for it to 
show up in our system, and processing it can 
take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter 
you’ve received.  Go to IRS.gov/Notices to 
find additional information about responding to 
an IRS notice or letter.
You can use Schedule LEP, Request for 
Change in Language Preference, to state a 
preference to receive notices, letters, or other 
written communications from the IRS in an al-
ternative language, when these are available. 
Once your Schedule LEP is processed, the IRS 
will determine your translation needs and pro-
vide you translations when available. If you 
have a disability requiring notices in an accessi-
ble format, see Form 9000.
Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in 
mind, many questions can be answered on 
IRS.gov without visiting an IRS TAC. Go to 
IRS.gov/LetUsHelp for the topics people ask 
about most. If you still need help, IRS TACs 
provide tax help when a tax issue can’t be han-
dled online or by phone. All TACs now provide 
service by appointment, so you’ll know in ad-
vance that you can get the service you need 
without long wait times. Before you visit, go to 
IRS.gov/TACLocator to find the nearest TAC 
and to check hours, available services, and ap-
pointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, un-
der the Stay Connected tab, choose the Con-
tact Us option and click on “Local Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) Is Here To 
Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the 
IRS that helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer 
rights. Their job is to ensure that every taxpayer 
is treated fairly and that you know and under-
stand your rights under the Taxpayer Bill of 
Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your 
Taxpayer Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic 
rights that all taxpayers have when dealing with 
the IRS. Go to TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to 
help you understand what these rights mean to 
you and how they apply. These are your rights. 
Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do for You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you 
can’t resolve with the IRS. And their service is 
free. If you qualify for their assistance, you will 
be assigned to one advocate who will work with 
you throughout the process and will do every-
thing possible to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
• Your problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business;
• You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action; or
• You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico . Your local advo-
cate’s number is in your local directory and at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us. You 
can also call them at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help 
Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that 
affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of 
these broad issues, report it to them at IRS.gov/
SAMS.
TAS for Tax Professionals
TAS can provide a variety of information for tax 
professionals, including tax law updates and 
guidance, TAS programs, and ways to let TAS 
know about systemic problems you’ve seen in 
your practice.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS. LITCs 
represent individuals whose income is below a 
certain level and need to resolve tax problems 
with the IRS, such as audits, appeals, and tax 
collection disputes. In addition, LITCs can pro-
vide information about taxpayer rights and re-
sponsibilities in different languages for individu-
als who speak English as a second language. 
Services are offered for free or a small fee for 
eligible taxpayers. To find an LITC near you, go 
to TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/about-us/Low-
Income-Taxpayer-Clinics-LITC or see IRS Pub. 
4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List.
Page 28 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 28 Publication 501 (2021)

To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
A
Abroad, citizens living, filing 
requirements 3
Absence, temporary 9, 13, 19
Accounting periods, joint 
returns 6
Adopted child 12, 19
Taxpayer identification 
number 22
Advance payment of premium 
tax credit 5
Age:
Filing status determination 3
Gross income and filing 
requirements (Table 1) 2
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 23
Test 12
Aliens:
Dual-status (See Dual-status 
taxpayers)
Nonresident (See Nonresident 
aliens)
Alimony 22
Alternative minimum tax (AMT), 
effect on filing requirements 
(Table 3) 5
Amended returns 8, 24
 (See also Form 1040-X)
Change from itemized to 
standard deduction (or vice 
versa) 24
American citizens abroad 3
Annulled marriages, filing 
status 6
Armed forces:
Combat zone, signing return for 
spouse 7
Dependency allotments 19
GI Bill benefits 21
Military quarters allotments 19
Assistance (See Tax help)
ATINs (Adoption taxpayer 
identification numbers) 22
B
Birth of child 9
Blind persons, standard 
deduction 23
C
Canada, resident of 12, 18
Capital expenses 20
Child, qualifying 12
Child born alive 13
Child care expenses 21
Child custody 13
Children:
Adopted child (See Adoption)
Adoption (See Adopted child)
Birth of child 9, 10
Claiming parent, when child is 
head of household 9
Custody of 13
Death of child 9, 10
Dividends of 3
Filing requirements as 
dependents (Table 2) 4
Investment income of child under 
age 18 3, 4
Kidnapped 13, 18
Social security number 22
Stillborn 13
Child support under pre-1985 
agreement 22
Child tax credit 11
Church employees, filing 
requirements (Table 3) 5
Citizen or resident test 12
Citizens outside U.S., filing 
requirements 3
Common law marriage 6
Community property states 8
Cousin 19
Credit, premium tax 5
Custody of child 13
D
Death:
Of child 13
Of dependent 9, 19
Of spouse 3, 6, 19, 23
Of taxpayer 3, 23
Decedents 6, 23
 (See also Death of spouse)
Filing requirements 3
Deductions:
Standard deduction 23
Dependents 11
Birth of 19
Born and died within year 22
Child's earnings 3
Death of 19
Earned income 3
Filing requirements 3, 4
Married, filing joint return 12, 15
Not allowed to claim 
dependents 12
Qualifying child 12
Qualifying relative 18
Social security number 22
Standard deduction for 23
Unearned income 3
Dependent taxpayer test 12
Disabled:
Child 13
Dependent 19
Divorced parents 13
Divorced taxpayers:
Child custody 13
Filing status 6
Joint returns, responsibility for 6
Domestic help 11
Dual-status taxpayers:
Joint returns not available 7
E
Earned income:
Defined for purposes of standard 
deduction 23
Dependent filing requirements 
(Table 2) 4
Earned income credit:
Two persons with same 
qualifying child 15
Elderly persons:
Home for the aged 20
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 23
Equitable relief, Innocent 
spouse 7
F
Fair rental value 20
Figures (See Tables and figures)
Filing requirements 2–5
Filing status 5–11
Annulled marriages 6
Change to:
Joint return after separate 
returns 8
Separate returns after joint 
return 8, 9
Determination of 3, 5
Head of household 6, 8
Marital status, determination 
of 6
Married filing jointly (See Joint 
returns)
Married filing 
separately (See Married filing 
separately)
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
Food benefits 20
Foreign employment, filing 
requirements 3
Foreign students 12
Form 1040 or 1040-SR:
Social security numbers 22
Use of 7
Form 1040-X:
Change of filing status 8
Itemized deductions, change to 
standard deduction 24
Standard deduction, change to 
itemized deductions 24
Form 1095-A 5
Form 1099-B 5
Form 8814, parents' election to 
report child's interest and 
dividends 3
Form 8857, innocent spouse 
relief 7
Form SS-5, social security 
number request 22
Form W-7, individual taxpayer 
identification number 
request 22
Form W-7A, adoption taxpayer 
identification number 
request 22
Foster care payments and 
expenses 14, 20
Foster child 12, 14, 18, 20
Funeral expenses 21
G
GI Bill benefits 21
Gross income:
Defined:
Filing requirements 
(Table 1) 2
Dependent filing requirements 
(Table 2) 4
Test 19
Group-term life insurance 5
H
Head of household 8, 9
Filing requirements (Table 1) 2
Health insurance premiums 21
Home:
Aged, home for 20
Cost of keeping up 9
Household workers 11
I
Income:
Gross 19
Tax exempt 19
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs):
Filing requirements (Table 3) 5
Married filing separately 8
Individual taxpayer identification 
numbers (ITINs) 1, 22
Innocent spouse relief 7
Insurance premiums:
Life 21
Medical 21
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Itemized deductions:
Changing from standard to 
itemized deduction (or vice 
versa) 24
Choosing to itemize 24
Married filing separately 24
When to itemize 24
ITINs (Individual taxpayer 
identification numbers) 22
J
Joint returns 6, 7
Dependents on 18
Joint return test 12, 15
K
Kidnapped children:
Qualifying child 13
Qualifying relative 18
Qualifying widow(er) 10
L
Life insurance premiums 21
Local income taxes, itemized 
deductions 24
Local law violated 19
Lodging 20
Losses, rental real estate 8
Page 29 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2021)   Page 29

M
Marital status, determination 
of 6
Married dependents, filing joint 
return 12, 15
Married filing jointly (See Joint 
returns)
Married filing separately 7
Changing method from or to 
itemized deductions 24
Itemized deductions 24
Married taxpayers 6
 (See also Joint returns)
Age 65 or older spouse, 
standard deduction 23
Blind spouse, standard 
deduction 23
Dual-status alien spouse 7
Filing status 6
Medical insurance premiums 21
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs, effect on filing 
requirements (Table 3) 5
Medicare taxes, not support 21
Member of household or 
relationship test 18
Mexico, resident of 12, 18
Military (See Armed forces)
Missing children, photographs of 
in IRS publications 1
Multiple support agreement 21
N
National of the United States 12
Nonresident aliens 2
Dependents 22
Joint return 7
Spouse 9
Taxpayer identification 
number 22
P
Parent, claiming head of 
household for 9
Parents, divorced or 
separated 13
Parents who never married 14
Penalty, failure to file 3
Photographs of missing children 
in IRS publications 1
Premium tax credit 5
Publications (See Tax help)
Puerto Rico, residents of 3
Q
Qualifying:
 (See also Surviving spouse)
Child 12
Relative 18
Surviving spouse 9
Widow/widower 9
R
Recapture taxes 5
Relationship test 12, 18
Relative, qualifying 18
Remarriage after divorce 6
Rental losses 8
Residency test 13
S
Scholarships 3, 15, 19, 21, 23
Self-employed persons:
Filing requirements (Table 3) 5
Gross income 3
Separated parents 13
Separated taxpayers:
Filing status 6
Living apart but not legally 
separated 6
Separate returns (See Married 
filing separately)
Signatures, joint returns 7
Single taxpayers:
Filing status 6
Gross income filing requirements 
(Table 1) 2
Social security and Medicare 
taxes:
Reporting of (Table 3) 5
Support, not included in 21
Social security benefits 20
Social security numbers (SSNs) 
for dependents 22
Spouse:
Deceased 6, 7
Dual-status alien spouse 7
Innocent spouse relief 7
Nonresident alien 9
Signing joint returns 7
Surviving (See Surviving 
spouse)
SSNs (See Social security numbers 
(SSNs) for dependents)
Standard deduction 1, 23, 24
Married filing jointly 6
State or local income taxes 24
Stillborn child 13
Students:
Defined 13
Foreign 12
Support test:
Qualifying child 14
Qualifying relative 19
Surviving spouse 9
Death of spouse (See Death of 
spouse)
Gross income filing requirements 
(Table 1) 2
Qualifying widow(er) 9, 10
Single filing status 6
T
Tables and figures 9, 16
 (See also Worksheets)
Filing requirements:
Dependents (Table 2) 4
Gross income levels 
(Table 1) 2
Other situations requiring 
filing (Table 3) 5
Standard deduction tables 26
Taxes, not support 21
Tax-exempt income 19
Tax help 26
Tax returns:
Amended (See Form 1040-X)
Filing of (See Filing 
requirements)
Joint returns (See Joint returns)
Who must file 1–3, 5
Temporary absences 13, 19
Tiebreaker rules 15
Tips, reporting of (Table 3) 5
Total support 20
Tuition, benefits under GI Bill 21
U
U.S. citizen or resident 12
U.S. citizens filing abroad, filing 
requirements:
Filing requirements 3
U.S. national 12
U.S. possessions, income 
from 3
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
W
Welfare benefits 20
What's New 1
Widow/widower (See Surviving 
spouse)
Worksheets:
Head of household status and 
cost of keeping up home 9
Support test 16
Page 30 of 30  Fileid: … tions/p501/2021/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:56 - 28-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 30 Publication 501 (2021)