Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P550.SGM ( 6-Jan-2005) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\bsyfb\documents\Epicfiles\tip03\P550 2004oktoprint.SGM
Page 1 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
What’s New for 2004............... 2Department
of the What’s New for 2005............... 2InvestmentTreasury
Reminders ...................... 2Internal
Revenue Income and Introduction..................... 2Service
Chapter 1. Investment Income........ 3Expenses General Information............. 3
Interest Income................ 5
Discount on Debt Instruments...... 12
When To Report Interest Income.... 16(Including Capital How To Report Interest Income..... 16
Dividends and Other CorporateGains and Losses)
Distributions............... 19
How To Report Dividend
Income ................... 23For use in preparing Stripped Preferred Stock.......... 25
REMICs, FASITs, and Other
CDOs .................... 252004 Returns
S Corporations................ 26
Investment Clubs............... 26
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other
Reportable Transactions......... 28
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses...... 32
Limits on Deductions............ 32
Interest Expenses.............. 32
Bond Premium Amortization........ 34
Expenses of Producing Income..... 36
Nondeductible Expenses.......... 37
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 38
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 38
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property............ 39
What Is a Sale or Trade?.......... 39
Basis of Investment Property....... 42
How To Figure Gain or Loss....... 45
Nontaxable Trades.............. 46
Transfers Between Spouses....... 47
Related Party Transactions........ 48
Capital Gains and Losses......... 49
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss..................... 49
Holding Period............... 53
Nonbusiness Bad Debts......... 54
Short Sales................. 55
Wash Sales ................. 56
Options.................... 57
Straddles................... 58
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives......... 62
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded Securities...... 62
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock............. 62
Rollover of Gain From Sale of 
Empowerment Zone Assets..... 64Get forms and other information Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses ................... 64faster and easier by:
Special Rules for Traders in
Securities................. 72Internet • www.irs.gov
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help...... 73
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine)
Glossary ....................... 75

Page 2 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Index.......................... 77 Repeal of special rules for FASITs.Begin- National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
ning January 1, 2005, the special rules fordren. Photographs of missing children selected
FASITs (financial asset securitization invest-by the Center may appear in this publication on
ment trusts) are repealed. However, the specialpages that would otherwise be blank. You can
rules still apply to any FASIT in existence onhelp bring these children home by looking at theWhat’s New for 2004
October 22, 2004, to the extent that regularphotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
interests issued by the FASIT before that date(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.Tax shelters and other reportable continue to remain outstanding in accordancetransactions.Many of the rules that apply towith the original terms of issuance. See FASITstax shelters and reportable transactions haveunder REMICs, FASITs, and other CDOs inchanged. New penalties have been added. Forchapter 1.information about some of these changes, see Introduction
chapter 2. This publication provides information on the tax
treatment of investment income and expenses.Changes to the straddle rules.Changes to
It explains what investment income is taxablethe straddle rules went into effect for positionsReminders
and what investment expenses are deductible. Itestablished after October 21, 2004. In general,
the new rules 1) allow you to identify offsetting explains when and how to show these items onU.S. property acquired from a foreignpositions of a straddle, 2) clarify how to treat your tax return. It also explains how to determineperson. If you acquire a U.S. real propertycertain physically settled positions of a straddle, and report gains and losses on the disposition ofinterest from a foreign person or firm, you mayand 3) repeal the stock exception from the strad- investment property and provides informationhave to withhold income tax on the amount youdle rules. The changes are described in chapter on property trades and tax shelters.pay for the property (including cash, the fair4 under Changes to the Straddle Rules. market value of other property, and any as- The glossary at the end of this publica-
sumed liability). Domestic or foreign corpora- tion defines many of the terms used.
tions, partnerships, trusts, and estates may also
TIP
have to withhold on certain distributions and
What’s New for 2005 other transactions involving U.S. real property
interests. If you fail to withhold, you may be held
Investment income. This generally includesliable for the tax, penalties that apply, and inter-Increased section 1202 exclusion for em-
interest, dividends, capital gains, and otherest. For more information, see Publication 515,powerment zone business stock. Section
types of distributions.Withholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and1202 allows you to exclude up to 50% of your
Foreign Entities.gain on the sale or trade of qualified small busi-
Investment expenses. These include interestness stock. Beginning in 2005, you can exclude
Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. paid or incurred to acquire investment propertyup to 60% of your gain if:
citizen with investment income from sourcesand expenses to manage or collect income from
outside the United States (foreign income), you1. You sell or trade stock in a corporation that investment property.must report that income on your tax return un-qualifies as an empowerment zone busi-
less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whetherness during substantially all of the time you Comments and suggestions. We welcomeyou reside inside or outside the United Statesheld the stock, your comments about this publication and yourand whether or not you receive a Form 1099suggestions for future editions.2. You acquired the stock after December 21,from the foreign payer.2000, and You can write to us at the following address:
Alien’s individual taxpayer identification3. You held the stock for a least 5 years.
number (ITIN). If you are a nonresident or Internal Revenue Service
Condition (1) will still be met if the corporationresident alien and do not have and are not eligi-Individual Forms and Publications Branchceased to qualify after the 5-year period thatble to get a social security number (SSN), youSE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ibegins on the date you acquired the stock. How-must apply for an ITIN. For details on how to do1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406ever, the gain that qualifies for the 60% exclu-so, see Form W-7, Application for IRS IndividualWashington, DC 20224sion cannot be more than the gain you wouldTaxpayer Identification Number, and its instruc-
have had if you had sold the stock on the datetions. If you already have an ITIN, enter it wher-
the corporation ceased to qualify. We respond to many letters by telephone.ever an SSN is requested on your tax return.
The part of the gain that is included in income Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle
is a 28% rate gain. See Capital Gain Tax Rates clude your daytime phone number, including theyou to social security benefits or change your
in chapter 4. area code, in your correspondence.employment or immigration status under U.S.
For more information about the section 1202 You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Thelaw.
exclusion, see Section 1202 Exclusion in chap- asterisk must be included in the address.)
ter 4. For more information about empowermentSale of DC Zone assets.Investments in Dis-Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
zone businesses, see Publication 954, Tax In- trict of Columbia Enterprise Zone (DC zone)ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
centives for Distressed Communities. assets held more than 5 years will qualify for aally to each email, we do appreciate yourspecial tax benefit. If you sell or trade a DC zonefeedback and will consider your comments asQualified dividends.Beginning in 2005, for-asset at a gain, you may be able to exclude thewe revise our tax products.eign personal holding companies and foreignqualified capital gain from your gross income.
investment companies are no longer specifically Tax questions. If you have a tax question,This exclusion applies to an interest in, or prop-
excluded from the definition of qualified foreign visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. Weerty of, certain businesses operating in the Dis-
corporation for purposes of the qualified divi- cannot answer tax questions at either of thetrict of Columbia. For more information about the
dend rules. This is because the rules applicable addresses listed above.exclusion, see the Schedule D instructions. For
to these companies have been repealed. Thus,more information about DC Zone assets, see Ordering forms and publications. Visitordinary dividends from a foreign corporationPublication 954, Tax Incentives for Distressedwww.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andthat would have otherwise been subject to thoseCommunities. publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write torules will be qualified dividends if the other re-
one of the three addresses shown under How Toquirements under Qualified Dividends in chapterPhotographs of missing children.The Inter-
Get Tax Help in the back of this publication.1 are met. nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
Page 2 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 3 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 5 for information about gettingCustodian account for your child.If your
these publications and forms. child is the actual owner of an account that is
recorded in your name as custodian for the child,
1. give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example,
you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of
dividends on stock owned by your child, even
General Information
though the dividends are paid to you as custo-
Investment A few items of general interest are covered here.dian.
Recordkeeping. You should keep a Penalty for failure to supply SSN.You will
Income list showing sources and amounts ofbe subject to a penalty if, when required, you fail
investment income that you receiveto:RECORDS
during the year. Also, keep the forms you re-
1. Include your SSN on any return, state-ceive that show your investment income (FormsTopics
ment, or other document,1099-INT, Interest Income, and 1099-DIV, Divi-This chapter discusses: dends and Distributions, for example) as an im-2. Give your SSN to another person who hasportant part of your records.• Interest income, to include it on any return, statement, or
other document, or• Dividends and other corporate distribu-Tax on investment income of a child under
tions, 3. Include the SSN of another person on anyage 14. Part of a child’s 2004 investment in-
come may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This return, statement, or other document.• Real estate mortgage investment conduits
may happen if all of the following are true.(REMICs), financial asset securitization in- The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-
vestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat- mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.1. The child was under age 14 at the end oferalized debt obligations (CDOs), You will not be subject to this penalty if you2004. A child born on January 1, 1991, is
can show that your failure to provide the SSNconsidered to be age 14 at the end of• S corporations, and
was due to a reasonable cause and not to willful2004.• Investment clubs. neglect.2. The child had more than $1,600 of invest-If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also bement income (such as taxable interest andUseful Items subject to backup withholding.dividends) and has to file a tax return.
You may want to see:
3. Either parent was alive at the end of 2004.Backup withholding. Your investment in-
Publication come is generally not subject to regular with-If all of these statements are true, Form 8615
holding. However, it may be subject to backupmust be completed and attached to the child’s❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income withholding to ensure that income tax is col-tax return. If any of these statements is not true,
lected on the income. Under backup withhold-Form 8615 is not required and the child’s income❏ 537 Installment Sales
ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,is taxed at his or her own tax rate.❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions original issue discount (OID), dividends, cashHowever, the parent can choose to include
patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s
as income tax, a percentage of the amount you(IRAs) return if certain requirements are met. Use Form
are paid. For 2005, the percentage is 28%.8814 for this purpose.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk RulesFor more information about the tax on invest-Backup withholding applies if:
❏ 1212 List of Original Issue Discount ment income of children and the parents’ elec-
1. You do not give the payer your identifica-Instruments tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children
tion number (either a social security num-and Dependents.
Form (and Instructions) ber or an employer identification number)
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.Interest, in the required manner,
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040)Interest and dividends, and other investment income you re-2. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) noti-Ordinary Dividends ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust isfies the payer that you gave an incorrectgenerally taxable income. You should receive a❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)Interest and identification number,Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’s ShareOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040Aof Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the3. The IRS notifies the payer that you areFilers fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and itssubject to backup withholding on interest
❏ 1099 General Instructions for Forms instructions will tell you where to report the in-or dividends because you have underre-
1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G come on your Form 1040. ported interest or dividends on your in-
come tax return, or❏ 3115 Application for Change in Social security number (SSN). You mustAccounting Method 4. You are required, but fail, to certify thatgive your name and SSN to any person required
you are not subject to backup withholdingby federal tax law to make a return, statement,❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax —
for the reason described in (3).or other document that relates to you. This in-Individuals
cludes payers of interest and dividends.❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations Certification.For new accounts paying in-SSN for joint account.If the funds in a jointterest or dividends, you must certify under pen-❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 14 Whoaccount belong to one person, list that person’salties of perjury that your social security numberHave Investment Income of More name first on the account and give that person’sis correct and that you are not subject to backupThan $1,600 SSN to the payer. (For information on who ownswithholding. Your payer will give you a Formthe funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s W-9, Request for Taxpayer Identification Num-later.) If the joint account contains combinedInterest and Dividends ber and Certification, or similar form, to makefunds, give the SSN of the person whose namethis certification. If you fail to make this certifica-❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Seriesis listed first on the account. tion, backup withholding may begin immediatelyEE and I U.S. Savings Bonds These rules apply both to joint ownership byon your new account or investment.Issued After 1989 a married couple and to joint ownership by other
Underreported interest and dividends.❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record individuals. For example, if you open a joint
You will be considered to have underreportedRedemption of Series EE and I savings account with your child using funds be-
your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After longing to the child, list the child’s name first on
mined for a tax year that:1989 the account and give the child’s SSN.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
payment on that return, but you failed to backup withholding once it has begun. You must
1. You failed to include any part of a reporta-file the return. show that at least one of the following situations
ble interest or dividend payment required applies.
to be shown on your return, or How to stop backup withholding due to
1. No underreporting occurred.underreporting.If you have been notified that2. You were required to file a return and to
you underreported interest or dividends, you caninclude a reportable interest or dividend 2. You have a bona fide dispute with the IRSrequest a determination from the IRS to preventabout whether underreporting occurred.backup withholding from starting or to stop
3. Backup withholding will cause or is caus-
ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikelyTable 1-1.Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income
that you will underreport interest and divi-(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of thisdends in the future.publication, especially How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend
Income in chapter 1.) 4. You have corrected the underreporting by
filing a return if you did not previously file
Type of Income If you file Form 1040, If you can file Form If you can file Form one and by paying all taxes, penalties, and
report on ... 1040A, report on ... 1040EZ, report on ... interest due for any underreported interest
or dividend payments.
Taxable interest that Line 8a (You may need Line 8a (You may need Line 2
If the IRS determines that backup withhold-totals $1,500 or less to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as
ing should stop, it will provide you with a certifi-well.) well.)
cation and will notify the payers who were sent
notices earlier.
Ordinary dividends Line 9a (You may need Line 9a (You may need
that total $1,500 or to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as How to stop backup withholding due to anless well.) well.) incorrect identification number.If you have
been notified by a payer that you are subject toTaxable interest that Line 8a; also use Line 8a; also use
backup withholding because you have providedtotals more than Schedule B Schedule 1
an incorrect SSN or employer identification$1,500
number, you can stop it by following the instruc-
tions the payer gives you.
Ordinary dividends Line 9a; also use Line 9a; also use
that total more than Schedule B Schedule 1 Reporting backup withholding.If backup$1,500
withholding is deducted from your interest or
dividend income or other reportable payment,Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the Line 9b; also use the
the bank or other business must give you anyou do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and
information return for the year (for example, aSchedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax
Worksheet Worksheet Form 1099-INT) that indicates the amount with-
held. The information return will show any
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the You cannot use Form backup withholding as “Federal income tax with-
you have to file Qualified Dividends and 1040A. held.”
Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax
Nonresident aliens.Generally, paymentsWorksheet or the
Schedule D Tax made to nonresident aliens are not subject to
Worksheet backup withholding. You can use Form
W-8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of Benefi-
Savings bond interest Schedule B; also use Schedule 1; also use cial Owner for United States Tax Withholding, to
you will exclude Form 8815 Form 8815 certify exempt status. However, this does notbecause of higher exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-education expenses You cannot use Form holding rate that may apply to your investment1040EZ income. For information on the 30% rate, see
Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Capital gain Line 13; also use the Line 10; also use the
distributions (if you do Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and Penalties.There are civil and criminal pen-
not have to file Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax alties for giving false information to avoidSchedule D) Worksheet Worksheet backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.
The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine ofCapital gain Schedule D, line 13; also up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, ordistributions (if you use the Qualified both.have to file Schedule Dividends and Capital
D) Gain Tax Worksheet or
Where to report investment income.Tablethe Schedule D Tax
1-1 gives an overview of the forms and sched-Worksheet
ules to use to report some common types of
investment income. But, see the rest of thisGain or loss from Line 13; also use
sales of stocks or Schedule D and the publication for detailed information about report-
bonds Qualified Dividends and ing investment income.You cannot use FormCapital Gain Tax 1040AWorksheet or the Joint accounts.If two or more persons hold
Schedule D Tax property (such as a savings account, bond, orWorksheet stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or
tenants in common, each person’s share of anyGain or loss from Line 13; also use interest or dividends from the property is deter-exchanges of like-kind Schedule D, Form 8824, mined by local law.investment property and the Qualified
Dividends and Capital
Example. You and your husband have aGain Tax Worksheet or
joint money market account. Under state law,the Schedule D Tax
Worksheet half the income from the account belongs to you,
and half belongs to your husband. If you file
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT.separate returns, you each report half of the and other sources. The following are some
Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, youincome. sources of taxable interest.
must still report all of your taxable interest in-Income from property given to a child. come. For example, you may receive distributiveDividends that are actually interest.CertainProperty you give as a parent to your child undershares of interest from partnerships or sub-distributions commonly called dividends are ac-the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, thechapter S corporations. This interest is reportedtually interest. You must report as interestUniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law,to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Sched-so-called “dividends” on deposits or on sharebecomes the child’s property. ule K-1 (Form 1120S). accounts in:Income from the property is taxable to the
Nominees. Generally, if someone receiveschild, except that any part used to satisfy a legal • Cooperative banks,interest as a nominee for you, that person willobligation to support the child is taxable to the
• Credit unions,give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interestparent or guardian having that legal obligation.
received on your behalf. • Domestic building and loan associations,Savings account with parent as trustee. If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includesInterest income from a savings account opened • Domestic savings and loan associations,amounts belonging to another person, see thefor a child who is a minor, but placed in the namediscussion on nominee distributions, later,• Federal savings and loan associations,and subject to the order of the parents as trust-under How To Report Interest Income. andees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the
state in which the child resides, both of theIncorrect amount. If you receive a Form • Mutual savings banks.following are true. 1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or
other incorrect information), you should ask the1. The savings account legally belongs to the Money market funds. Generally, amountsissuer for a corrected form. The new Formchild. you receive from money market funds should be1099-INT you receive will be marked “Cor-
reported as dividends, not as interest.rected.”2. The parents are not legally permitted to
use any of the funds to support the child. Money market certificates, savings certifi-Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income
cates, and other deferred interest accounts.may also be shown on Form 1099-OID, OriginalAccuracy-related penalty.An accuracy-re- If you open any of these accounts, interest mayIssue Discount. For more information aboutlated penalty of 20% can be charged for under- be paid at fixed intervals of 1 year or less duringamounts shown on this form, see Original Issuepayments of tax due to negligence or disregard the term of the account. You generally mustDiscount (OID), later in this chapter.of rules or regulations or substantial understate- include this interest in your income when youment of tax. For information on the penalty andExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest actually receive it or are entitled to receive itany interest that applies, see Penalties in chap- dividends you receive from a regulated invest-without paying a substantial penalty. The sameter 2. ment company (mutual fund) are not included inis true for accounts that mature in 1 year or less
your taxable income. (However, see and pay interest in a single payment at maturity.
Information-reporting requirement, next.) You If interest is deferred for more than 1 year, see
will receive a notice from the mutual fund tellingOriginal Issue Discount (OID), later.Interest Income you the amount of the exempt-interest dividendsInterest subject to penalty for earlythat you received. Exempt-interest dividendsTerms you may need to know withdrawal. If you withdraw funds from a de-are not shown on Form 1099-DIV or Form(see Glossary): ferred interest account before maturity, you may1099-INT. have to pay a penalty. You must report the total
Information-reporting requirement.Al- amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-Accrual method though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-count during the year, without subtracting the
Below-market loan able, you must show them on your tax return ifpenalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-
you have to file. This is an information-reportingings under How To Report Interest Income,Cash method requirement and does not change the later, for more information on how to report the
Demand loan exempt-interest dividends into taxable income.interest and deduct the penalty.
See How To Report Interest Income, later.Forgone interest Money borrowed to invest in money mar-
ket certificate.The interest you pay on moneyGift loan Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid fromborrowed from a bank or savings institution tospecified private activity bonds may be subjectInterest meet the minimum deposit required for a moneyto the alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251market certificate from the institution and theNominee and its instructions for more information aboutinterest you earn on the certificate are two sepa-this tax. (Private activity bonds are discussedOriginal issue discount rate items. You must report the total interest youlater under State or Local Government Obliga-
earn on the certificate in your income. If youPrivate activity bond tions.)
itemize deductions, you can deduct the interest
Term loan you pay as investment interest, up to the amountInterest on VA dividends.Interest on insur-
of your net investment income. See Interest Ex-ance dividends that you leave on deposit with
penses in chapter 3.the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is notThis section discusses the tax treatment of dif-taxable. This includes interest paid on dividendsferent types of interest income. Example. You deposited $5,000 with aon converted United States Government LifeIn general, any interest that you receive or bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank toInsurance policies and on National Service Lifethat is credited to your account and can be make up the $10,000 minimum deposit requiredInsurance policies.withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have to to buy a 6-month money market certificate. Thebe entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this certificate earned $575 at maturity in 2004, butIndividual retirement arrangements (IRAs).rule are discussed later. you received only $265, which represented theInterest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.
Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You $575 you earned minus $310 interest chargedForm 1099-INT. Interest income is generally
generally do not include it in your income untilon your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Formreported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar
you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-1099-INT for 2004 showing the $575 intereststatement, by banks, savings and loans, and
cation 590 for more information. you earned. The bank also gives you a state-other payers of interest. This form shows you the
ment showing that you paid $310 interest forinterest you received during the year. Keep this
2004. You must include the $575 in your in-form for your records. You do not have to attachTaxable Interest — General
come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-it to your tax return.
ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subjectReport on your tax return the total amount of Taxable interest includes interest you receive
to the net investment income limit.interest income that you receive for the tax year. from bank accounts, loans you make to others,
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gift for opening account.If you receive non- other financial institutions in the state are tween an independent contractor and a person
cash gifts or services for making deposits or for bankrupt or insolvent. for whom the contractor provides services.
opening an account in a savings institution, you A tax avoidance loan is any below-marketThe amount of interest you must exclude ismay have to report the value as interest. loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one ofthe interest that was credited on the frozen de-For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or the main purposes of the interest arrangement.posits minus the sum of:services valued at more than $10 must be re- Forgone interest.For any period, forgone in-ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or1. The net amount you withdrew from theseterest is:more, gifts or services valued at more than $20deposits during the year, andmust be reported as interest. The value is deter- 1. The amount of interest that would be pay-2. The amount you could have withdrawn asmined by the cost to the financial institution. able for that period if interest accrued onof the end of the year (not reduced by anythe loan at the applicable federal rate andpenalty for premature withdrawals of aExample. You open a savings account at was payable annually on December 31,time deposit).your local bank and deposit $800. The account minusearns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in-2. Any interest actually payable on the loanculator. If no other interest is credited to yourcome on deposits that were frozen at the end offor the period.account during the year, the Form 1099-INT you2004, see Frozen deposits under How To Re-receive will show $35 interest for the year. Youport Interest Income for information about re-Applicable federal rate.Applicable federalmust report $35 interest income on your taxporting this interest income exclusion on yourrates are published by the IRS each month in thereturn. tax return. Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some IRS offices
Interest on insurance dividends.Interest on The interest you exclude is treated ashave these bulletins available for research. See
insurance dividends left on deposit with an in- credited to your account in the following year.chapter 5 for other ways to get this information.
surance company that can be withdrawn annu- You must include it in income in the year you can
Rules for below-market loans.The rules thatally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to withdraw it.
apply to a below-market loan depend onyour account. However, if you can withdraw it
whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, orExample. $100 of interest was credited ononly on the anniversary date of the policy (or
term loan.your frozen deposit during the year. You with-other specified date), the interest is taxable in
drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofthe year that date occurs. Gift and demand loans.A gift loan is anythe end of the year. You must include $80 inbelow-market loan where the forgone interest isPrepaid insurance premiums.Any increase your income and exclude $20 from your incomein the nature of a gift.in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,for the year. You must include the $20 in yourA demand loan is a loan payable in full at anyadvance premiums, or premium deposit funds isincome for the year you can withdraw it. time upon demand by the lender. A demand loaninterest if it is applied to the payment of premi-
is a below-market loan if no interest is chargedums due on insurance policies or made avail-Bonds traded flat.If you buy a bond at a or if interest is charged at a rate below theable for you to withdraw. discount when interest has been defaulted orapplicable federal rate.when the interest has accrued but has not beenU.S. obligations.Interest on U.S. obligations, A demand loan or gift loan that is apaid, the transaction is described as trading asuch as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, below-market loan is generally treated as anbond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is notissued by any agency or instrumentality of the arm’s-length transaction in which the lender isincome and is not taxable as interest if paid later.United States is taxable for federal income tax treated as having made:When you receive a payment of that interest, it ispurposes.
a return of capital that reduces the remaining1. A loan to the borrower in exchange for aInterest on tax refunds.Interest you receivecost basis of your bond. Interest that accruesnote that requires the payment of intereston tax refunds is taxable income. after the date of purchase, however, is taxableat the applicable federal rate, and
interest income for the year received or accrued.Interest on condemnation award.If the con- 2. An additional payment to the borrower inSee Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later indemning authority pays you interest to compen- an amount equal to the forgone interest.this chapter.sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the
The borrower is generally treated as transferringinterest is taxable.
the additional payment back to the lender as
Below-Market LoansInstallment sale payments.If a contract for interest. The lender must report that amount asthe sale or exchange of property provides forIf you make a below-market gift or demand loan,interest income.deferred payments, it also usually provides foryou must report as interest income any forgoneThe lender’s additional payment to the bor-interest payable with the deferred payments.interest (defined later) from that loan. Therower is treated as a gift, dividend, contributionThat interest is taxable when you receive it. Ifbelow-market loan rules and exceptions are de-to capital, pay for services, or other payment,little or no interest is provided for in a deferredscribed in this section. For more information,depending on the substance of the transaction.payment contract, part of each payment may besee section 7872 of the Internal Revenue CodeThe borrower may have to report this paymenttreated as interest. See Unstated Interest andand its regulations. as taxable income, depending on its classifica-Original Issue Discount in Publication 537. If you receive a below-market loan, you may tion.
be able to deduct the forgone interest as well as These transfers are considered to occur an-Interest on annuity contract.Accumulated
any interest that you actually paid, but not if it is nually, generally on December 31.interest on an annuity contract you sell before its
personal interest.maturity date is taxable. Term loans. A term loan is any loan that is
not a demand loan. A term loan is a below-mar-Usurious interest.Usurious interest is inter-Loans subject to the rules.The rules for ket loan if the amount of the loan is more thanest charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable asbelow-market loans apply to: the present value of all payments due under theinterest unless state law automatically changes
loan.• Gift loans,it to a payment on the principal.
A lender who makes a below-market term• Pay-related loans,Interest income on frozen deposits.Ex- loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer-
clude from your gross income interest on frozen ring an additional lump-sum cash payment to• Corporation-shareholder loans,
deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi-• Tax avoidance loans, andyear, you cannot withdraw any part of the de- tal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. The
posit because: amount of this payment is the amount of the loan• Loans to qualified continuing care facilities
minus the present value, at the applicable fed-(made after October 11, 1985) under a1. The financial institution is bankrupt or in- eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. Ancontinuing care contract.solvent, or equal amount is treated as original issue dis-
2. The state in which the institution is located A pay-related loan is any below-market loan count (OID). The lender must report the annual
has placed limits on withdrawals because between an employer and an employee or be- part of the OID as interest income. The borrower
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
may be able to deduct the OID as interest ex- Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash• Whether items of income and deductionpense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later. method of accounting, as most individual tax-generated by the loan offset each other,payers do, you generally report the interest on
• The amount of these items, U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But seeExceptions to the below-market loan rules.
Series EE and series I bonds, below.Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are• The cost to you of complying with thediscussed here. below-market loan rules, if they were to
Series HH bonds. These bonds were issuedapply, andException for loans of $10,000 or less. at face value. Interest is paid twice a year byThe rules for below-market loans do not apply to• Any reasons other than taxes for structur-direct deposit to your bank account. If you are aany day on which the total outstanding amounting the transaction as a below-marketcash method taxpayer, you must report interestof loans between the borrower and lender is loan. on these bonds as income in the year you re-$10,000 or less. This exception applies only to: ceive it.If you structure a transaction to meet thisSeries HH bonds were first offered in 1980;1. Gift loans between individuals if the giftexception, and one of the principal purposes ofthey were last offered in August 2004. Beforeloan is not directly used to buy or carrystructuring the transaction in that way is the1980, series H bonds were issued. Series Hincome-producing assets, and avoidance of federal tax, the loan will be consid-bonds are treated the same as series HH bonds.ered a tax-avoidance loan and this exception will2. Pay-related loans or corporation-share- If you are a cash method taxpayer, you mustnot apply.holder loans if the avoidance of federal tax report the interest when you receive it.is not a principal purpose of the interestLimit on forgone interest for gift loans ofSeries H bonds have a maturity period of 30arrangement. $100,000 or less.For gift loans between indi-years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.
viduals, if the outstanding loans between theThis exception does not apply to a term loan
lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, thedescribed in (2) above that previously has been Series EE and series I bonds.Interest onforgone interest to be included in income by thesubject to the below-market loan rules. Those these bonds is payable when you redeem thelender and deducted by the borrower is limited torules will continue to apply even if the outstand- bonds. The difference between the purchasethe amount of the borrower’s net investmenting balance is reduced to $10,000 or less. price and the redemption value is taxable inter-income for the year. If the borrower’s net invest-est.Exception for loans to continuing care fa-ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as
cilities.Loans to qualified continuing care fa- Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds werezero. This limit does not apply to a loan if the
cilities under continuing care contracts are not first offered in July 1980. They have a maturityavoidance of federal tax is one of the main
subject to the rules for below-market loans for period of 30 years. Before July 1980, series Epurposes of the interest arrangement.
the calendar year if the lender or the lender’s bonds were issued. The original 10-year matur-
Effective dates. These rules apply to termspouse is age 65 or older at the end of the year. ity period of series E bonds has been extended
loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demandFor 2004, this exception applies only to the part to 40 years for bonds issued before December
loans outstanding after that date.of the total outstanding loan balance that is 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after No-
$154,500 or less. vember 1965. Series EE and series E bonds are
issued at a discount. The face value is payableU.S. Savings BondsException for loans without significant tax to you at maturity.effect. Loans are excluded from the This section provides tax information on U.S.below-market loan rules if their interest arrange- Series I bonds. Series I bonds were firstsavings bonds. It explains how to report thements do not have a significant effect on the offered in 1998. These are inflation-indexedinterest income on these bonds and how to treatfederal tax liability of the borrower or the lender. bonds issued at their face amount with a matur-transfers of these bonds.These loans include: ity period of 30 years. The face value plus allU.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi-
accrued interest is payable to you at maturity.viduals include the following.1. Loans made available by the lender to the Reporting options for cash method• Series EE bondsgeneral public on the same terms and con- taxpayers. If you use the cash method of re-ditions that are consistent with the lender’s• Series I bonds porting income, you can report the interest oncustomary business practice, series EE, series E, and series I bonds in either
2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or of the following ways.For other information on U.S. savingsmunicipal government that are made avail- bonds, write to: 1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interestable under a program of general applica-
until the earlier of the year you cash ortion to the public, For Series HH/H: dispose of the bonds or the year in whichBureau of the Public Debt3. Certain employee-relocation loans, they mature. (However, see SavingsCurrent Income Services Division4. Certain loans from a foreign person, un- bonds traded, later.)HH/H Assistance Branchless the interest income would be effec- Note. Series E bonds issued in 1964 andP.O. Box 2186tively connected with the conduct of a U.S. 1974 matured in 2004. If you have usedParkersburg, WV 26106-2186.trade or business and would not be ex- method 1, you generally must report the
empt from U.S. tax under an income tax interest on these bonds on your 2004 re-
treaty, turn.
5. Gift loans to a charitable organization, con- 2. Method 2. Choose to report the increaseFor Series EE and I:
tributions to which are deductible, if the in redemption value as interest each year.Bureau of the Public Debt
total outstanding amount of loans between Accrual Services Division You must use the same method for all series EE,the organization and lender is $250,000 or P.O. Box 1328 series E, and series I bonds you own. If you doless at all times during the tax year, and Parkersburg, WV 26106-1328. not choose method 2 by reporting the increase
6. Other loans on which the interest arrange- in redemption value as interest each year, youOr, on the Internet, visit:
ment can be shown to have no significant must use method 1.www.publicdebt.treas.gov/sav/
effect on the federal tax liability of the sav.htm If you plan to cash your bonds in thelender or the borrower. same year that you will pay for higher
For a loan described in (6) above, all the educational expenses, you may wantAccrual method taxpayers.If you use an ac-
TIP
facts and circumstances are used to determine if to use method 1 because you may be able tocrual method of accounting, you must report
the interest arrangement has a significant effect exclude the interest from your income. To learninterest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it
on the federal tax liability of the lender or bor- how, see Education Savings Bond Program,accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interest
rower. Some factors to be considered are: later.until you receive it or until the bonds mature.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Community property. If you and yourTable 1-2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
spouse live in a community property state and
IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ... hold bonds as community property, one-half of
the interest is considered received by each ofyou buy a bond in your name and the name of you. you. If you file separate returns, each of youanother person as co-owners, using only your generally must report one-half of the bond inter-own funds est. For more information about community
property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-you buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond.
who is the sole owner of the bond erty.
Table 1-2. These rules are also shown inyou and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion
co-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond. Table 1-2.
purchase price
Child as only owner.Interest on U.S. savings
you and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separatebonds bought for and registered only in theproperty state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generallyname of your child is income to your child, evenproperty report one-half of the interest. if you paid for the bonds and are named as
beneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E,
or series I bonds, the interest on the bonds is
Change from method 1. If you want to have filed your original return for the year of theincome to your child in the earlier of the year the
change by the due date (including extensions).change your method of reporting the interest bonds are cashed or disposed of or the year the
from method 1 to method 2, you can do so bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re-By the date you file the original state-
without permission from the IRS. In the year of port the interest income each year.ment with your return, you must also
change you must report all interest accrued to send a copy to the address below.
Choice to report interest each year.Thedate and not previously reported for all your choice to report the accrued interest each yearbonds. can be made either by your child or by you for
Once you choose to report the interest each your child. This choice is made by filing an in-
Internal Revenue Service come tax return that shows all the interestyear, you must continue to do so for all seriesAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulingsearned to date, and by stating on the return thatEE, series E, and series I bonds you own and forBranch) your child chooses to report the interest eachany you get later, unless you request permissionP.O. Box 7604 year. Either you or your child should keep a copyto change, as explained next. Benjamin Franklin Station of this return.
Washington, DC 20044.Change from method 2. To change from Unless your child is otherwise required to file
method 2 to method 1, you must request permis-If you use a private delivery service, send thea tax return for any year after making this choice,
sion from the IRS. Permission for the change iscopy to the address below. your child does not have to file a return only to
automatically granted if you send the IRS a report the annual accrual of U.S. savings bond
Internal Revenue Service interest under this choice. However, see Tax onstatement that meets all the following require-
Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulingsinvestment income of a child under age 14,ments. 
Branch) earlier, under General Information. Neither you
1111 Constitution Avenue, NW nor your child can change the way you report the1. You have typed or printed at the top,
Washington, DC 20224. interest unless you request permission from the“Change in Method of Accounting Under
IRS, as discussed earlier under Change fromSection 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc. method 2..2002-9” (or later update).
Instead of filing this statement, you can re-Ownership transferred.If you bought series2. It includes your name and social securityquest permission to change from method 2 toE, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with yournumber under the label in (1). method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,own funds and had them reissued in yourfollow the form instructions for an automatic3. It identifies the savings bonds for which co-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone,change. No user fee is required. you are requesting this change. you must include in your gross income for the
year of reissue all interest that you earned on4. It includes your agreement to: Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued inthese bonds and have not previously reported.the names of co-owners, such as you and youra. Report all interest on any bonds ac- But, if the bonds were reissued in your namechild or you and your spouse, interest on thealone, you do not have to report the interestquired during or after the year of bond is generally taxable to the co-owner whoaccrued at that time.change when the interest is realizedbought the bond. This same rule applies when bonds (otherupon disposition, redemption, or final
One co-owner’s funds used. If you used than bonds held as community property) arematurity, whichever is earliest, and
your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxtransferred between spouses or incident to di-
b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-on the interest. This is true even if you let thevorce.
quired before the year of change whenother co-owner redeem the bond and keep all
the interest is realized upon disposition,the proceeds. Under these circumstances, sinceExample. You bought series EE bonds en-
the other co-owner will receive a Form 1099-INT tirely with your own funds. You did not choose toredemption, or final maturity, whichever
at the time of redemption, the other co-owner report the accrued interest each year. Later, youis earliest, with the exception of the in-
must provide you with another Form 1099-INT transfer the bonds to your former spouse underterest reported in prior tax years.
showing the amount of interest from the bond a divorce agreement. You must include the de-
that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re- ferred accrued interest, from the date of the5. It includes your signature.
deemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nominee original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer,You must attach this statement to your tax re-distributions under How To Report Interest In-in your income in the year of transfer. Your
turn for the year of change, which you must filecome , later, for more information about how a former spouse includes in income the interest on
by the due date (including extensions). person who is a nominee reports interest in- the bonds from the date of transfer to the date of
come belonging to another person. redemption.You can have an automatic extension of 6
months from the due date of your return for theBoth co-owners’ funds used. If you and Purchased jointly.If you and a co-owner
year of change (excluding extensions) to file thethe other co-owner each contribute part of the each contributed funds to buy series E, series
statement with an amended return. At the top ofbond’s purchase price, the interest is generally EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the
the statement, enter “Filed pursuant to sectiontaxable to each of you, in proportion to the bonds reissued in the co-owner’s name alone,
301.9100-2.” To get this extension, you must amount each of you paid. you must include in your gross income for the
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year of reissue your share of all the interest includes in income only interest earned after the include in gross income for the year you acquire
date of death. the bond all of the unreported increase in valueearned on the bonds that you have not previ-
of all series E, series EE, and series I bonds youously reported. The former co-owner does notDecedent who postponed reporting inter-hold, including the $200 on the bond you inher-have to include in gross income at the time ofest. If the transferred bonds were owned by aited from your uncle.reissue his or her share of the interest earneddecedent who had used the cash method andthat was not reported before the transfer. Thishad not chosen to report the interest each year,Example 4. When your aunt died, sheinterest, however, as well as all interest earnedand who had bought the bonds entirely with hisowned series H bonds that she had acquired in aafter the reissue, is income to the formeror her own funds, all interest earned beforetrade for series E bonds. You were the benefi-co-owner. death must be reported in one of the followingciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cashThis income-reporting rule also applies whenways. method and did not choose to report the interestthe bonds are reissued in the name of your
on the series E bonds each year as it accrued.1. The surviving spouse or personal repre-former co-owner and a new co-owner. But the
Your aunt’s executor chose not to include anysentative (executor, administrator, etc.)new co-owner will report only his or her share of
interest earned before your aunt’s death on herwho files the final income tax return of thethe interest earned after the transfer.
final return.decedent can choose to include on thatIf bonds that you and a co-owner bought The income in respect of the decedent is thereturn all of the interest earned on thejointly are reissued to each of you separately in sum of the unreported interest on the series Ebonds before the decedent’s death. Thethe same proportion as your contribution to the bonds and the interest, if any, payable on theperson who acquires the bonds then in-purchase price, neither you nor your co-owner series H bonds but not received as of the date ofcludes in income only interest earned afterhas to report at that time the interest earned your aunt’s death. You must report any interestthe date of death.before the bonds were reissued. received during the year as income on your
2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interestreturn. The part of the interest that was payableExample 1. You and your spouse each earned up to the date of death is income inbut not received before your aunt’s death isspent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriesrespect of the decedent. It should not beincome in respect of the decedent and mayEE savings bond. The bond was issued to you included in the decedent’s final return. Allqualify for the estate tax deduction. For informa-and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-of the interest earned both before and aftertion on when to report the interest on the seriespone reporting interest on the bond. You laterthe decedent’s death (except any part re-E bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded,have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, oneported by the estate on its income tax re-later.in your name and one in your spouse’s name. Atturn) is income to the person who acquires
that time neither you nor your spouse has to Savings bonds distributed from a retirementthe bonds. If that person uses the cash
report the interest earned to the date of reissue. or profit-sharing plan.If you acquire a U.S.method and does not choose to report the
savings bond in a taxable distribution from ainterest each year, he or she can postponeExample 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income forreporting it until the year the bonds are
savings bond entirely with your own funds. The the year of distribution includes the bond’s re-cashed or disposed of or the year they
bond was issued to you and your spouse as demption value (its cost plus the interest ac-mature, whichever is earlier. In the year
co-owners. You both postponed reporting inter- crued before the distribution). When you redeemthat person reports the interest, he or she
est on the bond. You later have the bond reis- the bond (whether in the year of distribution orcan claim a deduction for any federal es-
sued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and later), your interest income includes only thetate tax that was paid on the part of the
one in your spouse’s name. You must report half interest accrued after the bond was distributed.interest included in the decedent’s estate.
the interest earned to the date of reissue. To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-For more information on income in respect of abution and your interest income when you re-decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec-Transfer to a trust.If you own series E, series deem the bond, see Worksheet for savingsutors, and Administrators.EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a bonds distributed from a retirement or
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must profit-sharing plan under How To Report InterestExample 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax-include in your income for that year the interest Income, later.payer, died and left you a $1,000 series EEearned to the date of transfer if you have not
bond. He had bought the bond for $500 and hadSavings bonds traded. If you postponed re-already reported it. However, if you are consid-
not chosen to report the interest each year. Atporting the interest on your series EE or series Eered the owner of the trust and if the increase in
the date of death, interest of $200 had accruedbonds, you did not recognize taxable incomevalue both before and after the transfer contin-
on the bond and its value of $700 was includedwhen you traded the bonds for series HH orues to be taxable to you, you can continue to
in your uncle’s estate. Your uncle’s executorseries H bonds, unless you received cash in thedefer reporting the interest earned each year.
chose not to include the $200 accrued interest intrade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-You must include the total interest in your in-
your uncle’s final income tax return. The $200 isries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-come in the year you cash or dispose of the
income in respect of the decedent. not trade any other series of bonds for series HHbonds or the year the bonds finally mature,
You are a cash method taxpayer and do not bonds.) Any cash you received is income up towhichever is earlier.
choose to report the interest each year as it is the amount of the interest earned on the bondsThe same rules apply to previously unre-earned. If you cash the bond when it reaches traded. When your series HH or series H bondsported interest on series EE or series E bonds ifmaturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter- mature, or if you dispose of them before matur-the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH orest income—the difference between maturity ity, you report as interest the difference betweenseries H bonds you acquired in a trade for thevalue of $1,000 and the original cost of $500. their redemption value and your cost. Your costseries EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds For that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane- is the sum of the amount you paid for the tradedtraded, later. ous itemized deduction not subject to theseries EE or series E bonds plus any amount
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federal you had to pay at the time of the trade.Decedents. The manner of reporting interestestate tax paid because the $200 interest wasincome on series E, series EE, or series I bonds, Example 1. You own series EE bonds withincluded in your uncle’s estate.after the death of the owner, depends on the accrued interest of $523 and a redemption valueaccounting and income-reporting method previ-Example 2. If, in Example 1, the executor of $2,723 and have postponed reporting theously used by the decedent. had chosen to include the $200 accrued interest interest. In 2004, you traded the bonds for
Decedent who reported interest each year.in your uncle’s final return, you would report only $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 in cash.
If the bonds transferred because of death were$300 as interest when you cashed the bond at You must report the $223 as taxable income in
owned by a person who used an accrual maturity. $300 is the interest earned after your 2004, the year of the trade.
method, or who used the cash method and haduncle’s death.
chosen to report the interest each year, the Example 2. The facts are the same as in
interest earned in the year of death up to theExample 3. If, in Example 1, you make or Example 1. You hold the series HH bonds until
date of death must be reported on that person’shave made the choice to report the increase in maturity, when you receive $2,500. You must
final return. The person who acquires the bondsredemption value as interest each year, you report $300 as interest income in the year of
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
maturity. This is the difference between theirinterest in box 3. Do not include this income on4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or
your state or local income tax return.redemption value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 inheritances) received as educational as-
(the amount you paid for the series EE bonds). sistance, such as:
(It is also the difference between the accrued
a. Veterans’ educational assistance bene-interest of $523 on the series EE bonds and theEducation Savings Bond Program fits,$223 cash received on the trade.)
You may be able to exclude from income all orb. Qualified tuition reductions, orChoice to report interest in year of trade.part of the interest you receive on the redemp-You can choose to treat all of the previously c. Employer-provided educational assis-tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during theunreported accrued interest on series EE or tance.year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-series E bonds traded for series HH bonds aspenses during the same year. This exclusion isincome in the year of the trade. If you make this 5. Any expense used in figuring the Hopeknown as the Education Savings Bond Program.
choice, it is treated as a change from method 1. and lifetime learning credits.You do not qualify for this exclusion if your
See Change from method 1 under Series EE filing status is married filing separately.For information about these benefits, see Pub-and series I bonds, earlier.
lication 970.Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-
terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings BondsForm 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond
Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-Issued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At-interest.When you cash a bond, the bank or
terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-tach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.other payer that redeems it must give you a
ings bonds you redeem during the year are notForm 1099-INT if the interest part of the pay-Qualified U.S. savings bonds.A qualified more than your adjusted qualified higher educa-ment you receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of yourU.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issuedtional expenses for the year, you may be able toForm 1099-INT should show the interest as theafter 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must beexclude all of the interest. If the proceeds aredifference between the amount you receivedissued either in your name (sole owner) or inmore than the expenses, you may be able toand the amount paid for the bond. However,your and your spouse’s names (co-owners).exclude only part of the interest.your Form 1099-INT may show more interestYou must be at least 24 years old before the
To determine the excludable amount, multi-than you have to include on your income taxbond’s issue date.
ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.return. For example, this may happen if any of
The issue date of a bond may be earlierthe following are true. The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the
than the date the bond is purchasedqualified higher educational expenses you paid
because the issue date assigned to a1. You chose to report the increase in the
CAUTION
!
during the year. The denominator (bottom part)
bond is the first day of the month in which it isredemption value of the bond each year. of the fraction is the total proceeds you receivedpurchased.The interest shown on your Form during the year.
1099-INT will not be reduced by amountsBeneficiary.You can designate any individ-previously included in income. Example. In February 2004, Mark andual (including a child) as a beneficiary of theJoan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-2. You received the bond from a decedent.bond. ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in AprilThe interest shown on your Form Verification by IRS.If you claim the exclu-1996. They received proceeds of $6,892, repre-1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter-sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-senting principal of $5,000 and interest ofest reported by the decedent before death,tion information from the Department of $1,892. In 2004, they paid $4,000 of theiror on the decedent’s final return, or by theTreasury. daughter’s college tuition. They are not claimingestate on the estate’s income tax return.
an education credit for that amount, and theirQualified expenses.Qualified higher educa-3. Ownership of the bond was transferred. daughter does not have any tax-free educationaltional expenses are tuition and fees required forThe interest shown on your Form assistance. They can exclude $1,098 ($1,892 ×you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom1099-INT will not be reduced by interest ($4,000 ÷ $6,892)) of interest in 2004. Theyyou claim an exemption) to attend an eligiblethat accrued before the transfer. must pay tax on the remaining $794 ($1,892 −educational institution.
$1,098) interest.4. You were named as a co-owner and the Qualified expenses include any contribution
you make to a qualified tuition program or to aother co-owner contributed funds to buy Figuring the interest part of the proceeds
Coverdell education savings account. For infor-the bond. The interest shown on your (Form 8815, line 6).To figure the amount of
mation about these programs, see PublicationForm 1099-INT will not be reduced by the interest to report on Form 8815, line 6, use the
970, Tax Benefits for Education.amount you received as nominee for the Line 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.
Qualified expenses do not include expensesother co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in
If you previously reported any interestfor room and board or for courses involvingthis section, for more information about the
from savings bonds cashed duringsports, games, or hobbies that are not part of areporting requirements.)
2004, use the Alternate Line 6 Work-degree or certificate granting program.5. You received the bond in a taxable distri- sheet below instead.
Eligible educational institutions.Thesebution from a retirement or profit-sharing
institutions include most public, private, andplan. The interest shown on your Form Alternate Line 6 Worksheetnonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter-
1. Enter the amount from Form 8815,schools that are accredited and are eligible toest portion of the amount taxable as a dis-
line 5....................participate in student aid programs run by thetribution from the plan and not taxable as 2. Enter the face value of all post-1989Department of Education. See chapter 10 ofinterest. (This amount is generally shown series EE bonds cashed in 2004 . .Publication 970 for information on foreignon Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen- 3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50)schools that are eligible.sions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar- 4. Enter the face value of all series Iing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc.,Reduction for certain benefits.You must bonds cashed in 2004.........for the year of distribution.) reduce your qualified higher educational ex-5. Add lines 3 and 4............
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1.......penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.For more information on including the correct
7. Enter the amount of interestamount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav- 1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-reported as income in previousings bond interest previously reported or Nomi- ships. years ....................nee distributions under How To Report Interest 8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter theIncome, later. 2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-result here and on Form 8815, line 6tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-
Modified adjusted gross income limit.empt from state and local taxes. The3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
The interest exclusion is limited if your modifiedForm 1099-INT you receive will indi- tion of distributions from a qualified tuition
TIP
cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bonds adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:program.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989, difference is a premium. (See Bond Premium• $59,850 to $74,850 for taxpayers filing sin- Amortization in chapter 3.)to record this information. You should also keepgle or head of household, and bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-For other information on these notes or• $89,750 to $119,750 for married taxpayersmentation that shows you paid qualified higher bonds, write to:filing jointly, or for a qualifying widow(er)educational expenses during the year.
with dependent child. Treasury Direct
You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if Attn: Customer Information
your modified AGI is equal to or more than the P.O. Box 9150U.S. Treasury Bills,upper limit for your filing status. Minneapolis, MN 55480-9150.
Notes, and BondsModified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposes Or, on the Internet, visit:
of this exclusion, is adjusted gross incomeTreasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debtswww. publicdebt.treas.gov
(Form 1040A, line 21, or Form 1040, line 36)(obligations) of the U.S. Government.
figured before the interest exclusion, and modi-
fied by adding back any:
Taxation of interest.Interest income from
Treasury inflation-indexed securities.Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to1. Foreign earned income exclusion, These securities pay interest twice a year at afederal income tax, but is exempt from all state2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, fixed rate, based on a principal amount that isand local income taxes. You should receive
adjusted to take into account inflation and defla-Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interest3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents tion. For the tax treatment of these securities,of American Samoa, (in box 3) that was paid to you for the year. see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments underPayments of principal and interest generally4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico, Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
will be credited to your designated checking or5. Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedsavings account by direct deposit through theRetirement, sale, or redemption.For infor-under an employer’s adoption assistanceTREASURY DIRECT system. mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption ofprogram, U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or-
6. Deduction for tuition and fees, and dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non-Treasury bills.These bills generally have ataxable Trades in chapter 4 for information7. Deduction for student loan interest. 4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period.about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-They are issued at a discount in the amount ofUse the worksheet in the instructions for line tain other designated issues.$1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The difference9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you
between the discounted price you pay for theclaim any of the exclusion or deduction items Bonds Sold Between Interestbills and the face value you receive at maturity islisted above (except items 6 and 7), add the
Datesinterest income. Generally, you report this inter-amount of the exclusion or deduction (except
est income when the bill is paid at maturity. Seeany deduction for tuition and fees or student loan If you sell a bond between interest paymentDiscount on Short-Term Obligations under Dis-interest) to the amount on line 5 of the work- dates, part of the sales price represents interestsheet, and enter the total on Form 8815, line 9,count on Debt Instruments, later. accrued to the date of sale. You must report thatas your modified AGI. If you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur-part of the sales price as interest income for the
ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you willRoyalties included in modified AGI.Be- year of sale.
receive payment for the difference between thecause the deduction for interest expenses due If you buy a bond between interest payment
proceeds of the maturing bill (par amount lessto royalties and other investments is limited to dates, part of the purchase price represents
your net investment income (see Investment any tax withheld) and the purchase price of the interest accrued before the date of purchase.
Interest in chapter 3), you cannot figure the When that interest is paid to you, treat it as anew Treasury security. However, you must re-
deduction for interest expenses until you have return of your capital investment, rather thanport the full amount of the interest income on
figured this exclusion of savings bond interest. interest income, by reducing your basis in theeach of your Treasury bills at the time it reaches
Therefore, if you had interest expenses that are bond. See Accrued interest on bonds undermaturity.
due to royalties and deductible on Schedule E How To Report Interest Income, later in this
(Form 1040), you must make a special computa- chapter, for information on reporting the pay-
Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury notestion of your deductible interest to figure the net ment.
have maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang-royalty income included in your modified AGI.
ing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for TreasuryYou must figure deductible interest without re- Insurancebonds are longer than 10 years. Both of thesegard to this exclusion of bond interest.
Treasury issues generally are issued in denomi-Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-You can use a “dummy” Form 4952, Invest-nations of $1,000 to $1 million. Both notes andciary of the insured person are usually not tax-ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the
bonds generally pay interest every 6 months.able. But if you receive the proceeds inspecial computation. On this form, include in
Generally, you report this interest for the yearinstallments, you must usually report part ofyour net investment income your total interest
paid. When the notes or bonds mature, you caneach installment payment as interest income.income for the year from series EE and I U.S.
For more information about insurance pro-redeem these securities for face value.savings bonds. Use the deductible interest
ceeds received in installments, see Publicationamount from this form only to figure the netTreasury notes and bonds are usually sold525.royalty income included in your modified AGI.by auction with competitive bidding. If, after
Do not attach this form to your tax return.compiling the competitive bids, a determinationInterest option on insurance.If you leave lifeis made that the purchase price is less than theAfter you figure this interest exclusion, use a insurance proceeds on deposit with an insur-separate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc-face value, you will receive a refund for theance company under an agreement to pay inter-tion for investment interest expenses, and at-difference between the purchase price and theest only, the interest paid to you is taxable.tach that form to your return. face value. This amount is considered original
issue discount. However, the original issue dis-Recordkeeping. If you claim the in- Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-
count rules (discussed later) do not apply if theterest exclusion, you must keep a writ- ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-
discount is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) often record of the qualified U.S. savings ceive are taxed as pension and annuity incomeRECORDS
the face amount, multiplied by the number of fullbonds you redeem. Your record must include from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income.
years from the date of original issue to maturity.the serial number, issue date, face value, and See Publication 939, General Rule for Pensions
See De minimis OID under Original Issue Dis-total redemption proceeds (principal and inter- and Annuities, for information on taxation of
count (OID), later. If the purchase price is deter-est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818, pension and annuity income from nonqualified
mined to be more than the face amount, theOptional Form To Record Redemption of Series plans.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons under b. Derived from payments for property (orState or Local
Original Issue Discount (OID), later. borrowed money) used for a privateGovernment Obligations business use.Information reporting requirement.If you
Interest you receive on an obligation issued by amust file a tax return, you are required to showAlso, a bond is generally considered a privatestate or local government is generally not tax-any tax-exempt interest you received on youractivity bond if the amount of the proceeds toable. The issuer should be able to tell youreturn. This is an information-reporting require-be used to make or finance loans to personswhether the interest is taxable. The issuerment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-other than government units is more than 5%should also give you a periodic (or year-end)est to taxable interest. See Reporting
of the proceeds or $5 million (whichever isstatement showing the tax treatment of the obli-tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter-
less).gation. If you invested in the obligation through aest Income, later in this chapter. That discussion
trust, a fund, or other organization, that organi-also explains what to do if you receive a FormQualified bond.Interest on a private activ-zation should give you this information. 1099-INT for tax-exempt interest. ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. A
qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ-Even if interest on the obligation is not
ing an enterprise zone facility bond or New Yorksubject to income tax, you may have toTaxable Interestreport capital gain or loss when you sell Liberty bond), qualified student loan bond, quali-CAUTION
!
it. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax may fied small issue bond (including a tribal manu-Interest on some state or local obligations isapply to other dispositions of the obligation. facturing facility bond), qualified redevelopmenttaxable.
bond, qualified mortgage bond, qualified veter-
Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest on ans’ mortgage bond, or qualified 501(c)(3) bond
federally guaranteed state or local obligations(a bond issued for the benefit of certain tax-ex-Tax-Exempt Interest issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This ruleempt organizations).does not apply to interest on obligations guaran-Interest on a bond used to finance government Interest that you receive on these tax-ex-teed by the following U.S. Government agen-operations generally is not taxable if the bond is empt bonds (except qualified 501(c)(3) bondscies.issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a and New York Liberty bonds), if issued afterU.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi-• Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran-August 7, 1986, generally is a “tax preferencesions. Political subdivisions include: tee was under the Northwest Power Act asitem” and may be subject to the alternative mini-
in effect on July 18, 1984).• Port authorities, mum tax. See Form 6251 and its instructions for
more information.• Department of Veterans Affairs.• Toll road commissions,
Enterprise zone facility bonds.Interest on• Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora-• Utility services authorities, certain private activity bonds issued by a state ortion.• Community redevelopment agencies, and local government to finance a facility used in an
• Federal Housing Administration. empowerment zone or enterprise community is• Qualified volunteer fire departments (for
tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see• Federal National Mortgage Association.certain obligations issued after 1980).
Publication 954.• Government National Mortgage Corpora-There are other requirements for tax-exempt
New York Liberty bonds.New York Libertytion.bonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern-
bonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, toment agency or see sections 103 and 141 • Resolution Funding Corporation. finance the construction and rehabilitation ofthrough 150 of the Internal Revenue Code and
real property in a newly designated “Liberty• Student Loan Marketing Association.the related regulations.
Zone” of New York City. Interest on these bonds
is tax exempt.Obligations that are not bonds. Inter- Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds ofest on a state or local government obli-these bonds are used to finance mortgage loansgation may be tax exempt even if the Market discount. Market discount on a
TIP
for homebuyers. Generally, interest on state orobligation is not a bond. For example, interest on tax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If youlocal government home mortgage bonds issueda debt evidenced only by an ordinary written bought the bond after April 30, 1993, you canafter April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bondsagreement of purchase and sale may be tax choose to accrue the market discount over theare qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter-exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on period you own the bond and include it in yourans’ mortgage bonds.default by the state or political subdivision may income currently, as taxable interest. See Mar-
Arbitrage bonds.Interest on arbitrage bondsbe tax exempt. ket Discount Bonds under Discount on Debt
issued by state or local governments after Octo-Instruments, later. If you do not make thatRegistration requirement.A bond issued af-ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is achoice, or if you bought the bond before May 1,ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis-bond any portion of the proceeds of which is1993, any gain from market discount is taxabletered form for the interest to be tax exempt.expected to be used to buy (or to replace fundswhen you dispose of the bond.used to buy) higher yielding investments. AIndian tribal government.Bonds issued after For more information on the treatment ofbond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuer1982 by an Indian tribal government are treated market discount when you dispose of a tax-ex-intentionally uses any part of the proceeds of theas issued by a state. Interest on these bonds is empt bond, see Discounted Debt Instrumentsissue in this manner.generally tax exempt if the bonds are part of an under Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in chap-
issue of which substantially all of the proceedsPrivate activity bonds.Interest on a privateter 4.
are to be used in the exercise of any essentialactivity bond that is not a qualified bond (defined
government function. However, interest on pri-below) is taxable. Generally, a private activity
vate activity bonds (other than certain bonds forbond is part of a state or local government bond
tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable.issue that meets both of the following require-Discount onments.Original issue discount.Original issue dis-
Debt Instrumentscount (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern-1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the is-
ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest.sue is to be used for a private businessTerms you may need to knowFor information on the treatment of OID use.
(see Glossary):when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, see
2. More than 10% of the payment of the prin-Tax-exempt state and local government bonds
cipal or interest is:under Discounted Debt Instruments in chapter Market discount4. a. Secured by an interest in property to beMarket discount bondStripped bonds or coupons. For special used for a private business use (or pay-
Original issue discount (OID)rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga- ments for this property), or
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Premium Example 2. The facts are the same as in 1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give
Example 1, except that the bond was issued at you a Form 1099-OID.
$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount If you receive a Form 1099-OID that includes
In general, a debt instrument, such as a bond,is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-
note, debenture, or other evidence of indebted-must include the OID in income as it accruesinee distributions under How To Report Interest
ness, that bears no interest or bears interest at aover the term of the bond. Income, later.
lower than current market rate will usually beDebt instrument bought after original is-Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID.issued at less than its face amount. This dis-sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or boxcount is, in effect, additional interest income.minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the followingThe following are some of the types of dis-includible in income. If you buy a debt instrumentapply. counted debt instruments. with de minimis OID at a discount, the discount
1. You bought the debt instrument after itsis reported under the market discount rules. See• U.S. Treasury bonds. original issue and paid a premium or anMarket Discount Bonds, later in this chapter.
• Corporate bonds. acquisition premium.
Exceptions to reporting OID.The OID rules• Municipal bonds. 2. The debt instrument is a stripped bond or adiscussed here do not apply to the following debtstripped coupon (including certain zero• Certificates of deposit. instruments. coupon instruments). See Figuring OID
• Notes between individuals. under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, later1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see
in this chapter.Stripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)• Stripped bonds and coupons.
See Original issue discount (OID) adjustment2. U.S. savings bonds.• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). under How To Report Interest Income, later in
3. Short-term debt instruments (those with aThe discount on these instruments (except mu- this chapter, for information about reporting the
fixed maturity date of not more than 1 yearnicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. The correct amount of OID.
from the date of issue).discount on municipal bonds generally is not Premium. You bought a debt instrument attaxable (but see State or Local Government 4. Obligations issued by an individual beforea premium if its adjusted basis immediately afterObligations, earlier, for exceptions). See alsoMarch 2, 1984. purchase was greater than the total of allREMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs, later, for amounts payable on the instrument after the5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow-information about applying the rules discussed purchase date, other than qualified stated inter-ing are true.in this section to the regular interest holder of a est.real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi- If you bought an OID debt instrument at aa. The lender is not in the business ofnancial asset securitization investment trust, or premium, you generally do not have to reportlending money.other CDO. any OID as ordinary income.b. The amount of the loan, plus the
Qualified stated interest.In general, this isamount of any outstanding prior loansOriginal Issue stated interest that is unconditionally payable inbetween the same individuals, is
Discount (OID) cash or property (other than debt instruments of$10,000 or less.
the issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one ofOID is a form of interest. You generally include
Acquisition premium. You bought a debtthe principal purposes of the loan.OID in your income as it accrues over the term of
instrument at an acquisition premium if both ofthe debt instrument, whether or not you receive
the following are true.any payments from the issuer.
A debt instrument generally has OID when 1. You did not pay a premium.Form 1099-OIDthe instrument is issued for a price that is less
2. The instrument’s adjusted basis immedi-than its stated redemption price at maturity. OIDThe issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro-ately after purchase (including purchase atis the difference between the stated redemptionker, if you held the instrument through a broker)original issue) was greater than its ad-price at maturity and the issue price. should give you Form 1099-OID, Original Issuejusted issue price. This is the issue priceAll debt instruments that pay no interestDiscount, or a similar statement, if the total OIDplus the OID previously accrued, minusbefore maturity are presumed to be issued at afor the calendar year is $10 or more. Form any payment previously made on the in-discount. Zero coupon bonds are one example1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of OIDstrument other than qualified stated inter-of these instruments. for the part of the year that you held the bond. Itest.also will show, in box 2, the stated interest thatThe OID accrual rules generally do not apply
you must include in your income. A copy of FormAcquisition premium reduces the amount of OIDto short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-
1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. Do not file yourincludible in your income. For information aboutturity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).
copy with your return. Keep it for your records.figuring the correct amount of OID to include inSee Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later.
In most cases, you must report the entireyour income, see Figuring OID on Long-TermFor information about the sale of a debt in-
amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID asDebt Instruments in Publication 1212.strument with OID, see chapter 4.
interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown Refiguring periodic interest shown on Formon Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, andDe minimis OID. You can treat the discount 1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrumentalso Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentas zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) or acquired it from another holder during theunder How To Report Interest Income, later inof the stated redemption price at maturity multi- year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates,this chapter, for more information.plied by the number of full years from the date of earlier, for information about the treatment of
original issue to maturity. This small discount is periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 ofForm 1099-OID not received.If you had OID
known as “de minimis” OID. Form 1099-OID for that instrument.for the year but did not receive a Form
1099-OID, see Publication 1212, which lists totalExample 1. You bought a 10-year bond withOID on certain debt instruments and has infor-Applying the OID Rulesa stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,mation that will help you figure OID. If your debt
issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofinstrument is not listed in Publication 1212, con-The rules for reporting OID depend on the date1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10sult the issuer for further information about thethe long-term debt instrument was issued.(the number of full years from the date of originalaccrued OID for the year.
issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20 Debt instruments issued after 1954 and
discount is less than $25, the OID is treated asNominee. If someone else is the holder ofbefore May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a
zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willrecord (the registered owner) of an OID instru-government instrument). For these instru-
recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)ment that belongs to you and receives a Form ments, you do not report the OID until the year
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If only at the end of the 5-year period. You must 2. Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-
a gain results and the instrument is a capital curities that represent ownership interestsinclude a part of the interest in your income as
asset, the amount of the gain equal to the OID is in those securities, such as obligationsOID each year. Each year the bank must give
ordinary interest income. The rest of the gain is backed by U.S. Treasury bonds that areyou a Form 1099-OID to show you the amount
capital gain. If there is a loss on the sale of the offered primarily by brokerage firms.you must include in your income for the year.
instrument, the entire loss is a capital loss and
no reporting of OID is required. Seller.If you strip coupons from a bond andRedemption before maturity.If, before the
In general, the amount of gain that is ordinary sell the bond or coupons, include in income thematurity date, you redeem a deferred interest
interest income equals the following amount: interest that accrued while you held the bondaccount for less than its stated redemption price
before the date of sale to the extent you did notat maturity, you can deduct the amount of OID
previously include this interest in your income.that you previously included in income but didNumber of full For an obligation acquired after October 22,not receive.months you held Original 1986, you must also include the market discount
the instrument × Issue that accrued before the date of sale of theRenewable certificates.If you renew a CD atNumber of full Discount stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you didmaturity, it is treated as a redemption and amonths from date not previously include this discount in your in-purchase of a new certificate. This is true re-of original issue come.gardless of the terms of renewal.to date of maturity Add the interest and market discount that
you include in income to the basis of the bondDebt instruments issued after May 27, 1969 and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be-Face-Amount Certificates(after July 1, 1982, if a government instru- tween the items you keep and the items you sell,ment), and before 1985.If you hold theseThese certificates are subject to the OID rules.based on the fair market value of the items. Thedebt instruments as capital assets, you mustThey are a form of endowment contracts issueddifference between the sale price of the bond (orinclude a part of the discount in your grossby insurance or investment companies for eithercoupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (orincome each year that you own the instruments.a lump-sum payment or periodic payments, withcoupon) is your gain or loss from the sale.
the face amount becoming payable on the ma-Treat any item you keep as an OID bondEffect on basis. Your basis in the instru-
turity date of the certificate. originally issued and bought by you on the salement is increased by the amount of OID that you
date of the other items. If you keep the bond,include in your gross income. In general, the difference between the face
treat the amount of the redemption price of theamount and the amount you paid for the contractDebt instruments issued after 1984.For bond that is more than the basis of the bond asis OID. You must include a part of the OID inthese debt instruments, you report the total OID the OID. If you keep the coupons, treat theyour income over the term of the certificate.that applies each year regardless of whether amount payable on the coupons that is moreThe issuer must give you a statement onyou hold that debt instrument as a capital asset. than the basis of the coupons as the OID.Form 1099-OID indicating the amount you must
Effect on basis. Your basis in the instru-include in your income each year. Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped
ment is increased by the amount of OID that you coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued on
include in your gross income. the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond,
Inflation-Indexed treat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-
Debt Instruments tion price at maturity over your purchase price. If
Certificates of Deposit (CDs) you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID anyIf you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrumentexcess of the amount payable on the due date ofIf you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), youthe coupon over your purchase price.year, you must include in income each year amust report as OID any increase in the
part of the total interest due and report it in theinflation-adjusted principal amount of the instru-Figuring OID. The rules for figuring OID on
same manner as other OID. ment that occurs while you held the instrument stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend on
This also applies to similar deposit arrange-during the year. In general, an inflation-indexed the date the debt instruments were purchased,
ments with banks, building and loan associa-debt instrument is a debt instrument on which not the date issued.
tions, etc., including: the payments are adjusted for inflation and de- You must refigure the OID shown on the
flation (such as Treasury Inflation-Indexed Se- Form 1099-OID you receive for a stripped bond• Time deposits, curities). You should receive Form 1099-OID or coupon. For information about figuring the
• Bonus plans, from the payer showing the amount you must correct amount of OID on these instruments to
report as OID and any qualified stated interest include in your income, see Figuring OID on• Savings certificates, paid to you during the year. For more informa-Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Publication
• Deferred income certificates, tion, see Publication 1212. 1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and
coupons should not rely on the OID shown in• Bonus savings certificates, and Section II of Publication 1212, because the
• Growth savings certificates. Stripped Bonds and Coupons amounts listed in Section II for stripped bonds or
coupons are figured without reference to the
If you strip one or more coupons from a bonddate or price at which you acquired them.Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generallyand sell the bond or the coupons, the bond andmust be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDs Stripped inflation-indexed debtcoupons are treated as separate debt instru-that are not in registered form. They are not instruments. OID on stripped inflation-in-ments issued with OID.issued in the depositor’s name and are transfer- dexed debt instruments is figured under the dis-The holder of a stripped bond has the right toable from one individual to another. count bond method. This method is described inreceive the principal (redemption price) pay-Banks must provide the IRS and the person Regulations section 1.1275-7(e).ment. The holder of a stripped coupon has theredeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.right to receive interest on the bond. Stripped tax-exempt obligations.You do
Time deposit open account arrangement. not have to pay tax on OID on any strippedStripped bonds and stripped coupons in-
This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity date tax-exempt bond or coupon that you boughtclude:
in which you make deposits on a schedule ar- before June 11, 1987. However, if you acquired
1. Zero coupon instruments available throughranged between you and your bank. But there is it after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID
the Department of the Treasury’s Separateno actual or constructive receipt of interest until on it to determine its basis when you dispose of
Trading of Registered Interest and Princi-the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance, it. See Original issue discount (OID) on debt
pal of Securities (STRIPS) program andyou and your bank enter into an arrangement instruments under Stocks and Bonds in chapter
government-sponsored enterprises suchunder which you agree to deposit $100 each 4.
as the Resolution Funding Corporation andmonth for a period of 5 years. Interest will be You may have to pay tax on part of the OID
the Financing Corporation, andcompounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payable on stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons that
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you bought after June 10, 1987. For informationExceptions. A bond you acquired at origi- Also see Election To Report All Interest as
on figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exempt OID , later. If you make that election, you mustnal issue can be a market discount bond if either
Bonds and Coupons  under Figuring OID on use the constant yield method.of the following is true.
Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Publication Effect on basis.You increase the basis of1. Your cost basis in the bond is less than the1212. your bonds by the amount of market discountbond’s issue price. you include in your income.
Market Discount Bonds 2. The bond is issued in exchange for a mar-
Partial principal payments.If you receive aket discount bond under a plan of reorgani-A market discount bond is any bond having partial payment of principal on a market discountzation. (This does not apply if the bond ismarket discount except: bond that you acquired after October 22, 1986,issued in exchange for a market discount
and you did not choose to include the discount inbond issued before July 19, 1984, and the1. Short-term obligations (those with fixed income currently, you must treat the payment asterms and interest rates of both bonds arematurity dates of up to 1 year from the ordinary interest income up to the amount of thethe same.)date of issue), bond’s accrued market discount. Reduce the
2. Tax-exempt obligations that you bought amount of accrued market discount reportable
Accrued market discount.The accrued mar-before May 1, 1993, as interest at disposition by that amount.
ket discount is figured in one of two ways.There are 3 methods you can use to figure3. U.S. savings bonds, and accrued market discount for this purpose. YouRatable accrual method.Treat the market4. Certain installment obligations. can choose to figure accrued market discount:discount as accruing in equal daily installments
during the period you hold the bond. Figure theMarket discount arises when the value of a 1. On the basis of the constant yield method,daily installments by dividing the market dis-debt obligation decreases after its issue date, described earlier,count by the number of days after the date yougenerally because of an increase in interest
acquired the bond, up to and including its matur-rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar- 2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for any
ity date. Multiply the daily installments by theket, it may have market discount. accrual period, if the debt instrument has
number of days you held the bond to figure yourOID, orWhen you buy a market discount bond, you
accrued market discount.can choose to accrue the market discount over 3. In proportion to the amount of stated inter-the period you own the bond and include it inConstant yield method. Instead of using est paid in the accrual period, if the debtyour income currently as interest income. If youthe ratable accrual method, you can choose to instrument has no OID.do not make this choice, the following rulesfigure the accrued discount using a constantUnder method (2) above, figure accruedgenerally apply. interest rate (the constant yield method). Makemarket discount for a period by multiplying thethis choice by attaching to your timely filed return1. You must treat any gain when you dispose total remaining market discount by a fraction.a statement identifying the bond and stating thatof the bond as ordinary interest income, up The numerator (top part) of the fraction is theyou are making a constant interest rate election.to the amount of the accrued market dis- OID for the period, and the denominator (bottomThe choice takes effect on the date you acquiredcount. See Discounted Debt Instruments part) is the total remaining OID at the beginningthe bond. If you choose to use this method forunder Capital Gains and Losses in chapter of the period.any bond, you cannot change your choice for4. Under method (3) above, figure accruedthat bond. market discount for a period by multiplying the2. You must treat any partial payment of prin-For information about using the constanttotal remaining market discount by a fraction.cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in-yield method, see Figuring OID using the con-The numerator is the stated interest paid in thecome, up to the amount of the accruedstant yield method under Debt Instruments Is-accrual period, and the denominator is the totalmarket discount. See Partial principal pay-sued After 1984 in Publication 1212. To use thisstated interest remaining to be paid at the begin-ments, later in this discussion. method to figure market discount (instead ofning of the accrual period.
3. If you borrow money to buy or carry theOID), treat the bond as having been issued on
bond, your deduction for interest paid onthe date you acquired it. Treat the amount ofDiscount onthe debt is limited. See Limit on interest your basis (immediately after you acquired the
Short-Term Obligationsdeduction for market discount bonds under bond) as the issue price. Then apply the formula
When To Deduct Investment Interest in shown in Publication 1212. When you buy a short-term obligation (one withchapter 3. a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from theChoosing to include market discount in in-date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga-come currently. You can make this choice ifMarket discount. Market discount is the tion, you can generally choose to include anyyou have not revoked a prior choice to includeamount of the stated redemption price of a bond discount and interest payable on the obligationmarket discount in income currently within theat maturity that is more than your basis in the in income currently. If you do not make thislast 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-bond immediately after you acquire it. You treat choice, the following rules generally apply.taching to your timely filed return a statement inmarket discount as zero if it is less than
which you:one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp- 1. You must treat any gain when you sell,
tion price of the bond multiplied by the number of exchange, or redeem the obligation as or-
1. State that you have included market dis-full years to maturity (after you acquire the dinary income, up to the amount of the
count in your gross income for the yearbond). ratable share of the discount. See Dis-
under section 1278(b) of the Internal Reve-If a market discount bond also has OID, the counted Debt Instruments under Capital
nue Code, andmarket discount is the sum of the bond’s issue Gains and Losses in chapter 4.
price and the total OID includible in the gross2. Describe the method you used to figure2. If you borrow money to buy or carry theincome of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, thethe accrued market discount for the year.obligation, your deduction for interest paidtotal OID that accrued) before you acquired the on the debt is limited. See Limit on interestOnce you make this choice, it will apply to allbond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi- deduction for short-term obligations undermarket discount bonds that you acquire duringately after you acquired it. When To Deduct Investment Interest inthe tax year and in later tax years. You cannot
chapter 3.revoke your choice without the consent of theBonds acquired at original issue.Generally,
IRS. For information on how to revoke youra bond that you acquired at original issue is not a
choice, see section 12A of the Appendix to Rev-Short-term obligations for which no choicemarket discount bond. If your adjusted basis in a
enue Procedure 2002-9 in Internal Revenueis available.You must include any discount orbond is determined by reference to the adjusted
Bulletin 2002-3. You can find this Internal Reve-interest in current income as it accrues for anybasis of another person who acquired the bond
nue Bulletin at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/short-term obligation (other than a tax-exemptat original issue, you are also considered to
irb02-03.pdf. obligation) that is:have acquired it at original issue.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choosing to include accrued discount and you are considered to receive interest, divi-
1. Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer, other interest in current income.If you ac- dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-
quire short-term discount obligations that are notcount in a bank, savings and loan, or similar2. Held primarily for sale to customers in the
subject to the rules for current inclusion in in-financial institution, or interest on life insuranceordinary course of your trade or business,
come of the accrued discount or other interest,policy dividends left to accumulate, when they
3. Held by a bank, regulated investment com-you can choose to have those rules apply. Thisare credited to your account and subject to your
pany, or common trust fund, choice applies to all short-term obligations youwithdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet
acquire during the year and in all later years.entered in your passbook.4. Held by certain pass-through entities,
You cannot change this choice without the con-You constructively receive income on the5. Identified as part of a hedging transaction,sent of the IRS. deposit or account even if you must: or The procedures to use in making this choice
are the same as those described for choosing to 1. Make withdrawals in multiples of even6. A stripped bond or stripped coupon held by
include acquisition discount instead of OID on amounts,the person who stripped the bond or cou-
nongovernment obligations in current income.pon (or by any other person whose basis 2. Give a notice to withdraw before makingHowever, you should indicate that you are mak-in the obligation is determined by refer- the withdrawal,ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of theence to the basis in the hands of that per-
3. Withdraw all or part of the account to with-Internal Revenue Code.son).
draw the earnings, orAlso see the following discussion. If you
make the election to report all interest currentlyEffect on basis.Increase the basis of your 4. Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unlessas OID, you must use the constant yield method.obligation by the amount of discount you include the interest you are to receive on an early
in income currently. withdrawal or redemption is substantially
Election To Report less than the interest payable at maturity.Figuring the accrued discount.Figure the All Interest as OIDaccrued discount by using either the ratable
Accrual method. If you use an accrualaccrual method or the constant yield methodGenerally, you can elect to treat all interest on amethod, you report your interest income whendiscussed previously in Accrued market dis- debt instrument acquired during the tax year asyou earn it, whether or not you have received it.count under Market Discount Bonds, earlier. OID and include it in income currently. For pur-Interest is earned over the term of the debtposes of this election, interest includes statedGovernment obligations. For an obligation instrument.interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimisdescribed above that is a short-term govern-OID, market discount, de minimis market dis-ment obligation, the amount you include in your Example. If, in the previous example, youcount, and unstated interest as adjusted by anyincome for the current year is the accrued acqui- use an accrual method, you must include theamortizable bond premium or acquisition pre-sition discount, if any, plus any other accrued interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldmium. See Regulations section 1.1272-3.interest payable on the obligation. The acquisi- report the interest as follows: 2002, $80; 2003,
tion discount is the stated redemption price at $249.60; and 2004, $179.20.
maturity minus your basis. 
Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds isIf you choose to use the constant yield
When To Report taxable in the year the coupon becomes due andmethod to figure accrued acquisition discount,
payable. It does not matter when you mail thetreat the cost of acquiring the obligation as theInterest Income coupon for payment.issue price. If you choose to use this method,
you cannot change your choice. Terms you may need to know
(see Glossary):Nongovernment obligations. For an obliga-
tion listed above that is not a government obliga- How To Reporttion, the amount you include in your income forAccrual methodthe current year is the accrued OID, if any, plus Interest IncomeCash methodany other accrued interest payable. If you
choose the constant yield method to figure ac- Terms you may need to knowcrued OID, apply it by using the obligation’s (see Glossary):When to report your interest income depends onissue price. whether you use the cash method or an accrual
Choosing to include accrued acquisitionmethod to report income. Nomineediscount instead of OID.You can choose to
Cash method. Most individual taxpayers useOriginal issue discount (OID)report accrued acquisition discount (defined
the cash method. If you use this method, youearlier under Government obligations) rather
generally report your interest income in the yearthan accrued OID on these short-term obliga-
in which you actually or constructively receive it. Generally, you report all of your taxable interesttions. Your choice will apply to the year for which
However, there are special rules for reporting income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, lineit is made and to all later years and cannot be
the discount on certain debt instruments. See 8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.changed without the consent of the IRS.
U.S. Savings Bonds and Discount on Debt In-You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interestYou must make your choice by the due date
struments, earlier. income is more than $1,500. Instead, you mustof your return, including extensions, for the first
use Form 1040A or Form 1040.year for which you are making the choice. Attach
Example. On September 1, 2002, you In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ ifa statement to your return or amended return
loaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com-you must use Form 1040, as described later, orindicating:
pounded annually. You are not in the businessif any of the statements listed under Schedule B,
of lending money. The note stated that principal1. Your name, address, and social security later, are true.
and interest would be due on August 31, 2004.number,
In 2004, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 12. The choice you are making and that it ispal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash(Form 1040A), Part I, if you file Form 1040A andbeing made under section 1283(c)(2) ofmethod, you must include in income on yourany of the following are true. the Internal Revenue Code, 2004 return the $508.80 interest you received in
1. Your taxable interest income is more than3. The period for which the choice is being that year.
$1,500.made and the obligation to which it ap-Constructive receipt.You constructivelyplies, and 2. You are claiming the interest exclusionreceive income when it is credited to your ac-
under the Education Savings Bond Pro-4. Any other information necessary to show count or made available to you. You do not need
gram (discussed earlier).you are entitled to make this choice. to have physical possession of it. For example,
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
Interest income not included in box 31PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
$
Early withdrawal penalty Interest on U.S. Savings
Bonds and Treas. obligations
32RECIPIENT’S name
$$
Federal income tax withheld4Street address (including apt. no.)
$
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7Foreign tax paid6City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
Investment expenses5
$
2004
3. You received interest from a seller-fi- 6. You received tax-exempt interest from pri- not add tax-exempt interest in the total on Form
vate activity bonds issued after August 7, 1040EZ, line 2.nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the
1986.property as a home. You should not have received a Form
1099-INT for tax-exempt interest. But if you did,4. You received a Form 1099-INT for tax-ex-Schedule B. You must complete Schedule you must fill in Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) orempt interest. B (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 andSchedule B (Form 1040). See the Schedule 1 or
any of the following apply. Schedule B instructions for how to report this. Be5. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.
sure to also show this tax-exempt interest on linesavings bond interest that includes 1. Your taxable interest income is more than8b.amounts you reported before 2004. $1,500.
Do not report interest from an individ-6. You received, as a nominee, interest that2. You are claiming the interest exclusion ual retirement arrangement (IRA) asactually belongs to someone else. under the Education Savings Bond Pro- tax-exempt interest.CAUTION
!
7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest gram (discussed earlier).
on frozen deposits. 3. You had a foreign account. Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,
List each payer’s name and the amount of inter- except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and4. You received interest from a seller-fi-est income received from each payer on line 1. If Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Formnanced mortgage, and the buyer used theyou received a Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxableproperty as a home.
1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker- interest income you received. You must report
5. You received a Form 1099-INT for tax-ex-age firm as the payer. all of your taxable interest income even if you do
empt interest. not receive a Form 1099-INT.You cannot use Form 1040A if you must use
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. If you forfeited interest income because ofForm 1040, as described next.
savings bond interest that includes the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
amounts you reported before 2004. ductible amount will be shown on FormForm 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead 1099-INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early with-7. You received, as a nominee, interest thatof Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if: drawal of savings, later.actually belongs to someone else.
Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amount1. You forfeited interest income because of8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interestof interest income you received from U.S. sav-the early withdrawal of a time deposit, on frozen deposits. ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and
Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 32. You received or paid accrued interest on9. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
to any other taxable interest income you re-securities transferred between interest on a bond that you bought between inter-
ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 waspayment dates, est payment dates.
previously included in your interest income. If
3. You had a financial account in a foreign10. Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list ispart of the amount shown in box 3 was previ-
true.country, unless the combined value of all ously included in your interest income, see U.S.
foreign accounts was $10,000 or less dur- savings bond interest previously reported, later.On Part I, line 1, list each payer’s name and theing all of 2004 or the accounts were with If you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you boughtamount received from each. If you received a
certain U.S. military banking facilities, after 1989 and you paid qualified educationalForm 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-
expenses, see Interest excluded under the Edu-kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.4. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 cation Savings Bond Program, later.and choose to reduce interest income from Box 4 (federal income tax withheld) of FormReporting tax-exempt interest.Report thethe bonds by any amortizable bond pre- 1099-INT will contain an amount if you weretotal of your tax-exempt interest (such as inter-mium (discussed in chapter 3 under Bond subject to backup withholding. Report theest or accrued OID on certain state and munici-Premium Amortization), amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, onpal bonds) and exempt-interest dividends from a
Form 1040A, line 39, or on Form 1040, line 63.5. You are reporting OID in an amount moremutual fund on line 8b of Form 1040A or Form
or less than the amount shown on Form Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment1040. If you file Form 1040EZ, enter “TEI” and
1099-OID, or expenses you may be able to deduct as anthe amount in the space to the left of line 2. Do
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest- yearly, you need only include the $29.20 interest Your employer should tell you the value of
ment expenses. each bond on the date it was distributed.that accrued from January 2004 to March 2004.
If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of FormYou received no other taxable interest for
Example. You received a distribution of se-1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be2004. You file Form 1040A.
ries EE U.S. savings bonds in December 2001able to take a credit for the amount shown in boxOn Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1,from your company’s profit-sharing plan.6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct thisenter your interest income as shown on FormIn March 2004, you redeemed a $100 seriesamount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as “Other1099-INT — $992.00. (If you had other taxableEE bond that was part of the distribution youtaxes.” To take the credit, you may have to fileinterest income, you would enter it next and thenreceived in 2001. You received $103.68 for theForm 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor-enter a subtotal, as described earlier, beforebond the company bought in May 1991. Themation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Creditgoing to the next step.) Several lines above linevalue of the bond at the time of distribution infor Individuals. 2, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously2001 was $93.04. (This is the amount you in-
Reported” and enter $962.80 ($992.00 − cluded on your 2001 return.) The bank gave youForm 1099-OID. The taxable OID on a dis-$29.20). Subtract $962.80 from $992.00 anda Form 1099-INT that shows $53.68 interestcounted obligation for the part of the year you
enter $29.20 on line 2. Enter $29.20 on Sched-(the total interest from the date the bond wasowned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099-OID.
ule 1, line 4, and on Form 1040A, line 8a.purchased to the date of redemption). Since aInclude this amount in your total taxable interest
part of the interest was included in your incomeincome. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form
Example 2. Your uncle died and left you ain 2001, you need to include in your 2004 in-1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID),
$1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bondcome only the interest that accrued after theearlier.
when it reaches maturity. bond was distributed to you.You must report all taxable OID even if you
Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500On Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1, includedo not receive a Form 1099-OID.
all the interest shown on your Form 1099-INT asof the amount you receive upon redemption isBox 2 of Form 1099-OID shows any taxable
well as any other taxable interest income youinterest income. Your uncle’s executor includedinterest on the obligation other than OID. Add
received. Several lines above line 2, put a sub-in your uncle’s final return $200 of the interestthis amount to the OID shown in box 1 and
total of all interest listed on line 1. Below thisthat had accrued at the time of your uncle’sinclude the result in your total taxable income.
subtotal enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Pre-death. You have to include only $300 in yourIf you forfeited interest or principal on the viously Reported” and enter the amount figuredincome.obligation because of an early withdrawal, the on the worksheet below.The bank where you redeem the bond givesdeductible amount will be shown in box 3. See
you a Form 1099-INT showing interest incomePenalty on early withdrawal of savings, later.
A. Enter the amount of cash receivedof $500. You also receive a Form 1099-INTBox 4 of Form 1099-OID will contain an
upon redemption of the bond . . . $103.68showing taxable interest income of $300 fromamount if you were subject to backup withhold-
B. Enter the value of the bond at theyour savings account.ing. Report the amount from box 4 on Form
time of distribution by the plan . . . 93.041040EZ, line 7, on Form 1040A, line 39, or onYou file Form 1040 and you complete C. Subtract the amount on line B fromForm 1040, line 63. Schedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list thethe amount on line A. This is theBox 7 of Form 1099-OID shows investment$500 and $300 interest amounts shown on youramount of interest accrued on theexpenses you may be able to deduct as an Forms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you putbond since it was distributed byitemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-a subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, enterthe plan.................. $10.64ment expenses. “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re-D. Enter the amount of interest shown
ported” and enter the $200 interest included inon your Form 1099-INT....... $53.68U.S. savings bond interest previously re- E. Subtract the amount on line C fromyour uncle’s final return. Subtract the $200 fromported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for the amount on line D. This is thethe subtotal and enter $600 on line 2. You thenU.S. savings bond interest, the form may show amount you include in “U.S.complete the rest of the form.interest you do not have to report. See Form Savings Bond Interest PreviouslyWorksheet for savings bonds distributed1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest under Reported”................ $43.04
from a retirement or profit-sharing plan.IfU.S. Savings Bonds, earlier. Subtract $43.04 from the subtotal and enter theyou cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxableOn Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, or result on Schedule B, line 2. You then completedistribution from a retirement or profit-sharingon Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1, the rest of the form.plan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds,report all the interest shown on your Form
earlier), your interest income does not includeInterest excluded under the Education Sav-1099-INT. Then follow these steps.
the interest accrued before the distribution andings Bond Program. Use Form 8815, to fig-
1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotaltaxed as a distribution from the plan. ure your interest exclusion when you redeem
of all interest listed on line 1. qualified savings bonds and pay qualified higherUse the worksheet below to figure theeducational expenses during the same year.2. Below the subtotal enter “U.S. Savings amount you subtract from the interestFor more information on the exclusion andBond Interest Previously Reported” and shown on Form 1099-INT. qualified higher educational expenses, see theenter amounts previously reported or inter- earlier discussion under Education Savingsest accrued before you received the bond. Bond Program.A. Enter the amount of cash received3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal You must show your total interest from quali-upon redemption of the bond....and enter the result on line 2. fied savings bonds that you cashed during 2004
on Form 8815, line 6, and on line 1 of eitherB. Enter the value of the bond at the
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B (Formtime of distribution by the plan....Example 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav-
1040). After completing Form 8815, enter theings bonds for you when you were a child. The
result from line 14 (Form 8815) on Schedule 1C. Subtract the amount on line B frombonds were issued in your name, and the inter-
(Form 1040A), line 3, or Schedule B (Formthe amount on line A. This is theest on the bonds was reported each year as it
amount of interest accrued on the 1040), line 3.accrued. (See Choice to report interest each bond since it was distributed by theyear under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.) Interest on seller-financed mortgage.If anplan .....................In March 2004, you redeemed one of the individual buys his or her home from you in a
bonds — a $1,000 series EE bond. The bond sale that you finance, you must report theD. Enter the amount of interest shownwas originally issued in March 1985. When you buyer’s name, address, and social security num-on your Form 1099-INT........redeemed the bond, you received $1,492.00 for ber on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), line 1, or
it. Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1. If you do not,E. Subtract the amount on line C from
The Form 1099-INT you received shows in- you may have to pay a $50 penalty. The buyerthe amount on line D. This is the
terest income of $992.00. However, since the may have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she doesamount you include in “U.S. Savings
Bond Interest Previously Reported”interest on your savings bonds was reported not give you this information.
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must also give your name, address, and this account, and you and she have agreed totaxed as a corporation. However, some
social security number (or employer identifica- share the yearly interest income in proportion to amounts you receive that are called dividends
tion number) to the buyer. If you do not, you may the amount that each of you has invested. Be- are actually interest income. (See Dividends that
have to pay a $50 penalty. cause your social security number was given to are actually interest under Taxable Interest —
the bank, you received a Form 1099-INT forGeneral, earlier.)Frozen deposits.Even if you receive a Form2004 that includes the interest income earned The most common kinds of distributions are:1099-INT for interest on deposits that you couldbelonging to your sister. This amount is $450, or• Ordinary dividends,not withdraw at the end of 2004, you must ex-30% of the total interest of $1,500.clude these amounts from your gross income. • Capital gain distributions, andYou must give your sister a Form 1099-INT(See Interest income on frozen deposits under by January 31, 2005, showing $450 of interest• Nondividend distributions.Interest Income, earlier.) Do not include thisincome that she earned for 2004. You must alsoincome on line 8a of Form 1040A or Form 1040. Most distributions are paid in cash (check).send a copy of the nominee Form 1099-INT,In Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, or Schedule However, distributions can consist of morealong with Form 1096, to the Internal RevenueB (Form 1040), Part I, include the full amount of stock, stock rights, other property, or services.Service Center by February 28, 2005 (March 31,interest shown on your Form 1099-INT on line 1.2005, if you file Form 1099-INT electronically).Several lines above line 2, put a subtotal of all Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use FormShow your own name, address, and social se-interest income. Below this subtotal, enter “Fro- 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to showcurity number as that of the “Payer” on the Formzen Deposits” and show the amount of interest you the distributions you received from them1099-INT. Show your sister’s name, address,that you are excluding. Subtract this amount during the year. Keep this form with your rec-and social security number in the blocks pro-from the subtotal and enter the result on line 2. ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxvided for identification of the “Recipient.”
return.When you prepare your own federal incomeAccrued interest on bonds.If you received a
tax return, report the total amount of interestForm 1099-INT that reflects accrued interest Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.income, $1,500, on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),paid on a bond you bought between interest Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, youPart I, line 1, or Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I,payment dates, include the full amount shown must still report all of your taxable dividend in-line 1, and identify the name of the bank thatas interest on the Form 1099-INT on Schedule B come. For example, you may receive distributivepaid this interest. Show the amount belonging to(Form 1040), Part I, line 1. Then, below a sub- shares of dividends from partnerships or sub-your sister, $450, as a subtraction from a sub-total of all interest income listed, enter “Accrued chapter S corporations. These dividends aretotal of all interest on Schedule 1 (or ScheduleInterest” and the amount of accrued interest that reported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)B) and identify this subtraction as a “Nomineeyou paid to the seller. That amount is taxable to and Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).Distribution.” (Your sister will report the $450 ofthe seller, not you. Subtract that amount from
Nominees. If someone receives distribu-interest income on her own tax return, if she hasthe interest income subtotal. Enter the result on
tions as a nominee for you, that person will giveto file a return, and identify you as the payer ofline 2 and also on Form 1040, line 8a.
you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-that amount.)For more information, see Bonds Sold Be-
tions received on your behalf.tween Interest Dates, earlier. Original issue discount (OID) adjustment.If If you receive a Form 1099-DIV that includes
you are reporting OID in an amount greater orNominee distributions. If you received a amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-
less than the amount shown on Form 1099-OIDForm 1099-INT that includes an amount you inees under How To Report Dividend Income,
or other written statement (such as for a REMICreceived as a nominee for the real owner, report later, for more information.
regular interest), include the full amount of OIDthe full amount shown as interest on the Form
Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-shown on your Form 1099-OID or other state-1099-INT on Part I, line 1 of Schedule 1 (Form
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestment on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1.1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, be-
that are received by a broker on your behalfIf the OID to be reported is less than the amountlow a subtotal of all interest income listed, enter
must be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC,shown on Form 1099-OID, show the OID you do“Nominee Distribution” and the amount that ac-
Miscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.not have to report below a subtotal of the interesttually belongs to someone else. Subtract that
See also Reporting Substitute Payments underand OID listed. Identify the amount as “OIDamount from the interest income subtotal. Enter
Short Sales in chapter 4.Adjustment” and subtract it from the subtotal. Ifthe result on line 2 and also on line 8a of Form
the OID to be reported is greater than the1040A or 1040. Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.Ifamount shown on Form 1099-OID, show the you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrectFile Form 1099-INT with the IRS.If you additional OID below the subtotal. Identify theamount (or other incorrect information), youreceived interest as a nominee in 2004, youamount as “OID Adjustment” and add it to theshould ask the issuer for a corrected form. Themust file a Form 1099-INT for that interest withsubtotal. new Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor-the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099-INT with a
rected.”Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofPenalty on early withdrawal of savings.If
U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-you withdraw funds from a time-savings or otherDividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,nue Service Center by February 28, 2005 deferred interest account before maturity, youexchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a(March 31, 2005 if you file Form 1099-INT elec-may be charged a penalty. The Form 1099-INTdividend is declared, but before it is paid, thetronically). Give the actual owner of the interestor similar statement given to you by the financialowner of record (usually the payee shown on theCopy B of the Form 1099-INT by January 31,institution will show the total amount of interestdividend check) must include the dividend in2005. On Form 1099-INT, you should be listedin box 1 and will show the penalty separately inincome.as the “Payer.” Prepare one Form 1099-INT forbox 2. You must include in income all the inter-
Dividends received in January.If a regu-each other owner and show that person as theest shown in box 1. You can deduct the penalty
lated investment company (mutual fund) or real“Recipient.” However, you do not have to fileon Form 1040, line 33. Deduct the entire penalty
estate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi-Form 1099-INT to show payments for your even if it is more than your interest income.
dend (including any exempt-interest dividend orspouse. For more information about the report-
capital gain distribution) in October, November,ing requirements and the penalties for failure to
or December payable to shareholders of recordfile (or furnish) certain information returns, see
on a date in one of those months but actuallythe General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,Dividends and
pays the dividend during January of the next5498, and W2-G.
calendar year, you are considered to have re-Similar rules apply to OID reported to you asOther Corporate
ceived the dividend on December 31. You reporta nominee on Form 1099-OID. You must file a
the dividend in the year it was declared.DistributionsForm 1099-OID with Form 1096 to show the
proper distributions of the OID.
Dividends are distributions of money, stock, orOrdinary Dividends
Example. You and your sister have a joint other property paid to you by a corporation. You
savings account that paid $1,500 interest for also may receive dividends through a partner- Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-
2004. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds in ship, an estate, a trust, or an association that is mon type of distribution from a corporation. They
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are paid out of the earnings and profits of a date), and you sold the stock on September 9, in this discussion are met. Certain dividends
corporation and are ordinary income to you. This 2004. You held the stock for 63 days (from Julypaid by a CFC that would be treated as a pas-
means they are not capital gains. You can as- 9, 2004, through September 9, 2004). The $500sive foreign investment company but for section
sume that any dividend you receive on common of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of your1297(e) of the Internal Revenue Code may be
or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends be-treated as qualified dividends. For more infor-
the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi- cause you held the stock for 61 days of themation, see Notice 2004-70, which is on page
nary dividends will be shown in box 1a of the 121-day period (from July 9, 2004, through Sep-724 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-44 at
Form 1099-DIV you receive. tember 7, 2004). www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-44.pdf.
Readily tradable stock.Any stock (such asExample 3. You bought 10,000 shares ofcommon, ordinary, or preferred stock), or anQualified Dividends ABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 1, American depositary receipt in respect of that2004. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend ofstock, is considered to satisfy requirement (3) ifQualified dividends are the ordinary dividends10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date wasit is listed on one of the following securitiesthat are subject to the same 5% or 15% maxi-July 9, 2004. The ABC Mutual Fund advises youmarkets: the New York Stock Exchange, themum tax rate that applies to net capital gain.that the portion of the dividend eligible to be
NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex-They should be shown in box 1b of the Formtreated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per
change, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin-1099-DIV you receive. share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual
nati Stock Exchange, the Chicago StockQualified dividends are subject to the 15%Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000
Exchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, orrate if the regular tax rate that would apply isand qualified dividends of $200. However, you
the Pacific Exchange, Inc.25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that wouldsold the 10,000 shares on August 4, 2004. You
apply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends arehave no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual
Table 1-3. Income Tax Treatiessubject to the 5% rate. Fund because you did not hold the ABC Mutual
To qualify for the 5% or 15% maximum rate,Fund stock for more than 60 days. Income tax treaties that the United Statesall of the following requirements must be met.
Holding period reduced where risk of losshas with the following countries satisfy
is diminished. When determining whether1. The dividends must have been paid by a requirement (2) under Qualified foreign
you met the minimum holding period discussedcorporation.U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor-
earlier, you cannot count any day during whichporation. (See Qualified foreign corpora-
you meet any of the following conditions.tion later.) Australia Ireland Romania
2. The dividends are not of the type listed Austria Israel Russian1. You had an option to sell, were under alater under Dividends that are not qualified Belgium Italy Federationcontractual obligation to sell, or had madedividends. Canada Jamaica Slovak(and not closed) a short sale of substan-
China Japan Republictially identical stock or securities.3. You meet the holding period (discussed
Cyprus Kazakhstan Slovenianext). 2. You were grantor (writer) of an option toCzech Korea South Africabuy substantially identical stock or securi-Republic Latvia SpainHolding period.You must have held the stock ties. Denmark Lithuania Swedenfor more than 60 days during the 121-day period Egypt Luxembourg Switzerland3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holdingthat begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date.one or more other positions in substantiallyEstonia Mexico ThailandThe ex-dividend date is the first date followingsimilar or related property. Finland Morocco Trinidad andthe declaration of a dividend on which the buyer
France Netherlands Tobagoof a stock will not receive the next dividendFor information about how to apply conditionGermany New Zealand Tunisiapayment. When counting the number of days(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5. Greece Norway Turkeyyou held the stock, include the day you disposed
Hungary Pakistan Ukraineof the stock, but not the day you acquired it. SeeQualified foreign corporation.A foreign cor-
Iceland Philippines Unitedthe examples, later. poration is a qualified foreign corporation if it
India Poland Kingdommeets any of the following conditions. Exception for preferred stock.In the case Indonesia Portugal Venezuelaof preferred stock, you must have held the stock1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.more than 90 days during the 181-day period possession.that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date
2. The corporation is eligible for the benefitsif the dividends are due to periods totaling more
Dividends that are not qualified dividends.of a comprehensive income tax treaty withthan 366 days. If the preferred dividends are due
The following dividends are not qualified divi-the United States that the Treasury De-to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold-
dends. They are not qualified dividends even ifpartment determines is satisfactory for thising period in the preceding paragraph applies.
they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.purpose and that includes an exchange of
Example 1. You bought 5,000 shares of information program. For a list of those• Capital gain distributions.XYZ Corp. common stock on July 1, 2004. XYZ treaties, see Table 1-3.
• Dividends paid on deposits with mutualCorp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)savings banks, cooperative banks, creditshare. The ex-dividend date was July 9, 2004.above, but the stock for which the dividendunions, U.S. building and loan associa-Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. shows is paid is readily tradable on an estab- tions, U.S. savings and loan associations,$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxlished securities market in the United federal savings and loan associations, and1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold theStates. See Readily tradable stock, later. similar financial institutions. (Report these5,000 shares on August 4, 2004. You held your
amounts as interest income.)shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of theException. A corporation is not a qualified121-day period (from July 2, 2004, through Au- • Dividends from a corporation that is aforeign corporation if it is a foreign personalgust 4, 2004). The 121-day period began on tax-exempt organization or farmer’s coop-holding company, foreign investment company,May 10, 2004 (60 days before the ex-dividend erative during the corporation’s tax year inor a passive foreign investment company duringdate), and ended on September 7, 2004. You which the dividends were paid or duringits tax year in which the dividends are paid orhave no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be- the corporation’s previous tax year.during its previous tax year.cause you did not hold the XYZ stock for more
• Dividends paid by a corporation on em-Controlled foreign corporation (CFC).than 60 days.
ployer securities which are held on theDividends paid out of a CFC’s earnings and
date of record by an employee stock own-Example 2. Assume the same facts as in profits that were not previously taxed are quali-
ership plan (ESOP) maintained by thatExample 1 except that you bought the stock on fied dividends if the CFC is otherwise a qualified
corporation.July 8, 2004 (the day before the ex-dividend foreign corporation and the other requirements
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Dividends on any share of stock to the ally receive them. However, they are not in- amount reduced your basis to zero. You report
extent that you are obligated (whether cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are the other $10 as a long-term capital gain for
under a short sale or otherwise) to make reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share- 2004. You must report as a long-term capital
related payments for positions in substan-holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capitalgain any nondividend distribution you receive on
tially similar or related property. Gains. this stock in later years.
Form 2439 will also show how much, if any,
• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only ifof the undistributed capital gains is: Liquidating Distributionsyou know or have reason to know that the
payments are not qualified dividends. • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b),Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui-
• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box • Gain from qualified small business stock dating dividends, are distributions you receive
1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent(section 1202 gain, box 1c), or during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-
you know or have reason to know the pay- poration. These distributions are, at least in part,• Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d).ments are not qualified dividends. one form of a return of capital. They may be paid
For information about these terms, see Capital in one or more installments. You will receive
Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. Form 1099-DIV from the corporation showingDividends Used To Buy More you the amount of the liquidating distribution inReport undistributed capital gains (box 1a ofStock box 8 or 9.Form 2439) as long-term capital gains on Any liquidating distribution you receive is notThe corporation in which you own stock maySchedule D (Form 1040), line 11, column (f).taxable to you until you have recovered thehave a dividend reinvestment plan. This planEnter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Sectionbasis of your stock. After the basis of your stocklets you choose to use your dividends to buy1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-has been reduced to zero, you must report the(through an agent) more shares of stock in thetions the part reported to you as unrecapturedliquidating distribution as a capital gain. Whethercorporation instead of receiving the dividends insection 1250 gain. For any gain on qualifiedyou report the gain as a long-term or short-termcash. If you are a member of this type of plansmall business stock, follow the reporting in-capital gain depends on how long you have heldand you use your dividends to buy more stock atstructions under Section 1202 Exclusion in the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4.a price equal to its fair market value, you stillchapter 4. Enter the collectibles gain on line 1 of
must report the dividends as income. the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the Schedule Stock acquired at different times.If you
If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-D instructions. acquired stock in the same corporation in more
ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a price than one transaction, you own more than oneThe tax paid on these gains by the mutual
less than its fair market value, you must report block of stock in the corporation. If you receivefund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.
as dividend income the fair market value of the distributions from the corporation in completeYou take credit for this tax by including it on
additional stock on the dividend payment date. liquidation, you must divide the distributionForm 1040, line 69, and checking box a on that
You also must report as dividend income any among the blocks of stock you own in the follow-line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return,
service charge subtracted from your cash divi- ing proportion: the number of shares in thatand keep Copy C for your records.
dends before the dividends are used to buy the block over the total number of shares you own.Basis adjustment. Increase your basis inadditional stock. But you may be able to deduct Divide distributions in partial liquidation amongyour mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, bythe service charge. See Expenses of Producing that part of the stock that is redeemed in thethe difference between the gain you report andIncome in chapter 3. partial liquidation. After the basis of a block ofthe credit you claim for the tax paid.In some dividend reinvestment plans, you stock is reduced to zero, you must report the
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a part of any later distribution for that block as a
Nondividend Distributionsprice less than fair market value. If you choose capital gain.
to do this, you must report as dividend income Distributions less than basis.If the totalA nondividend distribution is a distribution that isthe difference between the cash you invest and liquidating distributions you receive are lessnot paid out of the earnings and profits of athe fair market value of the stock you buy. When than the basis of your stock, you may have acorporation. You should receive a Formfiguring this amount, use the fair market value of capital loss. You can report a capital loss only1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora-the stock on the dividend payment date. after you have received the final distribution intion showing you the nondividend distribution.
liquidation that results in the redemption or can-On Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution
cellation of the stock. Whether you report thewill be shown in box 3. If you do not receive suchMoney Market Funds
loss as a long-term or short-term capital lossa statement, you report the distribution as an
depends on how long you held the stock. SeeReport amounts you receive from money marketordinary dividend.
Holding Period in chapter 4.funds as dividend income. Money market funds
Basis adjustment.A nondividend distributionare a type of mutual fund and should not be
reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxedconfused with bank money market accounts that Distributions of Stock
until your basis in the stock is fully recovered.pay interest. and Stock RightsThis nontaxable portion is also called a return of
capital; it is a return of your investment in theCapital Gain Distributions Distributions by a corporation of its own stockstock of the company. If you buy stock in aare commonly known as stock dividends. Stockcorporation in different lots at different times,Capital gain distributions (also called capital rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri-and you cannot definitely identify the sharesgain dividends) are paid to you or credited to butions by a corporation of rights to acquire thesubject to the nondividend distribution, reduceyour account by regulated investment compa- corporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividendsthe basis of your earliest purchases first.nies (commonly called mutual funds) and real and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you
When the basis of your stock has been re-estate investment trusts (REITs). They will be do not report them on your return.
duced to zero, report any additional nondividendshown in box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.distribution that you receive as a capital gain.receive from the mutual fund or REIT. Distributions of stock dividends and stock rightsWhether you report it as a long-term orReport capital gain distributions as long-term are taxable to you if any of the following apply.short-term capital gain depends on how longcapital gains, regardless of how long you owned
you have held the stock. See Holding Period inyour shares in the mutual fund or REIT. See 1. You or any other shareholder has thechapter 4.Capital gain distributions under How To Report choice to receive cash or other propertyDividend Income, later in this chapter. instead of stock or stock rights.Example. You bought stock in 1992 for
Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds$100. In 1995, you received a nondividend dis- 2. The distribution gives cash or other prop-
and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs tribution of $80. You did not include this amount erty to some shareholders and an increase
keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on in your income, but you reduced the basis of in the percentage interest in the
them. You must treat your share of these gains your stock to $20. You received a nondividend corporation’s assets or earnings and prof-
as distributions, even though you did not actu- distribution of $30 in 2004. The first $20 of this its to other shareholders.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Basis (cost) of old stock3. The distribution is in convertible preferred is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the
after the stock dividendstock and has the same result as in (2). redemption price multiplied by the number
(($200 ÷ $210) × $100)......... $95.24of full years from the date of issue to the4. The distribution gives preferred stock to Basis (cost) of stock dividenddate redeemable.some common stock shareholders and (($10 ÷ $210) × $100).......... +  4.76
common stock to other common stock 3. The stock was issued after October 9,Total..................... $100.00
shareholders. 1990, and must be redeemed at a speci-Cash received...............  $10.00fied time or is redeemable at your option,5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The Basis (cost) of stock dividend..... − 4.76but the redemption is unlikely because it isdistribution, however, is not taxable if it is
subject to a contingency outside your con-an increase in the conversion ratio of con- Gain  $5.24
trol (not including the possibility of default,vertible preferred stock made solely to take Because you had held the share of stock forinsolvency, etc.).into account a stock dividend, stock split, more than 1 year at the time the stock dividendor similar event that would otherwise result4. The stock was issued after December 19,was declared, your gain on the stock dividend isin reducing the conversion right.) 1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-a long-term capital gain.
tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-The term “stock” includes rights to acquire Scrip dividends. A corporation that de-mium is in the nature of a penalty forstock, and the term “shareholder” includes a clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrippremature redemption or redemption is notholder of rights or convertible securities. certificate that entitles you to a fractional share.more likely than not to occur. The redemp-If you receive taxable stock dividends or The certificate is generally nontaxable when yoution will be treated under a “safe harbor” asstock rights, include their fair market value at the receive it. If you choose to have the corporationtime of the distribution in your income. not more likely than not to occur if all of thesell the certificate for you and give you the pro-following are true. ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be-Constructive distributions.You must treat tween the proceeds and the part of your basis ina. You and the issuer are not relatedcertain transactions that increase your propor- the corporation’s stock that is allocated to theunder the rules discussed in chapter 4tionate interest in the earnings and profits or certificate.under Losses on Sales or Trades ofassets of a corporation as if they were distribu- However, if you receive a scrip certificateProperty, substituting “20%” for “50%.”tions of stock or stock rights. These constructive that you can choose to redeem for cash insteaddistributions are taxable if they have the sameb. There are no plans, arrangements, orof stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-result as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4),agreements that effectively require orceive it. You must include its fair market value inor (5) of the above discussion. are intended to compel the issuer toincome on the date you receive it.This treatment applies to a change in your redeem the stock.stock’s conversion ratio or redemption price, a
Other Distributionsdifference between your stock’s redemption c. The redemption would not reduce the
price and issue price, a redemption that is notstock’s yield. You may receive any of the following distribu-treated as a sale or exchange of your stock, and
tions during the year.any other transaction having a similar effect on
your interest in the corporation. Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-Exempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest
ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair market dividends you receive from a regulated invest-Preferred stock redeemable at a premium.
ment company (mutual fund) are not included invalue when distributed. If you receive stock orIf you hold preferred stock having a redemption
your taxable income. You will receive a noticestock rights that are not taxable to you, seeprice higher than its issue price, the difference
from the mutual fund telling you the amount ofStocks and Bonds under Basis of Investment(the redemption premium) generally is taxable
the exempt-interest dividends you received.Property in chapter 4 for information on how toas a constructive distribution of additional stock
Exempt-interest dividends are not shown onfigure their basis.on the preferred stock.
Form 1099-DIV or Form 1099-INT.For stock issued before October 10, 1990,
you include the redemption premium in yourFractional shares.You may not own enough Information reporting requirement.Al-
income ratably over the period during which thestock in a corporation to receive a full share ofthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax-
stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issuedstock if the corporation declares a stock divi-able, you must show them on your tax return if
after October 9, 1990, you include the redemp-dend. However, with the approval of the share-you have to file a return. This is an information
tion premium on the basis of its economic ac-holders, the corporation may set up a plan inreporting requirement and does not change the
crual over the period during which the stockwhich fractional shares are not issued, but in-exempt-interest dividends to taxable income.
cannot be redeemed, as if it were original issuestead are sold, and the cash proceeds are givenSee Reporting tax-exempt interest under How
discount on a debt instrument. See Original Is-to the shareholders. Any cash you receive forTo Report Interest Income, earlier.
sue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter.fractional shares under such a plan is treated asAlternative minimum tax treatment.The redemption premium is not a construc-an amount realized on the sale of the fractionalExempt-interest dividends paid from specifiedtive distribution, and therefore is not taxable, inshares. You must determine your gain or lossprivate activity bonds may be subject to thethe following situations. and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251 and itsule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is theinstructions for more information.1. The stock was issued before October 10,difference between the cash you receive and the1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re- Dividends on insurance policies.Insurancebasis of the fractional shares sold.deemable solely at the option of the is- policy dividends that the insurer keeps and usessuer), and the redemption premium is to pay your premiums are not taxable. However,Example. You own one share of common“reasonable.” (For stock issued before Oc- you must report as taxable interest income thestock that you bought on January 3, 1996, fortober 10, 1990, only the part of the re- interest that is paid or credited on dividends left$100. The corporation declared a common stockdemption premium that is not “reasonable” with the insurance company.dividend of 5% on June 30, 2004. The fair mar-is a constructive distribution.) The redemp-  If dividends on an insurance contract (otherket value of the stock at the time the stocktion premium is reasonable if it is not more than a modified endowment contract) are distrib-dividend was declared was $200. You were paidthan 10% of the issue price on stock not uted to you, they are a partial return of the$10 for the fractional-share stock dividend underredeemable for 5 years from the issue date premiums you paid. Do not include them in youra plan described in the above paragraph. Youor is in the nature of a penalty for making a gross income until they are more than the total offigure your gain or loss as follows:premature redemption. all net premiums you paid for the contract. (For
2. The stock was issued after October 9, information on the treatment of a distributionFair market value of old stock.... $200.00
1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem- from a modified endowment contract, see Distri-Fair market value of stock dividend
able solely at the option of the issuer), and bution Before Annuity Starting Date From a(cash received).............. +  10.00
the redemption premium is “de minimis.” Nonqualified Plan under Taxation of Nonperi-Fair market value of old stock and
stock dividend............... $210.00The redemption premium is de minimis if it odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension and
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no.
RECIPIENT’S identification
number
PAYER’S Federal identification
number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
Dividends and
Distributions
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-DIV (keep for your records)
Copy B
This is important
tax information
and is being
furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you
are required to
file a return, a
negligence
penalty or other
sanction may be
imposed on you
if this income is
taxable and the
IRS determines
that it has not
been reported.
For Recipient
Unrecap. Sec. 1250 gain
OMB No. 1545-0110Total ordinary dividends1a
$
1b Qualified dividends
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
Collectibles (28%) gainSection 1202 gain 2d2c
$
3
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation
distributions
9Cash liquidation
distributions
8
$
$
2b
$$
Nontaxable distributions
Form 1099-DIV
$
76
$
Foreign tax paid Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
$
4 Federal income tax withheld
$
2004
Annuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu-
1. Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,tions on insurance policies on Form 1040, lineHow To Report box 1a) are more than $1,500, or16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.
Dividend Income 2. You received, as a nominee, dividendsDividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi-
that actually belong to someone else.dends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli-Terms you may need to knowcies are not taxable. In addition, interest on List on line 5 each payer’s name and the amount(see Glossary):dividends left with the Department of Veterans of ordinary dividends you received. If you re-
Affairs is not taxable. ceived a Form 1099-DIV from a brokerage firm,
Nominee list the brokerage firm as the payer.Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listeddividends you receive in money from a coopera-Restricted stock
on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as ative organization are included in your income.
nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter thisDo not include in your income patronage
total on Form 1040A, line 9a.dividends you receive on: Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or
Form 1040A to report your dividend income.
1. Property bought for your personal use, or Form 1040. You must fill in Schedule B, PartReport the total of your ordinary dividends on
II, and attach it to your Form 1040, if:line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report2. Capital assets or depreciable property
qualified dividends on line 9b.bought for use in your business. But you 1. Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,If you receive capital gain distributions, youmust reduce the basis (cost) of the items box 1a) are more than $1,500, ormay be able to use Form 1040A or you maybought. If the dividend is more than the
have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-2. You received, as a nominee, dividendsadjusted basis of the assets, you must re-
butions, later. If you receive nondividend distri-that actually belong to someone else.port the excess as income.
butions required to be reported as capital gains,If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,These rules are the same whether the coop-you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Formyou must also complete Schedule B, Part III.erative paying the dividend is a taxable or1040EZ if you receive any dividend income.
tax-exempt cooperative. List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, each
payer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do not dends you received. If your securities are heldyou received $10 or more in dividends and otherreport these amounts as dividends. Instead, re- by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list thedistributions, you should receive a Formport these amounts on Form 1040, line 21, Form name of the brokerage firm that is shown on1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive a Form1040A, line 13, or Form 1040EZ, line 3. Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock is1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxable
held by a nominee who is the owner of record,dividend income.
and the nominee credited or paid you dividendsSee Form 1099-DIV for more information on
on the stock, show the name of the nominee andhow to report dividend income.
the dividends you received or for which you were
credited.Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1
(Form 1040A), Part II, and attach it to your Form Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed
1040A, if: on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-File Form 1099-DIV with the IRS.If you
total on Form 1040, line 9a. ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi- received dividends as a nominee in 2004, you
dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the must file a Form 1099-DIV for those dividends
Dividends received on restricted stock.Re- Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched- with the IRS. Send the Form 1099-DIV with a
stricted stock is stock that you get from yourule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc- Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of
employer for services you perform and that istions, whichever applies. Enter qualifiedU.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-
nontransferable and subject to a substantial riskdividends on line 2 of the worksheet. nue Service Center by February 28, 2005. Give
of forfeiture. You do not have to include the the actual owner of the dividends Copy B of theInvestment interest deducted.If you claimvalue of the stock in your income when you Form 1099-DIV by January 31, 2005. On Forma deduction for investment interest, you mayreceive it. However, if you get dividends on re- 1099-DIV, you should be listed as the “Payer.”have to reduce the amount of your qualifiedstricted stock, you must include them in your The other owner should be listed as the “Recipi-dividends that are eligible for the 5% or 15% taxincome as wages, not dividends. See Restricted ent.” You do not, however, have to file a Formrate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi-Property in Publication 525 for information on 1099-DIV to show payments for your spouse.dends you choose to include in investment in-restricted stock dividends. For more information about the reporting re-come when figuring the limit on your investmentYour employer should include these divi- quirements and the penalties for failure to file (orinterest deduction. This is done on the Qualifieddends in the wages shown on your Form W-2. If furnish) certain information returns, see theDividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet oryou also get a Form 1099-DIV for these divi- General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor-dends, list them on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), 5498, and W-2G.mation about the limit on investment interest,line 5, or Schedule B (Form 1040), line 5, with
see Interest Expenses in chapter 3. Liquidating distributions.If you receive athe other dividends you received. Enter a sub-
liquidating distribution on stock, the corporationtotal of all your dividend income several lines
will give you a Form 1099-DIV showing theCapital gain distributions.How to reportabove line 6. Below the subtotal, enter “Divi-
amount of the liquidating distribution in boxes 8capital gain distributions depends on whetherdends on restricted stock reported as wages on
and 9.you have any other capital gains or losses. If youForm 1040 (or Form 1040A), line 7,” and enter
do, report total capital gain distributions (box 2athe amount of the dividends included in your
of Form 1099-DIV) on Schedule D (Form 1040),wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Part II, line 13. If you do not have any otherSubtract this amount from the subtotal and enter
capital gains or losses, you may be able toStrippedthe result on line 6.
report your capital gain distributions directly on
Election. You can choose to include the Preferred StockForm 1040, line 13, or Form 1040A, line 10. In
value of restricted stock in gross income as payeither case, see Reporting Capital Gains and
for services. If you make this choice, report the  If the dividend rights are stripped from certainLosses in chapter 4 for more information.
dividends on the stock like any other dividends. preferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre-The mutual fund or real estate investmentList them on Part II, line 5, of Schedule 1 or ferred stock may have to include amounts intrust (REIT) making the distribution should tellSchedule B, along with your other dividends (if income equal to the amounts that would haveyou how much of it is:the amount of ordinary dividends received from been included if the stock were a bond with
all sources is more than $1,500). If you receive• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2b),original issue discount (OID).
both a Form 1099-DIV and a Form W-2 showing or
Stripped preferred stock defined.Strippedthese dividends, do not include the dividends in• Section 1202 gain (box 2c). preferred stock is any stock that meets both ofyour wages reported on line 7 of Form 1040 or
the following tests.Form 1040A. Attach a statement to your FormFor information about these terms, see Capital
1040 or Form 1040A explaining why the amountGain Tax Rates in chapter 4. 1. There has been a separation in ownershipshown on line 7 of your Form 1040 or Form Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Sectionbetween the stock and any dividend on the1040A is different from the amount shown on1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-stock that has not become payable.your Form W-2. tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured2. The stock:Independent contractor.If you received section 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualified
restricted stock for services as an independentsmall business stock (section 1202 gain), followa. Is limited and preferred as to dividends,
contractor, the rules in the previous discussionthe reporting instructions under Section 1202
b. Does not participate in corporate growthapply. Generally, you must treat dividends youExclusion in chapter 4.
to any significant extent, andreceive on the stock as income from self-em-
ployment. Nondividend distributions.Report nondivi- c. Has a fixed redemption price.
dend distributions (box 3 of Form 1099-DIV)Qualified dividends.Report qualified divi-only after your basis in the stock has been re-dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b of Treatment of buyer.If you buy stripped pre-duced to zero. After the basis of your stock hasForm 1040 or Form 1040A. Do not include any ferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in-been reduced to zero, you must show thisof the following on line 9b. clude certain amounts in your gross incomeamount on Schedule D, Part I, line 1, if you heldwhile you hold the stock. These amounts arethe stock 1 year or less. Show it on Schedule D,• Qualified dividends you received as a ordinary income. They are equal to the amountsPart II, line 8, if you held the stock for more thannominee. See Nominees later. you would have included in gross income if the1 year. Enter “Nondividend Distribution Exceed-• Dividends on stock for which you did not stock were a bond that:ing Basis” in column (a) of Schedule D and themeet the holding period. See Holding pe- name of the company. Report your gain in col-1. Was issued on the purchase date of theriod, earlier under Qualified Dividends. umn (f). Your gain is the amount of the distribu-stock, andtion that is more than your basis in the stock.• Dividends on any share of stock to the
2. Has OID equal to:extent that you are obligated (whether
Nominees. If you received ordinary dividendsunder a short sale or otherwise) to make a. The redemption price for the stock, mi-as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in yourrelated payments for positions in substan- nusname but actually belong to someone else),tially similar or related property.
include them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (Form b. The price at which you bought the• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Several stock.you know or have reason to know that thelines above line 6, put a subtotal of all dividendpayments are not qualified dividends.income listed on line 5. Below this subtotal, enter Report these amounts as other income on
• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box “Nominee Distribution” and show the amount Form 1040, line 21. For information about OID,
1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent received as a nominee. Subtract the total of your see Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier.
you know or have reason to know the pay- nominee distributions from the subtotal. Enter This treatment also applies to you if you
ments are not qualified dividends. the result on line 6. acquire the stock in such a way (for example, by
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sale or exchange of a regular interest.gift) that your basis in the stock is determined byForms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should
Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of ausing a buyer’s basis. receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form
REMIC regular interest may be ordinary income.1099-OID from the REMIC. You will also receiveTreatment of person stripping stock.If you The ordinary income part, if any, is:a written statement by March 15, 2005 (if youstrip the rights to one or more dividends fromare a calendar year taxpayer), that providesstripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav- • The amount that would have been in-additional information. The statement shoulding purchased the stock. You are treated as cluded in your income if the yield to matur-contain enough information to enable you tomaking the purchase on the date you disposed ity on the regular interest had been 110%figure your accrual of market discount or amor-of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the of the applicable federal rate at the begin-tizable bond premium.stripped preferred stock is treated as your ning of your holding period, minusForm 1099-INT shows the amount of interestpurchase price. The rules described in Treat- • The amount you included in your income.income that accrued to you for the period youment of buyer, earlier, apply to you. held the regular interest.
Form 1099-OID shows the amount of OID Residual Interestand interest, if any, that accrued to you for the
period you held the regular interest. You will notA residual interest is an interest in a REMIC thatREMICs, FASITs, need to make any adjustments to the amountsis not a regular interest. It is designated as a
reported even if you held the regular interest forresidual interest by the REMIC.and Other CDOs
only a part of the calendar year. However, if youIf you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC,
bought the regular interest at a premium or ac-Holders of interests in real estate mortgage in- you must take into account, on a quarterly basis,quisition premium, see Refiguring OID shown onvestment conduits (REMICs), financial asset your daily portion of the taxable income or netForm 1099-OID under Original Issue Discountsecuritization investment trusts (FASITs), and loss of the REMIC for each day during the tax(OID), earlier.other collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) year that you hold the residual interest. You
must follow special rules for reporting income must report these amounts as ordinary incomeYou may not get a Form 1099. Corpora-and any expenses from these investment prod- or loss.tions and other persons specified in Regulationsucts.
section 1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 1099.Basis in the residual interest.Your basis inThese persons and fiscal year taxpayers mayREMICs the residual interest is increased by the amountobtain tax information by contacting the REMICof taxable income you take into account. Youror the issuer of the CDO, if they hold their inter-A real estate mortgage investment conduit basis is decreased (but not below zero) by theest directly from the REMIC or issuer of the(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the pur- amount of cash or the fair market value of anyCDO. Publication 938, Real Estate Mortgagepose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages se- property distributed to you, and by the amount ofInvestment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Infor-cured by interests in real property. A REMIC any net loss you have taken into account. If youmation, explains how to request this information.issues regular and residual interests to inves- sell your residual interest, you must adjust your
tors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is generally Publication 938 is available only on thebasis to reflect your share of the REMIC’s tax-
treated as a partnership with the residual inter-Internet at www.irs.gov. able income or net loss immediately before the
est holders treated as the partners. The regular sale. See Wash Sales, in chapter 4, for more
interests are treated as debt instruments. information about selling a residual interest.
REMIC income or loss is not income or lossIf you hold a regular interest or CDO throughfrom a passive activity. Treatment of distributions.You must in-a nominee (rather than directly), you can re-For more information about the qualifications clude in your gross income the part of any distri-quest the information from the nominee.and the tax treatment that apply to a REMIC and bution that is more than your adjusted basis.the interests of investors in a REMIC, see sec- Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale orAllocated investment expenses.Regular in-tions 860A through 860G of the Internal Reve- exchange of your residual interest.terest holders in a REMIC may be allowed tonue Code, and the regulations under those
deduct the REMIC’s investment expenses, butsections. Schedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residualonly if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. A
interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Formsingle-class REMIC is one that generally would
1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interestbe classified as a trust for tax purposes if it hadRegular Interest Holder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Lossnot elected REMIC status.
Allocation, and instructions from the REMICA REMIC can have several classes (also knownThe single-class REMIC will report your
each quarter. Schedule Q will indicate youras “tranches”) of regular interests. A regularshare of its investment expenses in box 5 of
share of the REMIC’s quarterly taxable incomeinterest unconditionally entitles the holder to re-Form 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. It
(or loss). Do not attach the Schedule Q to yourceive a specified principal amount (or other simi-will also include this amount in box 1 of Form
tax return. Keep it for your records.lar amount). 1099-INT or box 2 of Form 1099-OID, and on the
A REMIC regular interest is treated as a debt Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV, toadditional written statement.
instrument for income tax purposes. Accord- report your total share of the REMIC’s taxableYou may be able to take a deduction foringly, the OID, market discount, and income income (or loss) for each quarter included inthese expenses subject to a 2% limit that alsoreporting rules that apply to bonds and other your tax year.applies to certain other miscellaneous itemizeddebt instruments as described earlier in this For more information about reporting yourdeductions. See chapter 3 for more information.publication under Discount on Debt Instruments income (or loss) from a residual interest in a
apply, with certain modifications discussed be- REMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) andRedemption of regular interests at maturity.low. Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions.Redemption of debt instruments at their maturityGenerally, you report your income from ais treated as a sale or exchange. You mustregular interest on Form 1040, line 8a. For morereport redemptions on your tax return whether orExpenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-information on how to report interest and OID,not you realize gain or loss on the transaction.gross-income limit, you may be able to claim asee How To Report Interest Income, earlier. Your basis is your adjusted issue price, whichmiscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or-
includes any OID you previously reported indinary and necessary expenses that you paid orHolders must use accrual method.Holders
income. incurred in connection with your investment in aof regular interests must use an accrual method
REMIC. These expenses may include certainAny amount that you receive on the retire-of accounting to report OID and interest income.
expense items incurred by the REMIC andment of a debt instrument is treated in the sameBecause income under an accrual method is not
passed through to you. The REMIC will reportway as if you had sold or exchanged that instru-determined by the receipt of cash, you may have
these expenses to you on Schedule Q, line 3b.ment. A debt instrument is retired when it isto include OID or interest income in your taxable
See chapter 3 for information on how to reportreacquired or redeemed by the issuer and can-income even if you have not received any cash
these expenses.celed.payments.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information about FASITs, see on your return. See Publication 925 for moreCollateralized Debt
sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev- information.Obligations (CDOs) enue Code.
A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a debtBeginning January 1, 2005, the special
instrument, other than a REMIC regular interest,rules for FASITs are repealed. How-Investment Clubsthat is secured by a pool of mortgages or other ever, the special rules still apply to anyCAUTION
!
evidence of debt and that has principal pay-FASIT in existence on October 22, 2004, to theAn investment club is formed when a group ofments that are subject to acceleration. (Note:extent that regular interests issued by the FASITfriends, neighbors, business associates, orWhile REMIC regular interests are collateralizedbefore that date continue to remain outstandingothers pool their money to invest in stock ordebt obligations, they have unique rules that doin accordance with the original terms of issu-other securities. The club may or may not have anot apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs,ance. written agreement, a charter, or bylaws.also known as “pay-through bonds,” are com-
Usually the group operates informally withmonly divided into different classes (also called
members pledging to pay a regular amount into“tranches”).
the club monthly. Some clubs have a committeeCDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-S Corporations that gathers information on securities, selectsgages, automobile loans, equipment leases, or
the most promising securities, and recommendscredit card receivables. In general, an S corporation does not pay a taxthat the club invest in them. Other clubs rotateFor more information about the qualificationson its income. Instead, its income and expensesthese responsibilities among all their members.and the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of aare passed through to the shareholders, whoMost clubs require all members to vote for orCDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internalthen report these items on their own income taxagainst all investments, sales, trades, and otherRevenue Code and the regulations under thatreturns. transactions.section. If you are an S corporation shareholder, your
The OID, market discount, and income-re- Identifying number.Each club must have anshare of the corporation’s current year income
porting rules that apply to bonds and other debt employer identification number (EIN) to useor loss and other tax items are taxed to you
instruments, as described earlier in this chapter when filing its return. The club’s EIN also maywhether or not you receive any amount. Gener-
under Discount on Debt Instruments, also apply have to be given to the payer of dividends orally, those items increase or decrease the basis
to a CDO. other income from investments recorded in theof your S corporation stock as appropriate. For
You must include interest income from your club’s name. To obtain an EIN, first get Formmore information on basis adjustments for S
CDO in your gross income under your regular SS-4, Application for Employer Identificationcorporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds under
method of accounting. Also include any OID Number, from the Internal Revenue Service orBasis of Investment Property in chapter 4.
accrued on your CDO during the tax year. your nearest Social Security Administration of-Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-
fice. See chapter 5 of this publication for moreGenerally, you report your income from acept dividend distributions, are considered a re-
information about how to get this form.CDO on Form 1040, line 8a. For more informa-turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stock
tion about reporting these amounts on your re-of the corporation. The part of any distributionInvestments in name of member. Whenturn, see How To Report Interest Income, that is more than your basis is treated as a gainan investment is recorded in the name of oneearlier. from the sale or exchange of property. Theclub member, this member must give his or her
corporation’s distributions may be in the form ofsocial security number (SSN) to the payer ofForms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should cash or property. investment income. (When an investment isreceive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form S corporation distributions are not treated asheld in the names of two or more club members,1099-OID. You will also receive a written state-dividends except in certain cases in which thethe SSN of only one member must be given toment by March 15, 2005, that provides addi-corporation has accumulated earnings and prof-the payer.) This member is considered as thetional information. The statement should containits from years before it became an S corporation.record owner for the actual owner, the invest-enough information about the CDO to enable ment club. This member is a “nominee” andReporting S corporation income, deduc-you to figure your accrual of market discount or must file an information return with the IRS. Fortions, and credits.The S corporation shouldamortizable bond premium. example, the nominee member must file Formsend you a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interest 1099-DIV for dividend income, showing the clubshowing your share of the S corporation’s in-income paid to you for the period you held the as the owner of the dividend, his or her SSN,come, credits, and deductions for the tax year.CDO. and the EIN of the club.You must report your distributive share of the SForm 1099-OID shows the amount of OID
corporation’s income, gain, loss, deductions, oraccrued to you and the interest, if any, paid to Tax Treatment of the Clubcredits on the appropriate lines and schedules ofyou for the period you held the CDO. You should
your Form 1040.not need to make any adjustments to the Generally, an investment club is treated as aFor more information about your treatment ofamounts reported even if you held the CDO for partnership for federal tax purposes unless itS corporation tax items, see Shareholder’s In-only a part of the calendar year. However, if you chooses otherwise. In some situations, how-structions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).bought the CDO at a premium or acquisition ever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust.premium, see Refiguring OID shown on Form Limit on losses and deductions.The de-
Clubs formed before 1997.Before 1997, the1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID), duction for your share of losses and deductions
rules for determining how an investment club isearlier. shown on Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) is limited
treated were different from those explained inIf you did not receive a Form 1099, see You to the adjusted basis of your stock and any debt
the following discussions. An investment clubmay not get a Form 1099 under REMICs , earlier.the corporation owes you. Any loss or deduction
that existed before 1997 is treated for later yearsnot allowed because of this limit is carried over
the same way it was treated before 1997, unlessand treated as a loss or deduction in the next taxFASITs it chooses to be treated a different way under theyear.
new rules. To make that choice, the club mustA financial asset securitization investment trustPassive activity losses.Rules apply thatfile Form 8832, Entity Classification Election.(FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt obliga-limit losses from passive activities. Your copy oftions such as credit card receivables, home eq-Schedule K-1 and its instructions will explain theuity loans, and automobile loans. limits and tell you where on your return to reportClub as a PartnershipA regular interest in a FASIT is treated as ayour share of S corporation items from passivedebt instrument. The rules described under Col- If your club is not taxed as a corporation or aactivities.lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap- trust, it will be treated as a partnership.ply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that aForm 8582. If you have a passive activity
holder of a regular interest in a FASIT must useloss from an S corporation, you must completeFiling requirement.If your investment club is
an accrual method of accounting to report OIDForm 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, to treated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065.
and interest income. figure the amount of the allowable loss to enter However, as a partner in the club, you must
Page 26 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 27 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
report on your individual return your share of the partnership’s activities are limited to investing in ported on Form 1099-DIV if total distributions to
club’s income, gains, losses, deductions, andsavings certificates, stock, or securities, and col-the shareholder are $10 or more for the year.
credits for the club’s tax year. (Its tax year gener-lecting interest or dividends for its members’You must report any distributions that youally must be the same tax year as that of theaccounts, a member’s share of income is notreceive from the club on your individual return.partners owning a majority interest.) You mustearnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-You should receive a copy of Form 1099-DIVreport these items whether or not you actuallyuntarily pay the self-employment tax to increasefrom the club showing the distributions you re-receive any distribution from the partnership.your social security coverage and ultimate bene-ceived.fits.Schedule K-1. You should receive a copy of Some corporations can choose not to beSchedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner’s Share of taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the part- ers. See S Corporations, earlier.Club as a Corporationnership. The amounts shown on Schedule K-1
For more information about corporations,are your share of the partnership’s income, de-An investment club formed after 1996 is taxedductions, and credits. Report each amount on see Publication 542, Corporations.as a corporation if: the appropriate lines and schedules of your in-
come tax return. 1. It is formed under a federal or state lawThe club’s expenses for producing or collect- Club as a Trustthat refers to it as incorporated or as aing income, for managing investment property,corporation, body corporate, or body poli-In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as aor for determining any tax are listed separatelytic, trust. In general, a trust is an arrangementon Schedule K-1. Each individual partner who
through which trustees take title to property foritemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)2. It is formed under a state law that refers to
the purpose of protecting or conserving it for thecan deduct his or her share of those expenses.it as a joint-stock company or joint-stock
The expenses are listed on Schedule A, line 22, beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied inassociation, or
along with other miscellaneous deductions sub- chancery or probate courts. An arrangement is3. It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.ject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3 for more treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purpose
information on the 2% limit. is to vest in trustees responsibility for protecting
For more information about reporting yourChoosing to be taxed as a corporation.To and conserving property for beneficiaries whoincome from a partnership, see the Schedulechoose to be taxed as a corporation, the clubcannot share in that responsibility and so are notK-1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, Part-cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) orassociates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofnerships. otherwise subject to special treatment under thebusiness for profit. If you need more information
tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to makePassive activity losses.Rules apply that about trusts, see Regulations section
limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of the choice. 301.7701-4.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and its instructions
will tell you where on your return to report yourFiling requirement.If your club is taxed as aFiling requirement.If your club is taxed as ashare of partnership items from passive activi-corporation, it must file Form 1120 (or Formtrust, it must file Form 1041. You should receiveties. If you have a passive activity loss from a1120-A). In that case, you do not report any of its
a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) from thepartnership, you must complete Form 8582 toincome or expenses on your individual return.
trust. Report the amounts shown on Schedulefigure the amount of the allowable loss to enterAll ordinary income and expenses and capital
on your tax return. K-1 on the appropriate lines and schedules ofgains and losses must be reported on the Form
your income tax return.1120 (or Form 1120-A). Any distribution the clubNo social security coverage for investment
makes that qualifies as a dividend must be re-club earnings. If an investment club
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 27

Page 28 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rules To Curb
Abusive Tax SheltersAbusive Tax Shelters2. Congress has enacted a series of income taxAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive taxthat involve artificial transactions with little or no
shelters. These provisions include the following.economic reality. They often make use of un-
realistic allocations, inflated appraisals, lossesTax Shelters and 1. Passive activity loss and credit limits.in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis- The passive activity loss and credit rules
matching of income and deductions, financinglimit the amount of losses and credits thatOther techniques that do not conform to standard com-can be claimed from passive activities and
mercial business practices, or the mis-charac-limit the amount that can offset nonpassive
terization of the substance of the transaction.income, such as certain portfolio incomeReportable
Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax-from investments. For more detailed infor-
payer generally risks little. mation about determining and reporting in-
Transactions come, losses, and credits from passiveAbusive tax shelters commonly involve
activities, see Publication 925.package deals that are designed from the start
to generate losses, deductions, or credits that2. Registration requirements for tax shel-
will be far more than present or future invest-Introduction ters. Generally, before October 23, 2004,
ment. Or, they may promise investors from thethe organizers of certain tax shelters wereInvestments that yield tax benefits are some-start that future inflated appraisals will enablerequired to register the shelter with thetimes called “tax shelters.” In some cases, Con-them, for example, to reap charitable contribu-IRS. The IRS then assigned the tax sheltergress has concluded that the loss of revenue is a registration number. If you are an inves-tion deductions based on those appraisals. (Butan acceptable side effect of special tax provi- tor in a tax shelter that was required to besee the appraisal requirements discussed undersions designed to encourage taxpayers to make registered, the seller (or the transferor)Rules To Curb Abusive Tax Shelters, later.)certain types of investments. In many cases, must provide you with the tax shelter regis-They are commonly marketed in terms of thehowever, losses from tax shelters produce little tration number at the time of sale (or trans-ratio of tax deductions allegedly available toor no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are fer) or within 20 days after the seller oreach dollar invested. This ratio (or “write-off”) isexaggerated beyond those intended. Those transferor receives the number if that datefrequently said to be several times greater thancases are called “abusive tax shelters.” An in- is later. See Investor Reporting, later, forone-to-one.vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub- more information about reporting this num-ject to restrictions, including the requirementBecause there are many abusive tax shel- ber when filing your tax return.that it be registered, as discussed later, unless itters, it is not possible to list all the factors you
is a “projected income investment” (defined 3. Disclosure of reportable transactions.should consider in determining whether an offer-
later). You must disclose information for each re-ing is an abusive tax shelter. However, you
portable transaction in which you partici-should ask the following questions, which might
pate. See Reportable TransactionTopics provide a clue to the abusive nature of the plan.Disclosure Statement later.This chapter discusses:
Material advisors with respect to any re-• Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-
portable transaction must disclose informa-nomic benefits?• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter,
tion about the transaction on Form 8264
• Is this a transaction you would seriously• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax according to the interim guidance provided
consider, apart from the tax benefits, if youshelters, in Notice 2004-80, which is on page 963 of
hoped to make a profit? Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-50 available• Investors’ reporting requirements, and
at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-50.pdf.• Do shelter assets really exist and, if so,• Penalties that may apply. This requirement applies to material advi-are they insured for less than their
sors who provide material aid, assistance,purchase price? or advice on any reportable transaction afterUseful Items • Is there a nontax justification for the wayOctober 22, 2004.You may want to see: profits and losses are allocated to part-4. Requirement to maintain list. Materialners? advisors must maintain a list of persons toPublication
• Do the facts and supporting documents whom they provide material aid, assis-
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods make economic sense? In that connec- tance, or advice on any reportable transac-
tion after October 22, 2004. Beforetion, are there sales and resales of the tax❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal
October 23, 2004, organizers and sellersshelter property at ever increasing prices?Rights, and Claims for Refund
who acted as material advisors with re-• Does the investment plan involve a gim-❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated spect to any potentially abusive tax sheltermick, device, or sham to hide the eco-Property (including a reportable transaction, dis-nomic reality of the transaction? cussed later) were required to maintain a❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
list of persons involved in the tax shelter.• Does the promoter offer to backdate docu-
The list must be available for inspection byments after the close of the year? Are youForm (and Instructions)
the IRS, and the information required to beinstructed to backdate checks covering
❏ 8271 Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter included on the list generally must be keptyour investment?
Registration Number for 7 years. See Regulations section
• Is your debt a real debt or are you assured301.6112-1 for more information.❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement by the promoter that you will never have to
5. Confidentiality privilege. The confidenti-pay it?❏ 8275-R Regulation Disclosure Statement ality privilege between you and a federally
• Does this transaction involve laundering❏ 8886 Reportable Transaction Disclosure authorized tax practitioner does not apply
United States source income through for-Statement to written communications made after Oc-
eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha-tober 21, 2004, regarding the promotion of
See chapter 5 for information about getting ven and owned by United States your direct or indirect participation in any
these publications and forms. shareholders? tax shelter.
Page 28 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 29 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. Appraisal requirement for donated prop-3. Videotapes,
Internal Revenue Serviceerty. Generally, if you donate property val-4. Lithograph plates, LM:PFTG:OTSAued at more than $5,000 ($10,000 in the
5. Copyrights, Large & Mid-Size Business Divisioncase of privately traded stock), you must get
1111 Constitution Avenue, NWa written qualified appraisal of the property’s6. Literary, musical, or artistic compositions,Washington, DC 20224fair market value and attach an appraisalorsummary to your income tax return. The
7. Collectibles (such as works of art, rugs,appraisal must be done by a qualified ap- If you fail to file Form 8886 as required or fail
antiques, metals, gems, stamps, coins, orpraiser who is not the taxpayer, a party to a to include any required information on the form,
alcoholic beverages).transaction in which the taxpayer acquired you may have to pay a penalty. See Penalty for
the property, the donee, or an employee or failure to disclose a reportable transaction laterTax shelters that qualify as projected incomerelated party of any of the preceding per- under Penalties.investments are not subject to the registrationsons. (Related parties are defined under The following discussion briefly describes re-requirement for tax shelters, described earlier.portable transactions. For more details, see theRelated Party Transactions in chapter 4.)However, the requirement to maintain a list thatinstructions for Form 8886.For more information about appraisals, seeis in effect for tax shelters also applies to anyPublication 561. projected income investment. See Requirement Reportable transaction.Note. The following rule changes apply toto maintain list, earlier. A reportable transaction is any of the follow-property donated after June 3, 2004. ing.A tax shelter that previously qualified as a
projected income investment may later be dis-• A listed transaction.a. The rule in (6) above does not apply toqualified if, in one of its first 5 years, it reducesdonations of inventory or publicly traded • A confidential transaction.the cumulative tax liability of any investor. In thatsecurities. case, the tax shelter becomes subject to the• A transaction with contractual protection.registration rules for tax shelters, described ear-b. If the value of the property you donated
• Loss transactions in excess of certainlier.(other than inventory or publicly traded
amounts.securities) is more than $500,000, you
must attach the qualified appraisal to • Transactions with a significant book-taxAuthority for Disallowance of Taxyour tax return. difference.Benefits
• Transactions with a brief asset holding pe-7. Interest on penalties. If you are assessed
The IRS has published guidance concluding thatriod. This category includes transactionsan accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty
the claimed tax benefits of various abusive taxthat result in your claiming a tax credit(as discussed under Penalties, later), inter-
shelters should be disallowed. The guidance is(including a foreign tax credit) of moreest will be imposed on the amount of the
the conclusion of the IRS on how the law is than $250,000 if the asset giving rise topenalty from the due date of the return
applied to a particular set of facts. Guidance isthe credit was held by you for 45 days or(including any extensions) to the date you
published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin forless.pay the penalty.
taxpayers’ information and also for use by IRS
8. Accounting method restriction. Tax officials. So, if your return is examined and anListed transaction.A listed transaction is a
shelters generally cannot use the cashabusive tax shelter is identified and challenged,transaction that is the same as or substantially
method of accounting. published guidance dealing with that type ofsimilar to one of the types of transactions that
shelter, which disallows certain claimed taxthe IRS has determined to be a tax-avoidance9. Uniform capitalization rules. The uniform
shelter benefits, could serve as the basis for the transaction. These transactions have been iden-capitalization rules generally apply to pro-
tified in notices, regulations, and other publishedexamining official’s challenge of the tax benefitsducing property or acquiring it for resale.
guidance issued by the IRS. For a list of existingthat you claimed. In such a case, the examinerUnder those rules, the direct cost and part
guidance, see the instructions for Form 8886.will not compromise even if you or your repre-of the indirect cost of the property must be
sentative believes that you have authority for thecapitalized or included in inventory. For Confidential transaction.A confidentialpositions taken on your tax return.more information, see Publication 538. transaction is one that is offered to you under
conditions of confidentiality and for which youThe courts have generally been un-10. Denial of deduction for interest on an
have paid an advisor a minimum fee. A transac-sympathetic to taxpayers involved inunderpayment due to a reportable
tion is offered under conditions of confidentialityabusive tax shelter schemes and haveCAUTION
!
transaction. You cannot deduct any inter-
if the advisor who is paid the fee places a limit onruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of theest you paid or accrued on any part of an
the disclosure of the tax treatment or tax struc-cases in which these shelters have been chal-underpayment of tax due to an understate-
ture on you and the limit protects the advisor’slenged.ment arising from a reportable transaction
tax strategies. The transaction is treated as con-(discussed later) if the relevant facts affect-
fidential even if the conditions of confidentialitying the tax treatment of the item are notInvestor Reporting are not legally binding on you.adequately disclosed. This rule applies to
reportable transactions entered into in taxYou may be required to provide the followingTransaction with contractual protection.
years beginning after October 22, 2004.information. Generally, a transaction with contractual protec-
tion is a transaction in which you or a related
1. Reportable transaction disclosure state-party has the right to a full or partial refund of
ment. fees if all or part of the intended tax conse-Projected Income Investment
quences of the transaction are not sustained, or2. Tax shelter registration number.
a transaction for which the fees are contingentSpecial rules apply to a projected income invest-
on your realizing the tax benefits from the trans-ment. To qualify as a projected income invest-
action.ment, a tax shelter must not be expected toReportable Transaction Disclosurereduce the cumulative tax liability of any investor Loss transactions.For individuals, a lossStatementduring any year of the first 5 years ending after transaction is any transaction that results in athe date the investment was offered for sale. InUse Form 8886 to disclose information for eachclaimed loss of at least $2 million in a single taxaddition, the assets of a projected income in-reportable transaction in which you participated.year or $4 million in any combination of taxvestment must not include or relate to more thanGenerally, you must attach Form 8886 to youryears. If the loss is from a foreign currencyan incidental interest in: return for each year that your tax liability istransaction under Internal Revenue Code sec-
affected by your participation in the transaction.tion 988, the loss must be at least $50,000 in a1. Master sound recordings, In addition, for the first year Form 8886 is at-single tax year, whether or not the loss flows
2. Motion picture or television films, tached to your return, you must send a copy to:through from an S corporation or partnership.
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable TransactionsPage 29

Page 30 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Certain losses (such as losses from casual- tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly a could cause a substantial understatement of in-
ties, thefts, and condemnations) are excepted 20% or 30% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75% come tax. In that way, you can avoid the sub-
from this category and do not have to be re- civil fraud penalty. You may also be subject to stantial understatement penalty if you have a
ported on Form 8886. For information on other the penalty for failure to pay tax. These penalties reasonable basis for your position on the tax
exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2003-24 in are explained in the following paragraphs. issue. Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a tax
Internal Revenue Bulletin 2003-11. This Internal return does not reduce the amount of the under-
Accuracy-related penalties.An accuracy-Revenue Bulletin is available at www.irs.gov/ statement.
related penalty of 20% can be imposed for un-pub/irs-irbs/irb03-11.pdf. Also, the understatement penalty will not be
derpayments of tax due to: imposed if you can show that there was reason-Transactions with a significant book-tax able cause for the underpayment caused by thedifference.This category includes transac-1. Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-understatement and that you acted in good faith.tions that result in book-tax differences of moretions, An important factor in establishing reasonablethan $10 million in any tax year. The book-tax cause and good faith will be the extent of your2. Substantial understatement of tax, ordifference is the amount by which the amount of effort to determine your proper tax liability underany income, gain, expense, or loss item from the3. Substantial valuation misstatement. the law.transaction for federal income tax purposes dif-
This penalty will not be imposed if you can showfers on a gross basis from the amount of the item Valuation misstatement.In general, youthat you had reasonable cause for any under-for book purposes for any tax year. are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantialstatement of tax and that you acted in good faith.valuation misstatement if all of the following areYour failure to disclose a reportable transactiontrue.is a strong indication that you failed to act inTax Shelter Registration Number
good faith. 1. The value or adjusted basis of any prop-
If you include on your tax return any deduction,If you are charged an accuracy-related pen-erty claimed on the return is 200% or more
loss, credit or other tax benefit, or any income,alty, interest will be imposed on the amount ofof the correct amount.
from an interest in a tax shelter required to bethe penalty from the due date of the return (in-2. You underpaid your tax by more thanregistered, you must report the registration num-cluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen-$5,000 because of the misstatement.ber that the tax shelter provided to you. (Seealty.
Registration requirements for tax shelters, ear- 3. You cannot establish that you had reason-Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-lier.) Complete and attach Form 8271 to your able cause for the underpayment and thattions. The penalty for negligence or disregardreturn to report the number and to provide other you acted in good faith.of rules or regulations is imposed only on theinformation about the tax shelter and its bene-part of the underpayment that is due to negli-The 20% penalty does not apply to any un-fits. You must also attach Form 8271 to anygence or disregard of rules or regulations. Thederstatement that is subject to the accuracy-re-application for tentative refund (Form 1045) andpenalty will not be charged if you can show thatlated penalty for a reportable transactionto any amended return (Form 1040X) on whichyou had reasonable cause for understating yourunderstatement (discussed later).these benefits are claimed or income is re-tax and that you acted in good faith. You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for aported. If you do not include the registration Negligence includes any failure to make agross valuation misstatement. If you misstatenumber with your return, you will be subject to areasonable attempt to comply with the provi-the value or the adjusted basis of property bypenalty of $250 for each such failure, unless thesions of the Internal Revenue Code. It also in-400% or more of the amount determined to befailure is due to reasonable cause. cludes any failure to keep adequate books andcorrect, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%,
Transfer of interests in a tax shelter.If you records. A return position that has a reasonableinstead of 20%, of the amount you underpaid
hold an investment interest in a tax shelter andbasis is not negligence. because of the gross valuation misstatement.
later transfer that interest to another person, youDisregard includes any careless, reckless, or The penalty rate is also 40% if the property’s
must provide the tax shelter’s registration num-intentional disregard of rules or regulations. correct value or adjusted basis is zero.
ber to each person to whom you transferred yourThe penalty for disregard of rules and regula-Penalty for failure to disclose a reportableinterest. (However, this does not apply if yourtions can be avoided if all of the following aretransaction.For returns or statements due af-interest is in a projected income investment,true. ter October 22, 2004, if you fail to include anydescribed earlier.) You must also provide a• You keep adequate books and records. required information regarding a reportablestatement substantially in the following form:
transaction (discussed earlier) on a return or• You have a reasonable basis for your po-You have acquired an interest in [name and statement, you may have to pay a penalty. Thesition on the tax issue.address of tax shelter] whose taxpayer amount of the penalty is $10,000 if you are anidentification number is [if any]. The Internal• You make an adequate disclosure of yourindividual, or $50,000 if you are not. In the caseRevenue Service has issued [name of tax shelter]
position. of a listed transaction, the amount of the penaltythe following tax shelter registration number:
is $100,000 if you are an individual, or $200,000[number]. You must report this registration Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure, and
number to the Internal Revenue Service, if you if you are not. This penalty applies whether orattach it to your tax return. To disclose a positionclaim any deduction, loss, credit, or other tax not there is an understatement of tax and is incontrary to a regulation, use Form 8275-R. Alsobenefit or report any income by reason of your addition to any other penalty that may be im-use Form 8886 to disclose a reportable transac-investment in [name of tax shelter]. You must posed.tion (discussed earlier).report the registration number (as well as the The Internal Revenue Service may rescindname and taxpayer identification number of [nameSubstantial understatement of tax.An or abate the penalty for failing to disclose aof tax shelter]) on Form 8271. Form 8271 must beunderstatement is considered to be substantial ifreportable transaction under certain limited cir-attached to the return on which you claim the
it is more than the greater of: cumstances, but cannot rescind the penalty fordeduction, loss, credit, or other tax benefit or
failing to disclose a listed transaction.report any income. Issuance of a registration
1. 10% of the tax required to be shown on thenumber does not indicate that this investment or
return, or Accuracy-related penalty for a reportablethe claimed tax benefits have been reviewed,
transaction understatement.For tax yearsexamined, or approved by the Internal Revenue2. $5,000.Service. ending after October 22, 2004, if you have a
An “understatement” is the amount of tax re-reportable transaction understatement, you may
quired to be shown on your return for a tax yearhave to pay a penalty equal to 20% of thePenalties
minus the amount of tax shown on the return,amount of that understatement. This applies to
reduced by any rebates. The term “rebate” gen-Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be an any item due to a listed transaction or other
erally means a decrease in the tax shown onexpensive proposition when you consider all of reportable transaction with a significant purpose
your original return as the result of your filing anthe consequences. First, the promoter generally of avoiding or evading federal income tax. The
amended return or claim for refund.charges a substantial fee. If your return is ex- penalty is 30% rather than 20% for the part of
For other than tax shelters, you can file Formamined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter- any reportable transaction understatement if the
8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose items thatmined, you will be faced with payment of more transaction was not properly disclosed. You may
Page 30 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 31 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not have to pay the 20% penalty if you meet theJoint return.The fraud penalty on a jointWhether To Invest
strengthened reasonable cause and good faithreturn applies to a spouse only if some part of
exception. In light of the adverse tax consequences and thethe underpayment is due to the fraud of that
This penalty does not apply to the part of an substantial amount of penalties and interest thatspouse.
understatement on which the fraud penalty or will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-
gross valuation misstatement penalty is im- lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-
posed. Failure to pay tax.If a deficiency is assessedments carefully and seek competent legal and
financial advice.and is not paid within 10 days of the demand forCivil fraud penalty.If there is any underpay-
payment, an investor can be penalized with upment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penalty
to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to payof 75% of the underpayment will be added to
your tax. continues.
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable TransactionsPage 31

Page 32 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
explained later in this chapter under Expenses Expenses. Do not include in the computa-
tion of your passive activity income or loss:of Producing Income.
1. Expenses (other than interest) that are3. At-risk rules.Special at-risk rules apply to clearly and directly allocable to your portfo-most income-producing activities. These ruleslio income, orlimit the amount of loss you can deduct to the
amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally,2. Interest expense properly allocable to port-Investment this is the amount of cash and the adjusted basisfolio income.
of property you contribute to the activity. It alsoHowever, this interest and other expenses mayincludes money you borrow for use in the activityExpenses be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-if you are personally liable for repayment or ifplained in the rest of this chapter.you use property not used in the activity as
security for the loan. For more information, seeAdditional information.For more informa-Terms you may need to know
Publication 925. tion about determining and reporting income(see Glossary):
and losses from passive activities, see Publica-
tion 925.Passive activity losses and credits.TheAt-risk rules amount of losses and tax credits you can claim
from passive activities is limited. Generally, youPassive activity
are allowed to deduct passive activity lossesPortfolio income only up to the amount of your passive activityInterest Expenses
income. Also, you can use credits from passive
This section discusses interest expenses youactivities only against tax on the income from
Topics may be able to deduct as an investor.passive activities. There are exceptions for cer-
For information on business interest, seetain activities, such as rental real estate activi-This chapter discusses:
chapter 5 of Publication 535.ties.
You cannot deduct personal interest ex-• Limits on deductions, Passive activity.A passive activity gener-penses other than qualified home mortgage in-• Interest expenses, ally is any activity involving the conduct of any terest, as explained in Publication 936, Hometrade or business in which you do not materiallyMortgage Interest Deduction, and interest on• Bond premium amortization, participate and any rental activity. However, ifcertain student loans, as explained in Publica-• Expenses of producing income, you are involved in renting real estate, the activ-tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education.ity is not a passive activity if both of the following• Nondeductible expenses, and are true. Investment Interest• How to report investment expenses.
1. More than one-half of the personal serv-If you borrow money to buy property you hold forices you perform during the year in allinvestment, the interest you pay is investmentUseful Items trades or businesses are performed in realinterest. You can deduct investment interestYou may want to see: property trades or businesses in which yousubject to the limit discussed later. However,materially participate. you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-Publication
2. You perform more than 750 hours of serv- duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in-
❏ 535 Business Expenses come  under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Norices during the year in real property trades
can you deduct interest expenses on straddles,or businesses in which you materially par-❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.ticipate.
❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and Investment interest does not include anyThe term “trade or business” generally meansDependents qualified home mortgage interest or any interestany activity that involves the conduct of a tradetaken into account in computing income or lossor business, is conducted in anticipation of start-Form (and Instructions) from a passive activity.ing a trade or business, or involves certain re-
Investment property.Property held for in-search or experimental expenditures. However,❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized
vestment includes property that produces inter-it does not include rental activities or certainDeductions
est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derivedactivities treated as incidental to holding prop-❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense in the ordinary course of a trade or business. Iterty for investment.Deduction also includes property that produces gain or lossYou are considered to materially participate
(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade orin an activity if you are involved on a regular,See chapter 5 for information about getting business) from the sale or trade of propertycontinuous, and substantial basis in the opera-these publications and forms. producing these types of income or held fortions of the activity.
investment (other than an interest in a passive
Other income (nonpassive income).Gen- activity). Investment property also includes an
erally, you can use losses from passive activitiesinterest in a trade or business activity in which
only to offset income from passive activities.you did not materially participate (other than aLimits on Deductions
You generally cannot use passive activity lossespassive activity).
to offset your other income, such as your wagesYour deductions for investment expenses may Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.or your portfolio income. Portfolio income in-be limited by: To determine your investment interest, combinecludes gross income from interest, dividends,your share of investment interest from a partner-• The at-risk rules, annuities, or royalties that is not derived in theship, S corporation, estate, or trust with yourordinary course of a trade or business. It also• The passive activity loss limits, other investment interest.includes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-
• The limit on investment interest, or nary course of a trade or business) from the sale
or trade of property (other than an interest in a• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous Allocation of Interest Expensepassive activity) producing portfolio income oritemized deductions.
held for investment. This includes capital gainIf you borrow money for business or personal
distributions from mutual funds and real estateThe at-risk rules and passive activity rules are purposes as well as for investment, you must
investment trusts.explained briefly in this section. The limit on allocate the debt among those purposes. Only
You cannot use passive activity losses toinvestment interest is explained later in this the interest expense on the part of the debt used
offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is for investment purposes is treated as invest-
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ment interest. The allocation is not affected by corporation, then the interest on those fundsInterest not deducted due to limit.In the
the use of property that secures the debt. must be allocated based on the assets of theyear you dispose of the bond, you can deduct
entity. If you contribute to the capital of thethe amount of any interest expense you were not
Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use entity, you can make the allocation using anyallowed to deduct in earlier years because of the
$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 toreasonable method. limit.
buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt Choosing to deduct disallowed interestAdditional allocation rules.For more infor-is used for, and allocated to, investment pur- expense before the year of disposition.Youmation about allocating interest expense, seeposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest- can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-chapter 5 of Publication 535.ment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible pense in any year before the year you dispose ofpersonal interest. the bond, up to your net interest income from the
bond during the year. The rest of the disallowedWhen To DeductDebt proceeds received in cash.If you re-
interest expense remains deductible in the yearceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds areInvestment Interest
you dispose of the bond.generally not treated as investment property.
If you use the cash method of accounting, youNet interest income.This is the interestDebt proceeds deposited in account.If you must pay the interest before you can deduct it.income (including OID) from the bond that youdeposit debt proceeds in an account, that de-If you use an accrual method of accounting,include in income for the year, minus the interestposit is treated as investment property, regard-you can deduct interest over the period it ac-expense paid or accrued during the year toless of whether the account bears interest. But, ifcrues, regardless of when you pay it. For anpurchase or carry the bond.you withdraw the funds and use them for an-exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re-
other purpose, you must reallocate the debt tolated party under When To Report Investment
Limit on interest deduction for short-termdetermine the amount considered to be for in-Expenses, later in this chapter.
obligations.If the current income inclusionvestment purposes.
rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount onExample. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-
Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, theExample 2. Assume in Example 1 that you tember 3, 2004, payable in 90 days at 12%
amount you can deduct for interest expense youborrowed the money on March 1 and immedi-interest. On December 2, 2004, you paid this
paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry aately bought the stock for $8,000. You did notwith a new note for $1,030, due on March 2,
short-term obligation is limited.buy the household items until June 1. You had2005. If you use the cash method of accounting,
deposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no The interest is deductible only to the extent ityou cannot deduct any part of the $30 interest
other transactions on the bank account untilon your return for 2004 because you did not is more than:
June. You did not sell the stock and you madeactually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you
1. The amount of acquisition discount or OIDno principal payments on the debt. You paidmay be able to deduct a portion of the interest on
interest from another account. The $8,000 is on the obligation for the tax year, plusthe loans through December 31, 2004, on your
treated as being used for an investment pur-return for 2004. 2. The amount of any interest payable on thepose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an obligation for the year that is not includedInterest paid in advance.Generally, if youinvestment purpose for the 3-month period. in income because of your accountingpay interest in advance for a period that goesYour total interest expense for 3 months on this method (other than interest taken into ac-beyond the end of the tax year, you must spreaddebt is investment interest. In June, when you count in determining the amount of acqui-the interest over the tax years to which it belongsspend the $2,000 for household items, you must sition discount or OID).under the OID rules discussed in chapter 1. Youbegin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter-
can deduct in each year only the interest for thatest expense to investment purposes and 20% to The method of determining acquisition discount
year.personal purposes. and OID for short-term obligations is discussed
in chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli-Interest on margin accounts.If you are aAmounts paid within 30 days. If you re- gations.cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interestceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-
on margin accounts to buy taxable securities asceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat Interest not deducted due to limit.In the
investment interest in the year you paid it. Youany payment (up to the amount of the proceeds) year you dispose of the obligation, or if you
are considered to have paid interest on thesemade from any account you own, or from cash, choose, in another year in which you have net
accounts only when you actually pay the brokeras made from those proceeds. This applies to interest income from the obligation, you can
or when payment becomes available to the bro-any payment made within 30 days before or deduct the amount of any interest expense you
ker through your account. Payment may be-after the proceeds are received in cash or de- were not allowed to deduct for an earlier year
come available to the broker through yourposited in your account. because of the limit. Follow the same rules pro-
account when the broker collects dividends orIf you received the loan proceeds in cash, vided in the earlier discussion under Limit on
interest for your account, or sells securities heldyou can treat the payment as made on the date interest deduction for market discount bonds,
for you or received from you.you received the cash instead of the date you earlier.
You cannot deduct any interest on moneyactually made the payment.
borrowed for personal reasons. Limit on DeductionPayments on debt may require new alloca-
Limit on interest deduction for market dis-tion. As you repay a debt used for more than Generally, your deduction for investment inter-count bonds. The amount you can deduct forone purpose, you must reallocate the balance. est expense is limited to the amount of your netinterest expense you paid or accrued during theYou must first reduce the amount allocated to investment income.year to buy or carry a market discount bond maypersonal purposes by the repayment. You then
You can carry over the amount of investmentbe limited. This limit does not apply if you accruereallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is
interest that you could not deduct because ofthe market discount and include it in your in-for investment purposes.
this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedcome currently.
over is treated as investment interest paid orUnder this limit, the interest is deductibleExample 3. If, in Example 2, you repay
accrued in that next year.only to the extent it is more than:$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is
You can carry over disallowed investmentapplied against the amount allocated to per-
1. The total interest and OID includible ininterest to the next tax year even if it is more thansonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo-
gross income for the bond for the year,your taxable income in the year the interest wascated as $8,000 for investment purposes, and
plus paid or accrued.$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next
reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷ 2. The market discount for the number of
$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense isdays you held the bond during the year.
Net Investment Incomeallocated to investment.
Figure the amount in (2) above using the rules
Determine the amount of your net investmentPass-through entities.If you use borrowed for figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1
income by subtracting your investment ex-funds to buy an interest in a partnership or S under Market Discount Bonds.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.Total investment income........ $10,000penses (other than interest expense) from your
Minus: Investment expenses (otherIf part of the amount you report is your child’sinvestment income.
than interest)................ 3,200Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part
Net investment income......... $6,800Investment income. This generally includesdoes not count as investment income. To figure
your gross income from property held for invest-the amount of your child’s income that you can
Deductible investment interestment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, andconsider your investment income, start with the
expense for the year........... $6,800royalties). Investment income does not includeamount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also doesamount by a percentage that is equal to theThe $2,000 of income from the passive activ-
not include qualified dividends or net capital gainAlaska Permanent Fund dividends divided byity is not used in determining Ted’s net invest-
unless you choose to include them. the total amount of interest and dividend incomement income. His investment interest deduction
on Form 8814, lines 1a and 2. Subtract the resultfor the year is limited to $6,800, the amount ofChoosing to include qualified dividends.from the amount on Form 8814, line 6. his net investment income.Investment income generally does not include
qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1.Example. Your 10-year-old child has tax-However, you can choose to include all or part ofable interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per-Form 4952your qualified dividends in investment income.manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You chooseYou make this choice by completing Form Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expenseto report this on your return. You enter $4,000 on4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-Form 8814, line 1a, $2,000 on line 2, and $6,000
If you choose to include any amount of your ment interest.on line 4. You then enter $4,400 on Form 8814,
qualified dividends in investment income, youline 6, and Form 1040, line 21. You figure the
must reduce your qualified dividends that are Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2004amount of your child’s income that you can con-
eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by income includes $3,000 in dividends (other thansider your investment income as follows:
the same amount. qualified dividends) and a net capital gain of
$4,400 − ($4,400 × ($2,000 ÷ $6,000)) $9,000 from the sale of investment property.Choosing to include net capital gain.In- She incurred $12,500 of investment interest ex-vestment income generally does not include netYou include this $2,933 on Form 4952, line 4a.pense. Her other investment expenses directlycapital gain from disposing of investment prop-Child’s capital gain distributions.If part connected with the production of investment in-erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-of the amount you report is your child’s capitalcome total $980 after applying the 2% limit ontual funds). However, you can choose to includegain distributions, that part (which is reported onmiscellaneous itemized deductions on Scheduleall or part of your net capital gain in investmentSchedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13)A (Form 1040).income. generally, does not count as investment income.For 2004, Jane chooses to include all of herYou make this choice by completing FormHowever, you can choose to include all or part ofnet capital gain in investment income. Her total4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.it in investment income, as explained in Choos- investment income is $12,000 ($3,000 divi-
If you choose to include any amount of youring to include net capital gain, earlier. dends + $9,000 net capital gain). Her net invest-
net capital gain in investment income, you mustYour investment income also includes thement income is $11,020 ($12,000 total
reduce your net capital gain that is eligible foramount on Form 8814, line 6 (or, if applicable,investment income − $980 other investment ex-
the lower capital gains tax rates by the samethe reduced amount figured under Child’s penses).
amount. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier). Jane’s Form 4952 is illustrated, later. Her
investment interest expense deduction is limitedFor more information about the capital gains
Investment expenses. Investment expenses to $11,020, the amount of her net investmentrates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
include all income-producing expenses (otherincome. The $1,480 disallowed investment in-Before making either choice, considerthan interest expense) relating to investmentterest expense is carried forward to 2005.the overall effect on your tax liability.property that are allowable deductions after ap-
Compare your tax if you make one or Exception to use of Form 4952.You do not
TIP
plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneous
both of these choices with your tax if you do not. have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to youritemized deductions. Use the smaller of:
return if you meet all of the following tests.
1. The investment expenses included onInvestment income of child reported on • Your investment interest expense is notSchedule A (Form 1040), line 22, orparent’s return.Investment income includes more than your investment income fromthe part of your child’s interest and dividend2. The amount on Schedule A, line 26. interest and ordinary dividends minus anyincome that you choose to report on your return. qualified dividends.See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for aIf the child does not have qualified dividends,
discussion of the 2% limit.Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, or capital • You do not have any other deductible in-
gain distributions, this is the amount on line 6 of vestment expenses.Losses from passive activities.Income orForm 8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s • You have no carryover of investment inter-expenses that you used in computing income orInterest and Dividends. Include it on line 4a of est expense from 2003.loss from a passive activity are not included inForm 4952.
determining your investment income or invest-
If you meet all of these tests, you can deductment expenses (including investment interestExample. Your 8-year-old son has interest
all of your investment interest.expense). See Publication 925 for informationincome of $2,000, which you choose to report on
about passive activities.your own return. You enter $2,000 on Form
8814, lines 1a and 4, and $400 on line 6. Also
Example. Ted is a partner in a partnershipenter $400 on Form 1040, line 21. Your invest-
that operates a business. However, he does notment income includes this $400.
materially participate in the partnership’s busi-Bond PremiumChild’s qualified dividends.If part of theness. Ted’s interest in the partnership is consid-
amount you report is your child’s qualified divi-ered a passive activity. Amortization
dends, that part (which is reported on FormTed’s investment income from interest and
1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-dividends (other than qualified dividends) is If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-
vestment income. However, you can choose to$10,000. His investment expenses (other than mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the
include all or part of it in investment income, asinterest) are $3,200 after taking into account the bond yields taxable interest, you can choose to
explained under Choosing to include qualified2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions. amortize the premium. This generally means
dividends, earlier. His investment interest expense is $8,000. Ted that each year, over the life of the bond, you use
Your investment income also includes the also has income from the partnership of $2,000. a part of the premium to reduce the amount of
amount on Form 8814, line 6 (or, if applicable, Ted figures his net investment income and interest includible in your income. If you make
the reduced amount figured next under Child’s the limit on his investment interest expense de- this choice, you must reduce your basis in the
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends). duction in the following way: bond by the amortization for the year.
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
9,000
9,000
0
9,000
12,000
980
11,020
1,480
11,020
3,000
OMB No. 1545-0191
Investment Interest Expense Deduction4952Form
/H17075Attach to your tax return.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 51
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number
1Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2004 (see instructions)1
2Disallowed investment interest expense from 2003 Form 4952, line 72
3Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 23
4a
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net
gain from the disposition of property held for investment)
4a
Investment expenses (see instructions)5 5
Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4h. If zero or less, enter -0-6 6
Total Investment Interest Expense
Net Investment Income
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
b Qualified dividends included on line 4a
c Subtract line 4b from line 4a
d Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment
e Enter the smaller of line 4d or your net capital gain from the disposition
of property held for investment (see instructions)
f Subtract line 4e from line 4d
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2005. Subtract line 6 from
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-
7
Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions8
4f
4b
4c
7
8
Part III
Part I
Part II
g Enter the amount from lines 4b and 4e that you elect to include in investment income (see
instructions)
h Investment income. Add lines 4c, 4f, and 4g 4h
4g
4d
4e
2004
(99)
If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, you See section 75 of the Internal Revenue Code must occur either on the first or the final day of
for the treatment of bond premium by a dealer inmust amortize the premium. This amortized an accrual period. The computation is simplest if
tax-exempt bonds.amount is not deductible in determining taxable accrual periods are the same as the intervals
income. However, each year you must reduce between interest payment dates.
your basis in the bond (and tax-exempt interestHow To Figure Step 3: determine the bond premium forotherwise reportable on Form 1040, line 8b) byAmortization the accrual period.To do this, multiply yourthe amortization for the year. adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of theFor bonds issued after September 27, 1985, youaccrual period by your yield. Then subtract themust amortize bond premium using a constantBond premium. Bond premium is the amount result from the qualified stated interest for theyield method on the basis of the bond’s yield toby which your basis in the bond right after you period.maturity, determined by using the bond’s basisget it is more than the total of all amounts pay- Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-and compounding at the close of each accrualable on the bond after you get it (other than ning of the first accrual period is the same asperiod.
payments of qualified stated interest). For exam- your basis. After that, it is your basis decreased
ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000Constant yield method.Figure the bond pre-by the amount of bond premium amortized for
generally would have a $50 premium if you buy itmium amortization for each accrual period asearlier periods and the amount of any payment
for $1050. follows. previously made on the bond other than a pay-
ment of qualified stated interest.Basis. In general, your basis for figuringStep 1: determine your yield.Your yield is
bond premium amortization is the same as yourthe discount rate that, when used in figuring the
Example. On February 3, 2003, you boughtbasis for figuring any loss on the sale of thepresent value of all remaining payments to be
a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has abond. However, you may need to use a differentmade on the bond (including payments of quali-
stated principal amount of $100,000, payable atfied stated interest), produces an amount equalbasis for:
maturity on February 3, 2010, making your pre-to your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as of
• Convertible bonds, mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). Thethe date you got the bond. It must be constant
bond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000over the term of the bond and must be figured to• Bonds you got in a trade, and at least two decimal places when expressed ason February 3 of each year. Your yield is
• Bonds whose basis has to be determineda percentage. 8.07439% compounded annually. You choose
using the basis of the person who trans- to use annual accrual periods ending on Febru-If you do not know the yield, consult your
ferred the bond to you. broker or tax advisor. Databases available toary 3 of each year. To find your bond premium
them are likely to show the yield at the date ofamortization for the accrual period ending onSee Regulations section 1.171-1(e).
purchase. February 3, 2004, you multiply the adjusted ac-
quisition price at the beginning of the periodDealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyoneStep 2: determine the accrual periods.
($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract thewho holds them mainly for sale to customers inYou can choose the accrual periods to use.
result ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated inter-the ordinary course of a trade or business orThey may be of any length and may vary in
est for the period ($10,000), you find that yourwho would properly include bonds in inventorylength over the term of the bond, but each ac-
at the close of the tax year) cannot claim a bond premium amortization for the period iscrual period can be no longer than 1 year and
deduction for amortizable bond premium. each scheduled payment of principal or interest $1,118.17.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Special rules.For special rules that apply ized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line plan lets you choose to use your dividends to
to variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds, 27. buy more shares of stock in the corporation
and bonds that provide for alternative payment  But your deduction is limited to the amount instead of receiving the dividends in cash.
schedules or remote or incidental contingen- by which your total interest inclusions on the You can deduct the monthly service charge
cies, see Regulations section 1.171-3. bond in prior accrual periods is more than your you pay to a bank to participate in an automatic
total bond premium deductions on the bond in investment service. If you participate in a divi-
prior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct any
Bonds Issued Before because of this limit can be carried forward to service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
September 28, 1985 the next accrual period. dends before the dividends are used to buy
more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in thePre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre- year you pay them.Generally, if you first elected to amortize bondmium using any reasonable method. Reasona-
premium before 1998, the above treatment ofClerical help and office rent.You can deductble methods include: 
the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-office expenses, such as rent and clerical help,
quired before 1988.1. The straight-line method, and that you pay in connection with your investments
and collecting the taxable income on them.Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986.2. The Revenue Ruling 82-10 method.
The amortization of the premium on these bondsCost of replacing missing securities.To re-
is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-place your taxable securities that are mislaid,Straight-line method.Under this method, the
ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to postamount of your bond premium amortization is
an indemnity bond. You can deduct the premiumthe same each month. Divide the number of Bonds acquired after October 22, 1986, but
you pay to buy the indemnity bond and themonths you held the bond during the year by thebefore 1988.The amortization of the premium
related incidental expenses.number of months from the beginning of the taxon these bonds is investment interest expense
You may, however, get a refund of part of theyear (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to thesubject to the investment interest limit, unless
bond premium if the missing securities are re-date of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiplyyou choose to treat it as an offset to interest
covered within a specified time. Under certainthe result by the bond premium (reduced by anyincome on the bond.
types of insurance policies, you can recoverbond premium amortization claimed in earlier
some of the expenses.years). This gives you your bond premium amor-
If you receive the refund in the tax year youtization for the year.
pay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ-Expenses ofRevenue Ruling 82-10 method. Under this ence between the expenses paid and the
method, the amount of your bond premium amount refunded. If the refund is made in a laterProducing Incomeamortization increases each month over the life tax year, you must include the refund in income
of the bond. This method is explained in Reve- in the year you received it, but only to the extentYou deduct investment expenses (other thannue Ruling 82-10. that the expenses decreased your tax in the yearinterest expenses) as miscellaneous itemized
you deducted them.deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To be
Choosing To Amortize deductible, these expenses must be ordinaryFees to collect income.You can deduct feesand necessary expenses paid or incurred: you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similarYou choose to amortize the premium on taxable
agent to collect investment income, such asbonds by reporting the amortization for the year1. To produce or collect income, or
your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or youron your income tax return for the first tax year for2. To manage property held for producing in-dividends on shares of stock.which you want the choice to apply. You shouldcome.attach a statement to your return that you are Fees to buy or sell.You cannot deduct a
making this choice under section 171. See How The expenses must be directly related to thefee you pay to a broker to acquire investment
To Report Amortization, next. income or income-producing property, and theproperty, such as stocks or bonds. You must
This choice is binding for the year you makeincome must be taxable to you. add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basis
it and for later tax years. It applies to all taxableThe deduction for most income-producingof Investment Property in chapter 4.
bonds you own in the year you make the choiceexpenses is subject to a 2% limit that also ap-You cannot deduct any broker’s fees, com-
and also to those you acquire in later years.plies to certain other miscellaneous itemizedmissions, or option premiums you pay (or that
You can change your decision to amortizedeductions. The amount deductible is limited towere netted out) in connection with the sale of
bond premium only with the written approval ofthe total of these miscellaneous deductions thatinvestment property. They can be used only to
the IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115,is more than 2% of your adjusted gross income.figure gain or loss from the sale. See Reporting
Application for Change in Accounting Method.For information on how to report expenses ofCapital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for more
For more information on requesting approval,producing income, see How To Report Invest- information about the treatment of these sale
see section 1C of the Appendix to Revenuement Expenses, later. expenses.
Procedure 2002-9 in Internal Revenue BulletinAttorney or accounting fees.You can de- Investment counsel and advice. You can2002-3. You can find this Internal Revenue Bul-duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces-deduct fees you pay for counsel and adviceletin at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-03.pdf. sary to produce or collect taxable income.about investments that produce taxable income.
However, in some cases, attorney or accountingThis includes amounts you pay for investmentHow To Report fees are part of the basis of property. See Basis advisory services.
Amortization of Investment Property in chapter 4.
Safe deposit box rent.You can deduct rentAutomatic investment service and dividendSubtract the bond premium amortization from you pay for a safe deposit box if you use the boxreinvestment plans. A bank may offer itsyour interest income from these bonds. to store taxable income-producing stocks,checking account customers an automatic in-Report the bond’s interest on Schedule B bonds, or other investment-related papers andvestment service so that, for a charge, each(Form 1040), line 1. Several lines above line 2, documents. If you also use the box to storecustomer can choose to invest a part of theput a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1. tax-exempt securities or personal items, you canchecking account each month in common stock.Below this subtotal, print “ABP Adjustment,” and deduct only part of the rent. See Tax-exemptOr, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent forthe amortization amount. Subtract this amount income under Nondeductible Expenses, later, toa number of publicly-owned corporations mayfrom the subtotal, and enter the result on line 2. figure what part you can deduct.set up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv-
Bond premium amortization more than inter-ice. Through that service, cash dividends areState and local transfer taxes.You cannot
est. If the amount of your bond premium amor- reinvested in more shares of stock, after the deduct the state and local transfer taxes you pay
tization for an accrual period is more than the bank deducts a service charge. when you buy or sell securities. If you pay these
qualified stated interest for the period, you can A corporation in which you own stock also transfer taxes when you buy securities, you
deduct the difference as a miscellaneous item- may have a dividend reinvestment plan. This must treat them as part of the cost of the prop-
Page 36 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 37 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
erty. If you pay these transfer taxes when you of income is to the total income. If the expenses
sell securities, you must treat them as a reduc- relate in part to capital gains and losses, includeNondeductible
tion in the amount realized. the gains, but not the losses, in figuring this
proportion. To find the part of the expenses thatExpensesTrustee’s commissions for revocable trust. is for the tax-exempt income, divide your tax-ex-If you set up a revocable trust and have its empt income by the total income and multiplySome expenses that you incur as an investorincome distributed to you, you can deduct theare not deductible. your expenses by the result.commission you pay the trustee for managing
the trust to the extent it is to produce or collectStockholders’ meetings.You cannot deduct Example. You received $6,000 interest;taxable income or to manage property. How-transportation and other expenses that you pay$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable.ever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis-to attend stockholders’ meetings of companiesIn earning this income, you had $500 of ex-sion that is for producing or collecting in which you have no interest other than owningpenses. You cannot specifically identify thetax-exempt income or for managing propertystock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-amount of each expense item that is for eachthat produces tax-exempt income. ing is to get information that would be useful inincome item, so you must divide your expenses.If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay themaking further investments. 80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided bycommissions for several years in advance, youInvestment-related seminar.You cannot de- $6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for themust deduct a part of the commission each year.duct expenses for attending a convention, semi-tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400You cannot deduct the entire amount in the yearnar, or similar meeting for investment purposes.(80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deductyou pay it.
$100 (the rest of the expenses) because theySingle-premium life insurance, endowment,Investment expenses from pass-through are for the taxable interest.and annuity contracts.You cannot deductentities.If you hold an interest in a partner-interest on money you borrow to buy or carry aState income taxes.If you itemize your de-ship, S corporation, real estate mortgage invest-single-premium life insurance, endowment, orductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in-ment conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offeredannuity contract. come taxes on interest income that is exemptregulated investment company (mutual fund),
from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct,you can deduct your share of that entity’s invest-Used as collateral.If you use a single pre-
as either taxes or investment expenses, statement expenses. A partnership or S corporationmium annuity contract as collateral to obtain or
income taxes on other exempt income.will show your share of these expenses on yourcontinue a mortgage loan, you cannot deduct
Schedule K-1. A nonpublicly offered mutual fundany interest on the loan that is collateralized by
Interest expense and carrying charges onwill indicate your share of these expenses in boxthe annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-
straddles. You cannot deduct interest and5 of Form 1099-DIV, or on an equivalent state-est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-
carrying charges that are allocable to personalment. Publicly-offered mutual funds are dis-rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by the
property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-cussed later. lesser of the amount of the annuity contract used
ductible interest and carrying charges are addedIf you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex-as collateral or the amount of the loan.
to the basis of the straddle property. However,penses relating to your residual interest invest-Borrowing on insurance. Generally, you this treatment does not apply if:ment will be shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066),cannot deduct interest on money you borrow toline 3b. Any expenses relating to your regularbuy or carry a life insurance, endowment, or1. All the offsetting positions making up theinterest investment will appear in box 5 of Formannuity contract if you plan to systematicallystraddle either consist of one or more qual-1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. borrow part or all of the increases in the cashified covered call options and the optionedReport your share of these investment ex-value of the contract. This rule applies to thestock or consist of section 1256 contractspenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject tointerest on the total amount borrowed to buy or(and the straddle is not part of a largerthe 2% limit, in the same manner as your othercarry the contract, not just the interest on thestraddle), orinvestment expenses. borrowed increases in the cash value.
2. The straddle is a hedging transaction.Including mutual fund or REMIC expensesTax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex-in income. Your share of the investment ex- For information about straddles, including defini-penses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-penses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered tions of the terms used in this discussion, seecome. Nor can you deduct interest on moneymutual fund, as described above, are consid- chapter 4.you borrow to buy tax-exempt securities orered to be indirect deductions through that Interest includes any amount you pay or in-shares in a regulated investment company (mu-pass-through entity. You must include in your cur in connection with personal property used intual fund) that distributes only exempt-interestgross income an amount equal to the amount of a short sale. However, you must first apply thedividends.the expenses allocated to you, whether or not rules discussed in Payments in lieu of dividendsyou are able to claim a deduction for thoseShort-sale expenses.The rule disallowingunder Short Sales in chapter 4.expenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpub-a deduction for interest expenses on tax-exempt
To determine the interest on market discountlicly offered mutual fund, you must include onsecurities applies to amounts you pay in con-
bonds and short-term obligations that are part ofyour return the full amount of ordinary dividendsnection with personal property used in a short
a straddle, you must first apply the rules dis-or other distributions of stock, as shown in boxsale or amounts paid by others for the use of any
cussed under Limit on interest deduction for1a of Form 1099-DIV or an equivalent state-collateral in connection with the short sale. How-
market discount bonds and Limit on interestment. If you are a residual interest holder in aever, it does not apply to the expenses you incur
deduction for short-term obligations (both underREMIC, you must report as ordinary income onif you deposit cash as collateral for the property
Interest Expenses, earlier).Schedule E (Form 1040) the total amounts used in the short sale and the cash does not
shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), lines 1b andearn a material return during the period of theNondeductible amount. Figure the nonde-3b. If you are a REMIC regular interest holder,sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4.ductible amount of interest and carrying chargesyou must include the amount of any expense on straddle property as follows.Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxableallocation you received on Form 1040, line 8a.income. You may have expenses that are for
1. Add:Publicly-offered mutual funds.Publicly-of- both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can-
fered mutual funds, generally, are funds that are not specifically identify what part of the ex-a. Interest on indebtedness incurred ortraded on an established securities exchange. penses is for each type of income, you cancontinued to buy or carry the personalThese funds do not pass investment expenses divide the expenses, using reasonable propor-property, andthrough to you. Instead, the dividend income tions based on facts and circumstances. You
b. All other amounts (including charges tothey report to you in box 1a of Form 1099-DIV is must attach a statement to your return showing
insure, store, or transport the personalalready reduced by your share of investment how you divided the expenses and stating that
property) paid or incurred to carry theexpenses. Therefore, you cannot deduct the ex- each deduction claimed is not based on tax-ex-
penses on your return. empt income. personal property.
Include the amount from box 1a of Form One accepted method for dividing expenses
2. Subtract from the amount in (1):1099-DIV in your income. is to do it in the same proportion that each type
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Interest (including OID) includible in in chapter 4 for information on these expenses.)Unpaid expenses owed to related party.If
gross income for the year on the per- you use an accrual method, you cannot deductAlso attach a completed Form 4952 if you used
sonal property, interest and other expenses owed to a relatedthat form to figure your investment interest ex-
cash-basis person until payment is made andpense.b. Any income from the personal property the amount is includible in the gross income ofEnter the total amount of your other invest-treated as ordinary income on the dis- that person. The relationship, for purposes ofment expenses (other than interest expenses)position of short-term government obli- this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxon Schedule A, line 22. List the type and amountgations or as ordinary income under the year for which the interest or expense wouldof each expense on the dotted lines next to linemarket discount and short-term bond otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is denied22. (If necessary, you can show the requiredprovisions — see Discount on Debt In- under this rule, this rule will continue to applyinformation on an attached statement.) Includestruments in chapter 1, even if your relationship with the person ceasesthe total on line 23 with your other miscellaneousc. The dividends includible in gross in- to exist before the amount is includible in thedeductions that are subject to the 2% limit.come for the year from the personal gross income of that person.
For information on how to report amortizableproperty, and This rule generally applies to those relation-
bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza- ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Partyd. Any payment on a loan of the personaltion, earlier in this chapter. Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-property for use in a short sale that is nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,includible in gross income. shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-
tions to shareholders.
Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductible The postponement of deductions for unpaidWhen To Reportamount to the basis of your straddle property. expenses and interest under the related party
rule does not apply to original issue discountInvestment Expenses
(OID), regardless of when payment is made.
This rule also does not apply to loans withIf you use the cash method to report income and
below-market interest rates or to certain pay-How To Report expenses, you generally deduct your expenses,
ments for the use of property and services whenexcept for certain prepaid interest, in the year
the lender or recipient has to include paymentsInvestment Expenses you pay them.
periodically in income, even if a payment has notIf you use an accrual method, you generallyTo deduct your investment expenses, you must been made.deduct your expenses when you incur a liabilityitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).for them, rather than when you pay them.Enter your deductible investment interest ex-
Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-pense on Schedule A, line 13. Include any de-
est, earlier in this chapter.ductible short sale expenses. (See Short Sales
Page 38 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 39 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption of stock.A redemption of stockTopics
is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to theThis chapter discusses:
capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
4. demption is a dividend or other distribution on• What a sale or trade is,
stock.• Basis,
Dividend versus sale or trade.Whether a• Adjusted basis, redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,Sales and or other distribution depends on the circum-• Figuring gain or loss,
stances in each case. Both direct and indirect• Nontaxable trades, ownership of stock will be considered. The re-Trades of
demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: • Capital gains and losses, and
• How to report your gain or loss.Investment 1. The redemption is not essentially
equivalent to a dividend — see Dividends
and Other Corporate Distributions in chap-Useful ItemsProperty ter 1,You may want to see:
2. There is a substantially disproportionate
Publication redemption of stock,Introduction
3. There is a complete redemption of all the❏ 551 Basis of AssetsThis chapter explains the tax treatment of sales stock of the corporation owned by the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributionsand trades of investment property. shareholder, or
4. The redemption is a distribution in partialForm (and Instructions)Investment property.This is property that
liquidation of a corporation.produces investment income. Examples include❏ Schedule D (Form 1040)Capital Gainsstocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. and Losses Redemption or retirement of bonds.A re-Property used in a trade or business is not in-
❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Section demption or retirement of bonds or notes at theirvestment property.
1256 Contracts and Straddles maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.
See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds and Dis-Form 1099-B. If you sold property such as ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationscounted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-stocks, bonds, or certain commodities through a
❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges nary Gain or Loss, later.broker during the year, you should receive, for
In addition, a significant modification of aeach sale, a Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Bro-See chapter 5 for information about gettingbond is treated as a trade of the original bond forker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or anthese publications and forms. a new bond. For details, see Regulations sec-equivalent statement from the broker. You
tion 1.1001-3.should receive the statement by January 31 of
the next year. It will show the gross proceeds Surrender of stock.A surrender of stock by afrom the sale. The IRS will also get a copy of dominant shareholder who retains control of theWhat Is aForm 1099-B from the broker. corporation is treated as a contribution to capitalUse Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state-Sale or Trade? rather than as an immediate loss deductiblement received from your broker) to complete from taxable income. The surrendering share-Schedule D of Form 1040. For more information,Terms you may need to know holder must reallocate his or her basis in the
see Form 1099-B transactions under Reporting (see Glossary): surrendered shares to the shares he or she
Capital Gains and Losses, later. retains.
Nominees. If someone receives gross pro-Equity option Trade of investment property for an annuity.ceeds as a nominee for you, that person will give The transfer of investment property to a corpora-Futures contractyou a Form 1099-B, which will show gross pro- tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-ceeds received on your behalf. Marked to market tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract thatIf you receive Form 1099-B that includes will make guaranteed annual payments to youNonequity optiongross proceeds belonging to another person, for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value ofOptions dealersee Nominees later under Reporting Capital the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-
Gains and Losses for more information. erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the yearRegulated futures contract
of the trade. Figure the present value of theSection 1256 contractOther property transactions.Certain trans- annuity according to factors used by commercial
fers of property are discussed in other IRS publi- insurance companies issuing annuities.Short sale
cations. These include:
Transfer by inheritance.The transfer of• Sale of your main home, discussed in This section explains what is a sale or trade. Itproperty of a decedent to the executor or admin-
Publication 523, Selling Your Home, also explains certain transactions and eventsistrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
that are treated as sales or trades. ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable• Installment sales, covered in Publication
gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.A sale is generally a transfer of property for537, Installment Sales,
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to
• Various types of transactions involving Termination of certain rights and obliga-pay money.
business property, discussed in Publica- tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, orA trade is a transfer of property for other
tion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of other termination of a right or obligation (otherproperty or services, and may be taxed in the
Assets, than a securities futures contract) with respect tosame way as a sale.
property that is a capital asset (or that would be• Transfers of property at death, covered in a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as aSale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transactionPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gainis not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyAdministrators, and or loss.for cash and immediately buy similar property to
• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac-replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa- This rule does not apply to the retirement of a
tivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas-rate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchanges debt instrument. See Redemption or retirement
sive Activity and At-Risk Rules. under Nontaxable Trades, later. of bonds, earlier.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 39

Page 40 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
principal contract, or a futures or forward 3. Any hedge with respect to a position de-Worthless Securities
scribed in (2).contract).
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other thanYou are also treated as having made a con-Certain trust instruments treated as stock.those held for sale by a securities dealer) thatstructive sale of an appreciated financial posi-For the constructive sale rules, an interest in anbecame worthless during the tax year are tion if a person related to you enters into aactively traded trust is treated as stock unlesstreated as though they were sold on the last daytransaction described above with a view towardsubstantially all of the value of the property heldof the tax year. This affects whether your capitalavoiding the constructive sale treatment. Forby the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-loss is long-term or short-term. See Holding Pe- this purpose, a related person is any relatedtion to the definition of an appreciated financialriod, later. party described under Related Party Transac-position (explained in (2) above).If you are a cash basis taxpayer and maketions, later in this chapter.payments on a negotiable promissory note that
you issued for stock that became worthless, you Sale of appreciated financial position.AException for nonmarketable securities.
can deduct these payments as losses in the transaction treated as a constructive sale of anA contract for sale of any stock, debt instrument,
years you actually make the payments. Do not appreciated financial position is not treated as aor partnership interest that is not a marketable
deduct them in the year the stock became worth- constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-security is not a constructive sale if it settles
less. cial position, as long as you continue to hold thewithin 1 year of the date you enter into it.
original position. However, if you hold anotherException for certain closed transactions.How to report loss.Report worthless securi- appreciated financial position and dispose of the
Do not treat a transaction as a constructive saleties on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8, original position before closing the transaction
whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d), enterif all of the following are true. that resulted in the constructive sale, you are
“Worthless.” Enter the amount of your loss in treated as if, at the same time, you construc-1. You closed the transaction before the endparentheses in column (f). tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-of the 30th day after the end of your taxtion.Filing a claim for refund.If you do not claim a year.
loss for a worthless security on your original
2. You held the appreciated financial positionSection 1256 Contractsreturn for the year it becomes worthless, you can
throughout the 60-day period beginning onfile a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss. Marked to Market
the date you closed the transaction.You must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi-
If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end ofvidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return3. Your risk of loss was not reduced at anythe tax year, you generally must treat it as soldfor the year the security became worthless. Youtime during that 60-day period by holdingat its fair market value on the last business daymust file it within 7 years from the date yourcertain other positions. of the tax year.original return for that year had to be filed, or 2
If a closed transaction is reestablished in ayears from the date you paid the tax, whichever
substantially similar position during the 60-dayis later. (Claims not due to worthless securities
Section 1256 Contractperiod beginning on the date the first transactionor bad debts generally must be filed within 3
was closed, this exception still applies if theyears from the date a return is filed, or 2 years A section 1256 contract is any:from the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) reestablished position is closed before the 30th
For more information about filing a claim, seeday after the end of your tax year in which the1. Regulated futures contract,Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Ap-first transaction was closed and, after that clos-
peal Rights, and Claims for Refund. 2. Foreign currency contract,ing, (2) and (3) above are true.
This exception also applies to successive3. Nonequity option,
Constructive Sales short sales of an entire appreciated financial
4. Dealer equity option, orposition. For more information, see Revenueof Appreciated
Ruling 2003-1 in Internal Revenue Bulletin5. Dealer securities futures contract.Financial Positions 2003-3. This bulletin is available at www.irs.gov/
pub/irs-irbs/irb03-03.pdf.You are treated as having made a constructive Regulated futures contract.This is a con-sale when you enter into certain transactions tract that: Appreciated financial position.This is anyinvolving an appreciated financial position (de-
interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debtfined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or 1. Provides that amounts that must be depos-instrument (including a futures or forward con-certain debt instruments. You must recognize ited to, or can be withdrawn from, yourtract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing ofgain as if the position were disposed of at its fair margin account depend on daily marketmarket value on the date of the constructivethe interest would result in a gain. conditions (a system of marking to mar-sale. This gives you a new holding period for the ket), andExceptions. An appreciated financial posi-position that begins on the date of the construc-tion does not include the following. 2. Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, ative sale. Then, when you close the transaction,
qualified board of exchange. A qualifiedyou reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by1. Any position from which all of the apprecia-board of exchange is a domestic board ofthe gain recognized on the constructive sale.tion is accounted for under marked to mar-trade designated as a contract market byket rules, including section 1256 contractsConstructive sale.You are treated as having the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-(described later under Section 1256 Con-made a constructive sale of an appreciated fi- sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-tracts Marked to Market).nancial position if you: proved by the Secretary of the Treasury, or
a national securities exchange registered2. Any position in a debt instrument if:1. Enter into a short sale of the same or sub- with the Securities and Exchange Commis-stantially identical property, a. The position unconditionally entitles thesion.
holder to receive a specified principal2. Enter into an offsetting notional principal
amount,contract relating to the same or substan- Foreign currency contract.This is a contracttially identical property, b. The interest payments (or other similarthat:
amounts) with respect to the position3. Enter into a futures or forward contract to
are payable at a fixed rate or a variable1. Requires delivery of a foreign currency thatdeliver the same or substantially identical
rate described in Regulations section has positions traded through regulated fu-property (including a forward contract that
1.860G-1(a)(3), and tures contracts (or settlement of which de-provides for cash settlement), or
pends on the value of that type of foreignc. The position is not convertible, either4. Acquire the same or substantially identical currency),directly or indirectly, into stock of theproperty (if the appreciated financial posi-
issuer (or any related person). 2. Is traded in the interbank market, andtion is a short sale, an offsetting notional
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Is entered into at arm’s length at a price The loss carried back to any year under this
1. Is entered into by the dealer (or, in thedetermined by reference to the price in the election cannot be more than the net section
case of an option, is purchased or grantedinterbank market. 1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, the
by the dealer) in the normal course of theamount of loss carried back to an earlier tax yearBank forward contracts with maturity datesdealer’s activity of dealing in this type ofcannot increase or produce a net operating lossthat are longer than the maturities ordinarilycontract (or option), and for that year.available for regulated futures contracts are con- The loss is carried to the earliest carryback2. Is traded on a qualified board or exchangesidered to meet the definition of a foreign cur- year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount can(as defined under Regulated futures con-rency contract if the above three conditions are then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. Intract, earlier.)satisfied. each carryback year, treat 60% of the carrybackSpecial rules apply to certain foreign cur-A securities futures contract that is not a dealeramount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as arency transactions. These transactions may re-securities futures contract is treated as de-short-term capital loss from section 1256 con-sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. Forscribed later under Securities Futures Con-tracts.details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988tracts. If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-and Regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) and
tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,1.988-3.
the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,Marked to Market RulesNonequity option. This is any listed option under the capital loss carryover rules, to the year
(defined later) that is not an equity option. None- following the loss. (See Capital Losses underA section 1256 contract that you hold at the end
quity options include debt options, commodity Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-of the tax year will generally be treated as sold at
futures options, currency options, and ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the lossits fair market value on the last business day of
broad-based stock index options. A year, you had an additional short-term capitalthe tax year, and you must recognize any gain or
broad-based stock index is based upon the gain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256loss that results. That gain or loss is taken into
value of a group of diversified stocks or securi- contracts loss absorbed in the carryback yearsaccount in figuring your gain or loss when you
ties (such as the Standard and Poor’s 500 in- and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%later dispose of the contract, as shown in the
dex). of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treatexample under 60/40 rule, below.
Warrants based on a stock index that are any capital loss carryover from losses on section
economically, substantially identical in all mate-Hedging exception. The marked to market 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from section
rial respects to options based on a stock indexrules do not apply to hedging transactions. See1256 contracts for that year.
are treated as options based on a stock index.Hedging Transactions, later. Net section 1256 contracts loss.This loss
Cash-settled options. Cash-settled op- is the lesser of:60/40 rule.Under the marked to market sys-tions based on a stock index and either tradedtem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will be1. The net capital loss for your tax year deter-on or subject to the rules of a qualified board oftreated as a long-term capital gain or loss, andmined by taking into account only theexchange are nonequity options if the Securities40% will be treated as a short-term capital gaingains and losses from section 1256 con-and Exchange Commission (SEC) determines or loss. This is true regardless of how long youtracts, orthat the stock index is broad based. actually held the property.This rule does not apply to options estab- 2. The capital loss carryover to the next taxlished before the SEC determines that the stockExample. On June 23, 2003, you bought a year determined without this election.index is broad based. regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-
cember 31, 2003 (the last business day of yourNet section 1256 contracts gain.This gainListed option.This is any option that is
tax year), the fair market value of the contractis the lesser of:traded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualified
was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain onboard or exchange (as discussed earlier under
1. The capital gain net income for the car-your 2003 tax return, treated as 60% long-termRegulated futures contract). A listed option,
ryback year determined by taking into ac-and 40% short-term capital gain.however, does not include an option that is a
count only gains and losses from sectionOn February 2, 2004, you sold the contractright to acquire stock from the issuer.
1256 contracts, orfor $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000
Dealer equity option.This is any listed optiongain on your 2003 return, you recognize a 2. The capital gain net income for that year.that, for an options dealer: $1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2004
Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain fortax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%1. Is an equity option, any carryback year without regard to the netshort-term capital loss.
section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year or2. Is bought or granted by that dealer in theLimited partners or entrepreneurs.The any later tax year.normal course of the dealer’s business ac-60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op-tivity of dealing in options, and tions or dealer securities futures contracts thatTraders in section 1256 contracts.Gain orresult in capital gain or loss allocable to limited3. Is listed on the qualified board of exchange loss from the trading of section 1256 contracts ispartners or limited entrepreneurs (defined laterwhere that dealer is registered. capital gain or loss subject to the marked tounder Hedging Transactions). Instead, thesemarket rules. However, this does not apply toAn “options dealer” is any person registeredgains or losses are treated as short term.contracts held for purposes of hedging propertywith an appropriate national securities ex-
if any loss from the property would be an ordi-change as a market maker or specialist in listedTerminations and transfers.The marked to nary loss.options. market rules also apply if your obligation or
rights under section 1256 contracts are termi-Treatment of underlying property.TheEquity option.This is any option: nated or transferred during the tax year. In thisdetermination of whether an individual’s gain or
case, use the fair market value of each sectionloss from any property is ordinary or capital gain1. To buy or sell stock, or
1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-or loss is made without regard to the fact that the
2. That is valued directly or indirectly by refer-fer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations orindividual is actively engaged in dealing in or
ence to any stock or narrow-based securitytransfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-trading section 1256 contracts related to that
index. ery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli-property.
gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.Equity options include options on a group of
stocks only if the group is a narrow-based stockLoss carryback election.An individual hav-How To Reportindex. ing a net section 1256 contracts loss (defined
Dealer securities futures contract.For later) for 2004 can elect to carry this loss back 3 If you disposed of regulated futures or foreign
any dealer in securities futures contracts or op- years, instead of carrying it over to the next year. currency contracts in 2004 (or had unrealized
tions on those contracts, this is a securities fu- See How To Report, later, for information about profit or loss on these contracts that were open
tures contract (or option on such a contract) that: reporting this election on your return. at the end of 2003 or 2004), you should receive
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 41

Page 42 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099-B, or an equivalent statement, from ing transaction (determined without regard toCost Basis
your broker. the limit) are more than the income received or
accrued during the tax year from this transac-The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781, Gainstion. The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtand Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and obligations, or other property or services.Any hedging loss that is allocated to you forStraddles, to report your gains and losses fromthe tax year is limited to your taxable income forall section 1256 contracts that are open at the Unstated interest.If you buy property on athat year from the trade or business in which theend of the year or that were closed out during time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg-the year. This includes the amount shown in box est, the basis of your property is your stateding transaction items in determining this taxable11 of Form 1099-B. Then enter the net amount purchase price, minus the amount considered toincome. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-of these gains and losses on Schedule D (Form be unstated interest. You generally have un-lowed because of this limit, you can carry it over1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with your stated interest if your interest rate is less than
to the next tax year as a deduction resulting fromincome tax return. the applicable federal rate. For more informa-
a hedging transaction.If the Form 1099-B you receive includes a tion, see Unstated Interest and Original Issue
If the hedging transaction relates to propertystraddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it Discount (OID) in Publication 537.
other than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-may be necessary to show certain adjustments
ing losses applies if the limited partner or entre-on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc- Basis Other Than Costtions for completing Part I. preneur is an individual.
There are times when you must use a basisThe limit on hedging losses does not apply toLoss carryback election.To carry back your other than cost. In these cases, you may need toany hedging loss to the extent that it is moreloss under the election procedures described know the property’s fair market value or thethan all your unrecognized gains from hedgingearlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica- adjusted basis of the previous owner.transactions at the end of the tax year that aretion for Tentative Refund, for the year to whichfrom the trade or business in which the hedgingyou are carrying the loss with an amended Form Fair market value.This is the price at whichtransaction occurred. The term “unrecognized6781 and an amended Schedule D attached. the property would change hands between again” has the same meaning as defined underFollow the instructions for completing Form buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy orStraddles, later.6781 for the loss year to make this election. sell and both having reasonable knowledge of
all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,Sale of property used in a hedge.Once you around the same date, may be helpful in figuring
identify personal property as being part of aHedging Transactions fair market value.
hedging transaction, you must treat gain from its
The marked to market rules, described earlier,sale or exchange as ordinary income, not capital
do not apply to hedging transactions. A transac-gain. Property Received for Servicestion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow-
ing conditions are met. If you receive investment property for services,
Self-Employment Income you must include the property’s fair market value1. You entered into the transaction in the nor- in income. The amount you include in incomemal course of your trade or business pri-Gains and losses derived in the ordinary coursethen becomes your basis in the property. If themarily to manage the risk of: of a commodity or option dealer’s trading inservices were performed for a price that was
section 1256 contracts and property related toagreed to beforehand, this price will be accepteda. Price changes or currency fluctuationsthese contracts are included in net earningsas the fair market value of the property if there ison ordinary property you hold (or willfrom self-employment. In addition, the rules re-no evidence to the contrary.hold), or lating to contributions to self-employment retire-
Restricted property.If you receive, as pay-b. Interest rate or price changes, or cur-ment plans apply. For information on retirement
ment for services, property that is subject torency fluctuations, on your current orplan contributions, see chapter 3 of Publication
certain restrictions, your basis in the propertyfuture borrowings or ordinary obliga-535, Business Expenses, Publication 560, Re-
generally is its fair market value when it be-tions. tirement Plans for Small Business, and Publica-
comes substantially vested. Property becomestion 590, Individual Retirement Arrangementssubstantially vested when it is transferable or is2. You clearly identified the transaction as(IRAs). no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,being a hedging transaction before the
whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-close of the day on which you entered into
erty in Publication 525 for more information.it.
Bargain purchases. If you buy investmentBasis ofThis hedging transaction exception does not
property at less than fair market value, as pay-apply to transactions entered into by or for any
Investment Property ment for services, you must include the differ-syndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor-
ence in income. Your basis in the property is theporation, or other entity (other than a regular
Terms you may need to know price you pay plus the amount you include incorporation) that allocates more than 35% of its
income.(see Glossary):losses to limited partners or limited entrepre-
neurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who
has an interest in an enterprise (but not as aBasis
Property Receivedlimited partner) and who does not actively par-
in Taxable TradesFair market valueticipate in its management. However, an inter-
est is not considered held by a limited partnerOriginal issue discount (OID) If you received investment property in trade foror entrepreneur if the interest holder actively
other property, the basis of the new property isparticipates (or did so for at least 5 full years)
its fair market value at the time of the tradein the management of the entity, or is theBasis is a way of measuring your investment inunless you received the property in a nontaxablespouse, child (including a legally adoptedproperty for tax purposes. You must know thetrade.child), grandchild, or parent of an individualbasis of your property to determine whether you
who actively participates in the management ofhave a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-Example. You trade A Company stock for Bthe entity. tion. Company stock having a fair market value of
Investment property you buy normally has anHedging loss limit.If you are a limited partner $1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Company
original basis equal to its cost. If you get propertyor entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable
in some way other than buying it, such as by gifthedging loss you can claim is limited. A “hedging gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A
or inheritance, its fair market value may be im-loss” is the amount by which the allowable de- Company stock is more than $1,200, you have a
portant in figuring the basis.ductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg- deductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value equal to or more thanCompany stock is $1,200. If you later sell the B property at the time of the transfer. Add to that
donor’s adjusted basis.If the fair marketamount the amount of any gift tax paid on theCompany stock for $1,300, you will have a gain
value of the property at the time of the gift wasgift, as described in the preceding discussion.of $100.
equal to or more than the donor’s adjusted basisFor figuring loss, your basis is limited to the
just before the gift, your basis for gain or loss onproperty’s fair market value at the time of the
its sale or other disposition is the donor’s ad- transfer.Property Received
justed basis plus or minus any required adjust-in Nontaxable Trades Gift tax information.For information on giftments to basis during the period you hold thetax, see Publication 950, Introduction to EstateIf you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec-property. Also, you may be allowed to add to theand Gift Taxes.ognize gain or loss until you dispose of thedonor’s adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax
property you received in the trade. See Nontax- paid, depending on the date of the gift.
able Trades, later. Property Received as InheritanceGift received before 1977.If you receivedThe basis of property you received in a non-property as a gift before 1977, your basis in thetaxable or partly nontaxable trade is generally If you inherited property, your basis in that prop-property is the donor’s adjusted basis increasedthe same as the adjusted basis of the property erty generally is its fair market value (its ap-by the total gift tax paid on the gift. However,you gave up. Increase this amount by any cash praised value on the federal estate tax return)your basis cannot be more than the fair marketon:you paid, additional costs you had, and any gainvalue of the gift at the time it was given to you.recognized. Reduce this amount by any cash or
1. The date of the decedent’s death, orunlike property you received, any loss recog-Example 1. You were given XYZ Company
nized, and any liability of yours that was as- 2. The later alternate valuation date if the es-stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stock
sumed or treated as assumed. tate qualifies for, and elects to use, alter-had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor’s
nate valuation.adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a
gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain orIf no federal estate tax return was filed, use theProperty Received loss is $20,500, the donor’s adjusted basis plusappraised value on the date of death for stateFrom Your Spouse the amount of gift tax paid. inheritance or transmission taxes.
If property is transferred to you from your spouse Appreciated property you gave theExample 2. The facts are the same as in(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to decedent. Your basis in certain appreciatedExample 1 except that the gift tax paid wasyour divorce), your basis is the same as your property that you inherited is the decedent’s$1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor’s ad-spouse’s or former spouse’s adjusted basis just adjusted basis in the property immediatelyjusted basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited to
before the transfer. See Transfers Between before death rather than its fair market value.the fair market value of the stock at the time of
Spouses, later. This applies to appreciated property that you orthe gift.
your spouse gave the decedent as a gift duringRecordkeeping. The transferor must Gift received after 1976.If you received the one-year period ending on the date of death.give you the records necessary to de-property as a gift after 1976, your basis is theAppreciated property is any property whose fairtermine the adjusted basis and holdingRECORDS
donor’s adjusted basis increased by the part ofmarket value on the day you gave it to theperiod of the property as of the date of thethe gift tax paid that was for the net increase indecedent was more than its adjusted basis.transfer. value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply-
More information.See Publication 551, Ba-ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The
sis of Assets, for more information on the basisnumerator (top part) is the net increase in value
of inherited property, including community prop-Property Received as a Gift of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) is
erty, property held by a surviving tenant in a jointthe amount of the gift.To figure your basis in property that you re- tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, a qualifiedThe net increase in value of the gift is the fairceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted joint interest, and a farm or closely held busi-market value of the gift minus the donor’s ad-basis to the donor just before it was given to you, ness.justed basis. The amount of the gift is its valueits fair market value at the time it was given tofor gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and the Adjusted Basisnual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc-date it was given to you. tion that applies to the gift.
Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,
exchange, or other disposition of property orFair market value less than donor’s adjustedExample. In 2004, you received a gift of
figure allowable depreciation, depletion, orbasis. If the fair market value of the property atproperty from your mother. At the time of the gift,
amortization, you usually must make certain ad-the time of the gift was less than the donor’sthe property had a fair market value of $101,000
justments (increases and decreases) to the ba-adjusted basis just before the gift, your basis forand an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. The
sis of the property. The result of thesegain on its sale or other disposition is the sameamount of the gift for gift tax purposes was
adjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis.as the donor’s adjusted basis plus or minus any$90,000 ($101,000 minus the $11,000 annual
Adjustments to the basis of stocks andrequired adjustments to basis during the periodexclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax of
bonds are explained in the following discussion.you hold the property. Your basis for loss is its $21,000. You figure your basis in the following
For information about other adjustments to ba-way:fair market value at the time of the gift plus or
sis, see Publication 551.minus any required adjustments to basis during
Fair market value............. $101,000the period you hold the property.
Minus: Adjusted basis.......... 40,000 Stocks and BondsNo gain or loss. If you use the basis forNet increase in value of gift...... $61,000
figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and then The basis of stocks or bonds you own generally
use the basis for figuring a loss and the result isGift tax paid................ $21,000 is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase,
a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss. Multiplied by .678 ($61,000 ÷ such as commissions and recording or transfer
$90,000) .................. .678 fees. If you acquired stock or bonds other than
Gift tax due to net increase in value $14,238Example. You receive a gift of investment by purchase, your basis is usually determined
Plus: Adjusted basis of property toproperty having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at by fair market value or the previous owner’syour mother................ 40,000the time of the gift. The fair market value at the adjusted basis as discussed earlier under BasisYour basis in the property $54,238time of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the Other Than Cost.
property for $9,500. You have neither gain nor The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer-
loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, andPart sale, part gift.If you get property in atain events that occur after purchase. For exam-
$9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss.transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, yourple, if you receive more stock from nontaxable
Your basis for figuring loss is $9,000, andbasis is the larger of the amount you paid for thestock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce
$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain.property or the transferor’s adjusted basis in thethe basis of your original stock. You must also
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 43

Page 44 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
50 shares (50 × $10) balance ofreduce your basis when you receive nondivi- shares of common stock. Your basis in each
stock bought in 1991.......... $500dend distributions (discussed in chapter 1). share is $15 ($45 ÷ 3).
80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought inThese distributions, up to the amount of your
January 1992............... 8 8 0 Example 2. You owned two shares of com-basis, are a nontaxable return of capital.
Total basis of stock sold in 2004$1,380 mon stock. You had bought one for $30 and the
Identifying stock or bonds sold.If you can other for $45. The corporation distributed two
adequately identify the shares of stock or the new shares of common stock for each shareShares in a mutual fund or REIT.The basis
bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other held. You had six shares after the distribution—of shares in a regulated investment company
basis of the particular shares of stock or bonds. three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷ 3) and(mutual fund) or a real estate investment trust
three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷ 3).(REIT) is generally figured in the same way asAdequate identification.You will make an
the basis of other stock.adequate identification if you show that certifi- New and old stock not identical.If the
cates representing shares of stock from a lot that new stock you received as a nontaxable divi-Mutual fund load charges.Your cost basis
you bought on a certain date or for a certain dend is not identical to the old stock on which itin a mutual fund often includes a sales fee, also
price were delivered to your broker or other was declared, the basis of the new stock isknown as a load charge. But, in certain cases,
agent. calculated differently. Divide the adjusted basisyou cannot include the entire amount of a load
of the old stock between the old and the newcharge in your basis if the charge gives you aBroker holds stock. If you have left the stock in the ratio of the fair market value of eachreinvestment right. For more information, seestock certificates with your broker or other lot of stock to the total fair market value of bothPublication 564.agent, you will make an adequate identification if lots on the date of distribution of the new stock.you: Choosing average basis for mutual fund
shares. You can choose to use the average Example. You bought a share of common1. Tell your broker or other agent the particu-basis of mutual fund shares if you acquired thestock for $100. Later, the corporation distributedlar stock to be sold or transferred at theshares at various times and prices and left thema share of preferred stock for each share oftime of the sale or transfer, and on deposit in an account kept by a custodian orcommon stock held. At the date of distribution,agent. The methods you can use to figure aver-2. Receive a written confirmation of this from your common stock had a fair market value ofage basis are explained in Publication 564.your broker or other agent within a reason- $150 and the preferred stock had a fair market
able time. value of $50. You figure the basis of the old andUndistributed capital gains.If you had to
new stock by dividing your $100 basis betweeninclude in your income any undistributed capitalStock identified this way is the stock sold or them. The basis of your common stock is $75gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase yourtransferred even if stock certificates from a dif- ($150/$200 × $100), and the basis of the newbasis in the stock by the difference between theferent lot are delivered to the broker or other preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 × $100).amount you included and the amount of tax paidagent.
for you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributed Stock bought at various times.Figure theSingle stock certificate.If you bought capital gains of mutual funds and REITs under basis of stock dividends received on stock youstock in different lots at different times and youCapital Gain Distributions in chapter 1. bought at various times and at different prices byhold a single stock certificate for this stock, you allocating to each lot of stock the share of thewill make an adequate identification if you:Automatic investment service.If you partici-stock dividends due to it.pate in an automatic investment service, your
1. Tell your broker or other agent the particu- Taxable stock dividends.If your stock divi-basis for each share of stock, including frac-
lar stock to be sold or transferred when dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis oftional shares, bought by the bank or other agent
you deliver the certificate to your broker or your new stock is its fair market value on theis the purchase price plus a share of the broker’s
other agent, and date of distribution. The basis of your old stockcommission.
does not change.2. Receive a written confirmation of this fromDividend reinvestment plans.If you partici-your broker or other agent within a reason- Stock splits.Figure the basis of stock splits inpate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receiveable time. the same way as stock dividends if identicalstock from the corporation at a discount, your
If you sell part of the stock represented by a stock is distributed on the stock held.basis is the full fair market value of the stock on
single certificate directly to the buyer instead ofthe dividend payment date. You must include
Stock rights.A stock right is a right to acquirethrough a broker, you will make an adequatethe amount of the discount in your income.
a corporation’s stock. It may be exercised, it mayidentification if you keep a written record of thePublic utilities.If, before 1986, you ex-be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire.particular stock that you intend to sell.cluded from income the value of stock you hadStock rights are rarely taxable when you receiveBonds. These methods of identificationreceived under a qualified public utility reinvest-them. See Distributions of Stock and Stockalso apply to bonds sold or transferred. ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero.Rights under Nondividend Distributions in chap-
ter 1.Identification not possible.If you buy andStock dividends. Stock dividends are distri-sell securities at various times in varying quanti- Taxable stock rights.If you receive stockbutions made by a corporation of its own stock.ties and you cannot adequately identify the rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights isGenerally, stock dividends are not taxable toshares you sell, the basis of the securities you their fair market value at the time of distribution.you. However, see Distributions of Stock andsell is the basis of the securities you acquired The basis of the old stock does not change.Stock Rights under Nondividend Distributions infirst. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis-chapter 1 for some exceptions. If the stock divi-Nontaxable stock rights.If you receivecussed later, you cannot use the average pricedends are not taxable, you must divide yournontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex-per share to figure gain or loss on the sale of thebasis for the old stock between the old and newpire, they have no basis.shares. stock. If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stock
Example. You bought 100 shares of stock rights and if, at the time of distribution, the stockNew and old stock identical.If the new
of XYZ Corporation in 1991 for $10 a share. In rights had a fair market value of 15% or more ofstock you received as a nontaxable dividend is
January 1992 you bought another 200 shares the fair market value of the old stock, you mustidentical to the old stock on which the dividend
for $11 a share. In July 1992 you gave your son divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-was declared, divide the adjusted basis of the
50 shares. In December 1994 you bought 100 tween the old stock and the stock rights. Use aold stock by the number of shares of old and
shares for $9 a share. In April 2004 you sold 130 ratio of the fair market value of each to the totalnew stock. The result is your basis for each
shares. You cannot identify the shares you dis- fair market value of both at the time of distribu-share of stock.
posed of, so you must use the stock you ac- tion.
quired first to figure the basis. The shares ofExample 1. You owned one share of com- If the fair market value of the stock rights was
stock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50 mon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora- less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, you
× $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares of tion distributed two new shares of common can choose to divide the basis of the old stock
stock you sold in 2004 as follows: stock for each share held. You then had three between the old stock and the stock rights. To
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
make the choice, attach a statement to your• Any nonseparately stated loss of the S Discounted tax-exempt obligations.OID
return for the year in which you received the corporation. on tax-exempt obligations is generally not tax-
rights, stating that you choose to divide the basis able. However, when you dispose of a tax-ex-
• Any expense of the S corporation that isof the stock. empt obligation issued after September 3, 1982,not deductible in figuring its taxable in-that you acquired after March 1, 1984, you mustBasis of new stock. If you exercise the come and not properly chargeable to a accrue OID on the obligation to determine itsstock rights, the basis of the new stock is its cost capital account. adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added to theplus the basis of the stock rights exercised.• The amount of your deduction for deple-basis of the obligation to determine your gain or
tion of oil and gas wells to the extent theloss.Example. You own 100 shares of ABC deduction is not more than your share ofFor information on determining OID on aCompany stock, which cost you $22 per share.the adjusted basis of the wells. long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is-The ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxable sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985 orstock rights that would allow you to buy 10 moreHowever, your basis in the stock cannot beDebt Instruments Issued After 1984, whichevershares at $26 per share. At the time the stockreduced below zero. applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OIDrights were distributed, the stock had a market on Long-Term Debt Instruments.Specialized small business investment com-value of $30, not including the stock rights. Each If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity ofpany stock or partnership interest.If youstock right had a market value of $3. The market 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules forbought this stock or interest as replacementvalue of the stock rights was less than 15% of acquisition discount on short-term obligations.property for publicly traded securities you sold atthe market value of the stock, but you chose to See Discount on Short-Term Obligations ina gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock ordivide the basis of your stock between the stock chapter 1.interest by the amount of any postponed gain onand the rights. You figure the basis of the rights
that sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publiclyand the basis of the old stock as follows: Stripped tax-exempt obligation.If you ac-
Traded Securities, later. quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or coupon
100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID onQualified small business stock. If youstock it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis-bought this stock as replacement property forpose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds orother qualified small business stock you sold at100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part ofa gain, you must reduce the basis of this re-old stock this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID onplacement stock by the amount of any post-these obligations in the manner described inponed gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rights chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons.Qualified Small Business Stock, later. Increase your basis in the stripped tax-ex-($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, empt bond or coupon by the taxable and nontax-Short sales. If you cannot deduct paymentsnew basis of old stock able accrued OID. Also increase your basis byyou make to a lender in lieu of dividends on
the interest that accrued (but was not paid, andstock used in a short sale, the amount you pay to($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of
was not previously reflected in your basis)the lender is a capital expense, and you mustrights
before the date you sold the bond or coupon. Inadd it to the basis of the stock used to close theIf you sell the rights, the basis for figuring addition, for bonds acquired after June 10, 1987,short sale.gain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right. If add to your basis any accrued market discountSee Payments in lieu of dividends, later, foryou exercise the rights, the basis of the stock not previously reflected in basis.information about deducting payments in lieu ofyou acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus thedividends.basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18
per share. The remaining basis of the old stockPremiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at a
is $21.78 per share. premium, the premium is treated as part of yourHow To Figurebasis in the bond. If you choose to amortize theInvestment property received in liquidation.premium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-Gain or LossIn general, if you receive investment property asduce the basis of the bond by the amortized parta distribution in partial or complete liquidation ofof the premium each year over the life of theYou figure gain or loss on a sale or trade ofa corporation and if you recognize gain or lossbond. property by comparing the amount you realizewhen you acquire the property, your basis in theAlthough you cannot deduct the premium onwith the adjusted basis of the property.property is its fair market value at the time of thea tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de-distribution. Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale ortermine your adjusted basis in the bond. You
trade is more than the adjusted basis of themust reduce the basis of the bond by the pre-S corporation stock.You must increase your property you transfer, the difference is a gain.mium you amortized for the period you held thebasis in stock of an S corporation by your pro
bond. Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property yourata share of the following items.
See Bond Premium Amortization in chapter transfer is more than the amount you realize, the• All income items of the S corporation, in-3 for more information. difference is a loss.cluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa-
Market discount on bonds. If you include Amount realized. The amount you realizerately stated and passed through to you as
market discount on a bond in income currently,from a sale or trade of property is everything youa shareholder.
increase the basis of your bond by the amount ofreceive for the property. This includes the• The nonseparately stated income of the Smarket discount you include in your income. Seemoney you receive plus the fair market value ofcorporation. Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 for moreany property or services you receive.
information. If you finance the buyer’s purchase of your• The amount of the deduction for depletion
property and the debt instrument does not pro-(other than oil and gas depletion) that isAcquisition discount on short-term vide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedmore than the basis of the property beingobligations.If you include acquisition dis-interest that you must report as ordinary incomedepleted. count on a short-term obligation in your incomewill reduce the amount realized from the sale.currently, increase the basis of the obligation byFor more information, see Publication 537.You must decrease your basis in stock of an Sthe amount of acquisition discount you include inIf a buyer of property issues a debt instru-corporation by your pro rata share of the follow-your income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-ment to the seller of the property, the amounting items. gations in chapter 1 for more information.realized is determined by reference to the issue• Distributions by the S corporation thatOriginal issue discount (OID) on debt price of the debt instrument, which may or maywere not included in your income. instruments. Increase the basis of a debt in- not be the fair market value of the debt instru-
• All loss and deduction items of the S cor- strument by the amount of OID that you include ment. See Regulations section 1.1001-1(g).
poration that are separately stated and in your income. See Original Issue DiscountHowever, if the debt instrument was previously
passed through to you. (OID) in chapter 1. issued by a third party (one not part of the sale
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 45

Page 46 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
transaction), the fair market value of the debt property you trade and the property you or loss on the unlike property you give up. The
instrument is used to determine the amount real- gain or loss is the difference between the ad-receive for productive use in your trade or
ized. justed basis of the unlike property and its fairbusiness or for investment. Neither prop-
market value.erty may be property used for personalFair market value.Fair market value is the purposes, such as your home or familyprice at which property would change hands Like property and money transferred. Ifcar.between a buyer and a seller, neither being conditions (1) — (6) are met, you have a non-
forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable2. The property must not be held primarily fortaxable trade even if you pay money in addition
knowledge of all the relevant facts. sale. The property you trade and the prop-to the like property.
erty you receive must not be property you
Example. You trade A Company stock with Basis of property received.You figure yoursell to customers, such as merchandise.
an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company basis in property received in a nontaxable or3. The property must not be stocks, bonds,stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which partly nontaxable trade as explained earliernotes, choses in action, certificates of trustis your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 under Basis Other Than Cost, earlier.or beneficial interest, or other securities or($10,000 minus $7,000). If you also receive aevidences of indebtedness or interest, in-How to report. You must report the trade ofnote for $6,000 that has an issue price of cluding partnership interests. However,like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-$6,000, your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 plus you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it on$6,000 minus $7,000). rate stocks under a different rule, as dis-Schedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,
Debt paid off.A debt against the property, cussed later under Corporate Stocks. Sales of Business Property, whichever applies.
or against you, that is paid off as a part of the For information on using Form 4797, see4. There must be a trade of like property. Thetransaction or that is assumed by the buyer must chapter 4 of Publication 544.trade of real estate for real estate, or per-be included in the amount realized. This is truesonal property for similar personal prop-even if neither you nor the buyer is personally Corporate Stockserty, is a trade of like property. The tradeliable for the debt. For example, if you sell orof an apartment house for a store building,trade property that is subject to a nonrecourse The following trades of corporate stocks gener-or a panel truck for a pickup truck, is aloan, the amount you realize generally includes ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductibletrade of like property. The trade of a piecethe full amount of the note assumed by the buyer loss.of machinery for a store building is not aeven if the amount of the note is more than thetrade of like property. Real property lo-fair market value of the property. Corporate reorganizations. In some in-cated in the United States and real prop-stances, a company will give you common stockerty located outside the United States areExample. You sell stock that you had for preferred stock, preferred stock for commonnot like property. Also, personal propertypledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000. stock, or stock in one corporation for stock inused predominantly within the UnitedYour basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer another corporation. If this is a result of aStates and personal property usedpays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledpredominantly outside the United Statescash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-are not like property.plus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-
minus $6,000). zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.5. The property to be received must be identi-
fied in writing within 45 days after the datePayment of cash. If you trade property and Example. On April 19, 2004, KP1 Corpora-you transfer the property given up in thecash for other property, the amount you realize tion was acquired by KP2 Corporation. You heldtrade. If you received the replacementis the fair market value of the property you re- 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis of $3,500.property before the end of the 45-day pe-ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- As a result of the acquisition, you received 70riod, you automatically are treated as hav-tracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basis shares of KP2 stock in exchange for your KP1ing met the 45-day written noticeof the property you trade in from the amount you stock. You do not recognize gain or loss on therequirement.realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a transaction. Your basis in the 70 shares of thegain. If the result is a negative number, it is a6. The property to be received must be re-new stock is still $3,500.loss. ceived by the earlier of:
Stock for stock of the same corporation.No gain or loss.You may have to use a basis a. The 180th day after the date on whichYou can exchange common stock for commonfor figuring gain that is different from the basisyou transfer the property given up in thestock or preferred stock for preferred stock in theused for figuring loss. In this case, you may havetrade, or same corporation without having a recognizedneither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in gain or loss. This is true for a trade between twob. The due date, including extensions, forthe discussion on the basis of property you re- stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-your tax return for the year in which theceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost, holder and the corporation.transfer of the property given up occurs.earlier. If you receive cash for fractional shares, see
Fractional shares under Distributions of stockIf you trade property with a related party in a
and stock rights in chapter 1.like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.
See Related Party Transactions, later in this Money or other property received.If in anNontaxable Trades chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544otherwise nontaxable trade you receive moneyfor more information on exchanges of businessor other property in addition to stock, then yourThis section discusses trades that generally doproperty and special rules for exchanges usinggain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up tonot result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss.qualified intermediaries or involving multiplethe amount of the money or other property. AnyFor more information on nontaxable trades, seeproperties. loss is not recognized.chapter 1 of Publication 544.
If you received cash for fractional shares,Partly nontaxable exchange.If you receivesee Fractional shares under Distributions ofLike-Kind Exchanges money or unlike property in addition to the likeStock and Stock Rights in chapter 1.property, and the preceding six conditions are
If you trade business or investment property for Nonqualified preferred stock.Nonquali-met, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You are
other business or investment property of a like fied preferred stock is generally treated as prop-taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to the
kind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct erty other than stock. Generally, this applies toamount of the money and the fair market value
any loss until you sell or dispose of the property preferred stock with one or more of the followingof the unlike property you receive. You cannot
you receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must features.deduct a loss.
meet all six of the following conditions. 
Like property and unlike property trans- • The holder has the right to require the
ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-1. The property must be business or invest- issuer or a related person to redeem or
tion to the like property, you must recognize gainment property. You must hold both the purchase the stock.
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The issuer or a related person is required If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro- ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-
ceeding and you transfer property to a controlledto redeem or purchase the stock. tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.
corporation under a plan, other than a reorgani-• The issuer or a related person has thezation, you must recognize gain to the extent theright to redeem the stock, and on the issue Demutualization of Lifestock you receive in the exchange is used to paydate, it is more likely than not that the rightoff your debts. Insurance Companieswill be exercised. For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-
A life insurance company may change from a• The dividend rate on the stock varies withration, you or your group of transferors must
mutual company to a stock company. This isreference to interest rates, commodityown, immediately after the exchange, at least
commonly called demutualization. If you were aprices, or similar indices. 80% of the total combined voting power of all
policyholder or annuitant of the mutual com-classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre- pany, you may have received either stock in theof the outstanding shares of each class of non-ferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter- stock company or cash in exchange for yourvoting stock of the corporation.nal Revenue Code. equity interest in the mutual company.If this provision applies to you, you must
If the demutualization transaction qualifiesattach to your return a complete statement of allConvertible stocks and bonds.You gener- as a tax-free reorganization under sectionfacts pertinent to the exchange.ally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gainconvert bonds into stock or preferred stock intoMoney or other property received.If, in anor loss is recognized on the exchange. Yourcommon stock of the same corporation accord-otherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor-holding period for the new stock includes theing to a conversion privilege in the terms of theporate stock, you also receive money or prop-period you held an equity interest in the mutualbond or the preferred stock certificate. erty other than stock, you may have a taxablecompany as a policyholder or annuitant.gain. However, you are taxed only up to the
If the demutualization transaction does notExample. In November, you bought for $1 aamount of money plus the fair market value of
qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec-right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, onthe other property you receive. The rules for
payment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issued tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, youfiguring taxable gain in this situation generally
by that corporation. must recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold-follow those for a partly nontaxable exchange
ing period for the stock does not include theOn December 2, you subscribed to the bond,discussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. If
period you held an equity interest in the mutualwhich was issued on December 9. The bond the property you give up includes depreciable
company.contained a clause stating that you would re-property, the taxable gain may have to be re-
ceive one share of XYZ Corporation commonported as ordinary income because of deprecia- If you received cash in exchange for your
stock on surrender of one bond and the paymenttion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No lossequity interest, you must recognize a capital
of $50. is recognized. gain. If you held an equity interest for more than
1 year, your gain is long-term.Later, you presented the bond and $50 andNonqualified preferred stock (described ear-
received one share of XYZ Corporation commonlier under Stock for stock of the same corpora-
stock. You did not have a recognized gain ortion) received is generally treated as propertyU.S. Treasury
loss. This is true whether the fair market value ofother than stock. Notes or Bondsthe stock was more or less than $150 on theBasis of stock or other property received.date of the conversion. You can trade certain issues of U.S. TreasuryThe basis of the stock you receive is generally
The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 + obligations for other issues, designated by thethe adjusted basis of the property you transfer.
$99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Your Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or lossIncrease this amount by any amount that was
holding period for the part based on your owner- recognized on the trade.treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognized
ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem-on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cashSee the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S.ber 2. Your holding period for the part based onyou received and the fair market value of anyTreasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for informationyour cash investment ($50 basis) begins on theother property you received. about income from these investments.day after you acquired the share of stock. The basis of any other property you receive
is its fair market value on the date of the trade.Bonds for stock of another corporation.
Generally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo-
Insurance Policies Transfers Betweenration into common stock of another corporation,
and Annuitiesaccording to the terms of the bond issue, you Spousesmust recognize gain or loss up to the differenceYou will not have a recognized gain or loss if thebetween the fair market value of the stock re- Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on ainsured or annuitant is the same under bothceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex- transfer of property from an individual to (or incontracts and you trade:changed. In some instances, however, such as trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident totrades that are part of mergers or other corpo-1. A life insurance contract for another lifea divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognitionrate reorganizations, you will have no recog-insurance contract or for an endowment orrule does not apply in the following situations.nized gain or loss if certain requirements areannuity contract,met. For more information about the tax conse- • The recipient spouse or former spouse isquences of converting securities of one corpora- 2. An endowment contract for an annuity con-a nonresident alien.tion into common stock of another corporation, tract or for another endowment contract
• Property is transferred in trust. Gain mustunder circumstances such as those just de- that provides for regular payments begin-
be recognized to the extent the amount ofscribed, consult the respective corporations and ning at a date not later than the beginning
the liabilities assumed by the trust, plusthe terms of the bond issue. This information is date under the old contract, or
any liabilities on the property, exceed thealso available on the prospectus of the bond3. An annuity contract for another annuity adjusted basis of the property.issue. contract.
• An installment obligation is transferred inYou also may not have to recognize gain or lossProperty for stock of a controlled corpora- trust. For information on the disposition offrom an exchange of a portion of an annuitytion. If you transfer property to a corporation an installment obligation, see Publicationcontract for another annuity contract. See Reve-solely in exchange for stock in that corporation, 537, Installment Sales.nue Ruling 2003-76 and Notice 2003-51 in Inter-and immediately after the trade you are in con-
nal Revenue Bulletin 2003-33. This bulletin is• Certain stock redemptions, which are tax-trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not
available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/ able to a spouse under the tax law, a di-recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both
irb03-33.pdf. vorce or separation instrument, or a validto individuals and to groups who transfer prop-
erty to a corporation. It does not apply if the written agreement, discussed in Regula-Exchanges of contracts not included in this
corporation is an investment company. list, such as an annuity contract for an endow- tions section 1.1041-2.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 47

Page 48 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Any transfer of property to a spouse or former• The holding by another person of a right to capital interests or the profit interests in
acquire the property, or both partnerships.spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is
treated by the recipient as a gift and is not• A short sale or any other transaction.Multiple property sales or trades.If you sellconsidered a sale or exchange. The recipient’s
or trade to a related party a number of blocks ofbasis in the property will be the same as the
stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youLosses on Sales oradjusted basis of the giver immediately before
must figure the gain or loss separately for eachthe transfer. This carryover basis rule appliesTrades of Property
block of stock or piece of property. The gain onwhether the adjusted basis of the transferred
You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade ofeach item may be taxable. However, you cannotproperty is less than, equal to, or greater than
property, other than a distribution in completededuct the loss on any item. Also, you cannoteither its fair market value at the time of transfer
liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction isreduce gains from the sales of any of theseor any consideration paid by the recipient. This
directly or indirectly between you and the follow-items by losses on the sales of any of the otherrule applies for purposes of determining loss as
ing related parties. items.well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer
in trust increases the basis. Indirect transactions.You cannot deduct1. Members of your family. This includes only
A transfer of property is incident to a divorce your loss on the sale of stock through youryour brothers and sisters, half-brothers
if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedand half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-
on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is party buys the same stock you had owned. Thisents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-
related to the ending of the marriage. For more does not apply to a trade between related par-scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).
information, see Property Settlements in Publi- ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-2. A partnership in which you directly or indi-cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. dental and is not prearranged.rectly own more than 50% of the capital
Constructive ownership of stock.In deter-interest or the profits interest.
mining whether a person directly or indirectly3. A corporation in which you directly or indi-owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-rectly own more than 50% in value of theRelated Party tion, the following rules apply.outstanding stock (see Constructive own-
Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byTransactions ership of stock, later).
or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust4. A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-is considered owned proportionately by or for itsSpecial rules apply to the sale or trade of prop-ganization that is directly or indirectly con-shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.erty between related parties. trolled, in any manner or by any method,
Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownby you or by a member of your family,
Gain on Sale or Trade the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orwhether or not this control is legally en-
for his or her family. Family includes only broth-forceable.of Depreciable Property
ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of propertyYour gain from the sale or trade of property to a spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.is not deductible if the transaction is directly orrelated party may be ordinary income, rather Rule 3. An individual owning, other than byindirectly between the following related parties.than capital gain, if the property can be depreci- applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation isated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 in1. A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciaryconsidered to own the stock that is directly orPublication 544 for more information. and beneficiary, of any trust. indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.
2. Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or theRule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock
fiduciary and beneficiary of two differentLike-Kind Exchanges constructively owned by a person under rule 1 is
trusts, if the same person is the grantor oftreated as actually owned by that person. But
Generally, if you trade business or investmentboth trusts. stock constructively owned by an individual
property for other business or investment prop- under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by3. A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whicherty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized. that individual for again applying either rule 2 ormore than 50% in value of the outstandingSee Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non- rule 3 to make another person the constructivestock is directly or indirectly owned by ortaxable Trades. owner of the stock.for the trust, or by or for the grantor of theThis rule also applies to trades of propertytrust. Property received from a related party.Ifbetween related parties, defined next under you sell or trade at a gain property that youLosses on Sales or Trades of Property. How- 4. A corporation and a partnership if theacquired from a related party, you recognize theever, if either you or the related party disposes ofsame persons own more than 50% in gain only to the extent that it is more than thethe like property within 2 years after the trade,value of the outstanding stock of the cor-loss previously disallowed to the related party.you both must report any gain or loss not recog-poration and more than 50% of the capitalThis rule applies only if you are the originalnized on the original trade on your return for theinterest, or the profits interest, in the part-transferee and you acquired the property byyear in which the later disposition occurs. nership. purchase or exchange. This rule does not applyThis rule generally does not apply to: 5. Two S corporations if the same personsif the related party’s loss was disallowed be-
own more than 50% in value of the out-cause of the wash sale rules, described later• Dispositions due to the death of either re-
standing stock of each corporation. under Wash Sales.lated party,
If you sell or trade at a loss property that you6. Two corporations, one of which is an S• Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 of acquired from a related party, you cannot recog-corporation, if the same persons own morePublication 544), or nize the loss that was not allowed to the relatedthan 50% in value of the outstanding stockparty.• Trades and later dispositions whose mainof each corporation.
purpose is not the avoidance of federal
7. An executor and a beneficiary of an estateExample 1. Your brother sells you stock forincome tax.
(except in the case of a sale or trade to$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother
satisfy a pecuniary bequest). cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sellIf a property holder’s risk of loss on the prop-
the same stock to an unrelated party forerty is substantially diminished during any pe-8. Two corporations that are members of the$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-riod, that period is not counted in determiningsame controlled group (under certain con-able gain is $500 — the $2,900 gain minus thewhether the property was disposed of within 2ditions, however, these losses are not dis-$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.years. The property holder’s risk of loss is sub-allowed but must be deferred).
stantially diminished by:
9. Two partnerships if the same persons own,Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the
• The holding of a put on the property, directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nized loss is only $700 — your $7,600 basis Investment property.Investment property isCapital Assets and
minus $6,900. You cannot deduct the loss that a capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale orNoncapital Assets
was not allowed to your brother. trade generally is a capital gain or loss.
For the most part, everything you own and useGold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.for personal purposes, pleasure, or investmentThese are capital assets except when they areis a capital asset. Some examples are: held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from
Capital Gains their sale or trade generally is a capital gain or• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-
loss.count,and Losses
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds.All of• A house owned and used by you and your
these, including stock received as a dividend,family,Terms you may need to know are capital assets except when they are held for(see Glossary): • Household furnishings, sale by a securities dealer. However, see
Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock• A car used for pleasure or commuting,
Call and Losses on Small Business Investment• Coin or stamp collections, Company Stock, later.Commodity future
• Gems and jewelry, and Personal use property.Property held for per-Conversion transaction sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a• Gold, silver, or any other metal.
Forward contract capital asset, and you must report a gain from its
sale as a capital gain. However, you cannotAny property you own is a capital asset, ex-Limited partner deduct a loss from selling personal use property.cept the following noncapital assets. 
Listed option
1. Property held mainly for sale to customersNonequity option
or property that will physically become aDiscounted Debt InstrumentsOptions dealer part of the merchandise that is for sale to
customers. Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,Put
or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument2. Depreciable property used in your trade orRegulated futures contract originally issued at a discount or bought at abusiness, even if fully depreciated. discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-Section 1256 contract
3. Real property used in your trade or busi-plained in the following discussions.
Straddle ness. Short-term government obligations.Treat
Wash sale 4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artisticgains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-
composition, a letter or memorandum, orernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-
similar property — gations) as ordinary income up to your ratableThis section discusses the tax treatment of share of the acquisition discount. This treatmentgains and losses from different types of invest-a. Created by your personal efforts, applies to obligations that have a fixed maturityment transactions. date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.b. Prepared or produced for you (in the
Acquisition discount is the stated redemptioncase of a letter, memorandum, or simi-Character of gain or loss.You need to clas- price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-lar property), orsify your gains and losses as either ordinary or tion.capital gains or losses. You then need to classifyc. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-However, do not treat these gains as incomeyour capital gains and losses as either short ample, by gift) entitling you to the basisto the extent you previously included the dis-term or long term. If you have long-term gains of the person who created the propertycount in income. See Discount on Short-Termand losses, you must identify your 28% rate or for whom it was prepared or pro-Obligations in chapter 1 for more information.gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,duced.you must also identify any unrecaptured section Short-term nongovernment obligations.
1250 gain. Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in
gations as ordinary income up to your ratableThe correct classification and identificationthe ordinary course of a trade or business
share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga-helps you figure the limit on capital losses andfor services rendered or from the sale of
tions that have a fixed maturity date of not morethe correct tax on capital gains. For informationproperty described in (1).
than 1 year from the date of issue.about determining whether your capital gain or6. U.S. Government publications that you re-However, to the extent you previously in-loss is short term or long term, see Holding ceived from the government for free or forcluded the discount in income, you do not havePeriod, later. For information about 28% rate
less than the normal sales price, or thatto include it in income again. See Discount ongain or loss and unrecaptured section 1250
you acquired under circumstances entitlingShort-Term Obligations, in chapter 1, for moregain, see Capital Gain Tax Rates under Report-
you to the basis of someone who receivedinformation.ing Capital Gains and Losses, later.
the publications for free or for less than theTax-exempt state and local governmentnormal sales price.Capital or Ordinary bonds. If these bonds were originally issued
7. Certain commodities derivative financial in-at a discount before September 4, 1982, or youGain or Loss
struments held by commodities derivativesacquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your
dealers. For more information, see sectionIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure
1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.from a transaction, it may be either a capital gain your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these
or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of of the OID.action is clearly identified as a hedginga capital asset (defined next) results in a capital If the bonds were issued after September 3,transaction before the close of the day ongain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-which it was acquired, originated, or en-generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De- crease the adjusted basis by your part of thetered into. For more information, see thepending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on OID to figure gain or loss. For more informationdefinition of hedging transaction earlier,a sale or trade of property used in a trade or on the basis of these bonds, see Discountedand the discussion of hedging transactionsbusiness may be treated as either capital or tax-exempt obligations under Stocks andunder Commodity Futures, later.ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In Bonds, earlier in this chapter.
9. Supplies of a type you regularly use orsome situations, part of your gain or loss may be Any gain from market discount is usually
consume in the ordinary course of youra capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi- taxable on disposition or redemption of tax-ex-
trade or business.nary gain or loss. empt bonds. If you bought the bonds before May
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 49

Page 50 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Long-term debt instruments issued after1, 1993, the gain from market discount is capital 2. Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.
May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-gain. If you bought the bonds after April 30, In that case, any gain is treated as interesternment instrument).If you hold one of these1993, the gain from market discount is ordinary income up to the amount of your deferred inter-debt instruments, you must include a part of theincome. est deduction for the year you dispose of theYou figure market discount by subtractingOID in your gross income each year that youbond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (Thethe price you paid for the bond from the sum ofown the instrument. Your basis in that debt in-limit on the interest deduction for market dis-the original issue price of the bond and thestrument is increased by the amount of OID thatcount bonds is discussed in chapter 3 underamount of accumulated OID from the date ofyou have included in your gross income. SeeWhen To Deduct Investment Interest.)issue that represented interest to any earlierOriginal Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1. Report the sale or trade of a market discountholders. For more information, see Market Dis- If you sell or trade the debt instrument beforebond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or linecount Bonds in chapter 1. maturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you didA loss on the sale or other disposition of aat the time the instrument was originally issuednot choose to include market discount in incometax-exempt state or local government bond isthere was an intention to call it before its matur-currently, enter “Accrued Market Discount” ondeductible as a capital loss. ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to thethe next line in column (a) and the amount of theextent of the entire OID reduced by any amountsRedeemed before maturity. If a state or accrued market discount as a loss in column (f).local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980, of OID previously includible in your income. InAlso report the amount of accrued market dis-is redeemed before it matures, the OID is notthis case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.count in column (f) as interest income on Sched-taxable to you. An intention to call a debt instrument beforeule B (Form 1040), line 1, and identify it asIf a state or local bond issued after June 8,maturity means there is a written or oral agree-“Accrued Market Discount.”1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofment or understanding not provided for in the
the OID that is earned while you hold the bond isdebt instrument between the issuer and originalRetirement of debt instrument.Any amountnot taxable to you. However, you must report theholder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru-that you receive on the retirement of a debtunearned part of the OID as a capital gain.ment before maturity. In the case of debt instru-instrument is treated in the same way as if you
ments that are part of an issue, the agreement orhad sold or traded that instrument.Example. On July 1, 1993, the date of is-understanding must be between the issuer andsue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bondthe original holders of a substantial amount ofNotes of individuals.If you hold an obligationfor $800. The face amount of the bond wasthe debt instruments in the issue. of an individual that was issued with OID after$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time
March 1, 1984, you generally must include thethe bond was issued, the issuer had no intentionExample 1. On February 4, 2002, you OID in your income currently, and your gain orof redeeming it before it matured. The bond wasbought at original issue for $7,600, Jonesloss on its sale or retirement is generally capitalcallable at its face amount beginning 10 yearsCorporation’s 10-year, 5% bond which has again or loss. An exception to this treatment ap-after the issue date. stated redemption price at maturity of $10,000.plies if the obligation is a loan between individu-The issuer redeemed the bond at the end ofOn February 3, 2004, you sold the bond forals and all of the following requirements are met.11 years (July 1, 2004) for its face amount of$9,040. Assume you have included $334 of the$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. TheOID in your gross income (including the amount1. The lender is not in the business of lendingOID earned during the time you held the bond,
accrued for 2004) and increased your basis inmoney.$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual
the bond by that amount. Your basis is nowinterest also is not taxable. However, you must 2. The amount of the loan, plus the amount of$7,934. If at the time of the original issue therereport the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000 orwas no intention to call the bond before maturity,capital gain. less.your gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized
Long-term debt instruments issued after 3. Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-minus $7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain.
1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July cipal purposes of the loan.
2, 1982, if a government instrument).If you Example 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of If the exception applies, or the obligation wassell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of theseoriginal issue there was an intention to call theissued before March 2, 1984, you do not includedebt instruments, the part of your gain that is notbond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinarythe OID in your income currently. When you sellmore than your ratable share of the OID at theincome. You figure this as follows: or redeem the obligation, the part of your gaintime of sale or redemption is ordinary income. that is not more than your accrued share of theThe rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however,1) Entire OID ($10,000 stated OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest ofthere was an intention to call the debt instrumentredemption price at maturity minus the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on thebefore maturity, all of your gain that is not more $7,600 issue price).......... $2,400 sale or redemption is capital loss.2) Minus: Amount previously includedthan the entire OID is treated as ordinary income
in income................ 3 3 4at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxable
3) Maximum amount of ordinarygain also applies to corporate instruments is- Bearer Obligationsincome .................. $2,066sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com-
mitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, and You cannot deduct any loss on an obligationBecause the amount in (3) is more than yourat all times thereafter. required to be in registered form that is insteadgain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in-
held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on thecome.Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov- sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi-ernment bond for $700 at original issue on April nary income. However, if the issuer was subjectMarket discount bonds. If the debt instru-1, 1985, and sold it for $900 on April 21, 2004, to a tax when the obligation was issued, thenment has market discount and you chose tofor a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000. you can deduct any loss, and any gain mayinclude the discount in income as it accrued,At the time of original issue, there was no inten- qualify for capital gain treatment.increase your basis in the debt instrument by thetion to call the bond before maturity. You have
accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss onheld the bond for 228 full months. Do not count Obligations required to be in registeredits disposition. If you did not choose to includethe additional days that are less than a full form. Any obligation must be in registeredthe discount in income as it accrued, you mustmonth. The number of complete months from form unless:report gain as ordinary interest income up to thedate of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30
instrument’s accrued market discount. See Mar-years). The fraction 228/360 multiplied by the 1. It is issued by a natural person,ket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of thediscount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal to
gain is capital gain. 2. It is not of a type offered to the public,$190. This is your ratable share of OID for the
period you owned the bond. You must treat anyHowever, a different rule applies if you dis-3. It has a maturity at the date of issue of notpart of the gain up to $190 as ordinary income.pose of a market discount bond that was: more than 1 year, orAs a result, $190 is treated as ordinary income
4. It was issued before 1983.1. Issued before July 19, 1984, andand $10 is capital gain.
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can contact the IRS to get these rates. SeeDeposit in Insolvent or Conversion Transactions
chapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS.Bankrupt Financial Institution
Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion
Net investment. To determine your net in-transaction is treated as ordinary income. ThisIf you lose money you have on deposit in a
vestment in a conversion transaction, includeapplies to gain on the disposition or other termi-qualified financial institution that becomes insol-
the fair market value of any position at the time itnation of any position you held as part of avent or bankrupt, you may be able to deduct
becomes part of the transaction. This meansconversion transaction that you entered into af-your loss in one of three ways. that your net investment generally will be theter April 30, 1993.
total amount you invested, less any amount youA conversion transaction is any transaction1. Ordinary loss,
received for entering into the position (for exam-that meets both of these tests.2. Casualty loss, or ple, a premium you received for writing a call).
1. Substantially all of your expected return3. Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital Position with built-in loss.A special rule ap-from the transaction is due to the timeloss). plies when a position with a built-in loss be-value of your net investment. In other
comes part of a conversion transaction. Awords, the return on your investment is, in
built-in loss is any loss that you would haveOrdinary loss or casualty loss.If you can substance, like interest on a loan.
realized if you had disposed of or otherwisereasonably estimate your loss, you can choose2. The transaction is one of the following.terminated the position at its fair market value atto treat the estimated loss as either an ordinary
the time it became part of the conversion trans-loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Eithera. A straddle as defined under Straddles, action.way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc- later, but including any set of offsettingWhen applying the conversion transactiontion. positions on stock. rules to a position with a built-in loss, use theIf you claim an ordinary loss, report it as a position’s fair market value at the time it becameb. Any transaction in which you acquiremiscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule part of the transaction. But, when you dispose ofproperty (whether or not actively traded)A (Form 1040), line 22. The maximum amount or otherwise terminate the position in a transac-at substantially the same time that youyou can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are tion in which you recognize gain or loss, youcontract to sell the same property, ormarried filing separately) reduced by any ex- must recognize the built-in loss. The conversionsubstantially identical property, at apected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is transaction rules do not affect whether theprice set in the contract.subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capitalc. Any other transaction that is marketedlimit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinary loss.or sold as producing capital gains fromloss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.
a transaction described in (1). Netting rule for certain conversion transac-If you claim a casualty loss, attach Form
tions. Before determining the amount of gain4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.
treated as ordinary income, you can net certainEach loss must be reduced by $100. Your totalAmount treated as ordinary income. The gains and losses from positions of the samecasualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%amount of gain treated as ordinary income is theconversion transaction. To do this, you have toof your adjusted gross income. smaller of: dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-You cannot choose either of these methods riod that is within a single tax year. You cannot1. The gain recognized on the disposition orif: net the built-in loss against the gain.other termination of the position, or
1. You own at least 1% of the financial institu- You can net gains and losses only if2. The “applicable imputed income amount.”tion, you identify the conversion transaction
as an identified netting transaction onRECORDS
2. You are an officer of the institution, orApplicable imputed income amount.Figure your books and records. Each position of the
this amount as follows.3. You are related to such an owner or of- conversion transaction must be identified before
ficer. You are related if you and the owner the end of the day on which the position be-1. Figure the amount of interest that wouldor officer are “related parties,” as defined comes part of the conversion transaction. Forhave accrued on your net investment inearlier under Related Party Transactions, conversion transactions entered into beforethe conversion transaction for the periodFebruary 20, 1996, this requirement is met if theor if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orending on the earlier of: identification was made by that date.niece of the owner or officer.
a. The date when you dispose of the posi-If the actual loss that is finally determined is Options dealers and commodities traders.tion, ormore than the amount you deducted as an esti- These rules do not apply to options dealers and
mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as ab. The date when the transaction stopscommodities traders.
bad debt. If the actual loss is less than the being a conversion transaction. How to report. Use Form 6781, Gains andamount deducted as an estimated loss, you To figure this amount, use an interest rateLosses From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad-must include in income (in the final determina-equal to 120% of the “applicable rate,” de-dles, to report conversion transactions. See thetion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov- fined later. instructions for lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781.eries in Publication 525, Taxable and
Nontaxable Income. 2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated as
ordinary income from any earlier disposi-Commodity Futurestion or other termination of a position heldNonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose
as part of the same conversion transac-to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty loss A commodity futures contract is a standardized,tion.or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year the exchange-traded contract for the sale or
amount of the actual loss is determined and purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at aApplicable rate.If the term of the conver-deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year. future date for a fixed price.sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rateReport it as a short-term capital loss on Sched- If the contract is a regulated futures contract,is the federal short-term rate in effect underule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi- the rules described earlier under Section 1256section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Codeness Bad Debts, later. Contracts Marked To Market apply to it.during the period of the conversion transaction,The termination of a commodity futures con-compounded daily. tract generally results in capital gain or lossIn all other cases, the applicable rate is theSale of Annuity unless the contract is a hedging transaction.“applicable federal rate” determined as if the
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityconversion transaction were a debt instrumentHedging transaction. A futures contract that
contract before its maturity date that is based onand compounded semi-annually. is a hedging transaction generally produces or-
interest accumulated on the contract is ordinaryThe rates discussed above are published by dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg-
income. the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, you ing transaction if you enter into the contract in
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 51

Page 52 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the ordinary course of your business primarily to long-term capital gain is the amount of net capi- ment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issued
manage the risk of interest rate or price changes tal gain you would have realized if you acquired to your partnership, you must have been a part-
or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinary the asset for its fair market value on the date the ner when the stock was issued and have re-
property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or- constructive ownership transaction was opened, mained so until the time of the loss. You add
dinary property or obligations are those that can- and sold the asset for its fair market value on the your distributive share of the partnership loss to
not produce capital gain or loss under any date the transaction was closed. If you do not any individual section 1244 stock loss you may
circumstances.) For example, the offset or exer- establish the amount of net underlying long-term have before applying the ordinary loss limit.
cise of a futures contract that protects against capital gain by clear and convincing evidence, itStock distributed by partnership.If yourprice changes in your business inventory results is treated as zero. partnership distributes the stock to you, you can-in an ordinary gain or loss. not treat any later loss on that stock as anMore information. For more informationFor more information about hedging transac- ordinary loss.about constructive ownership transactions, seetions, see Regulations section 1.1221-2. Also,section 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code. Stock sold through underwriter. Stocksee Hedging Transactions under Section 1256
sold through an underwriter is not section 1244Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.
stock unless the underwriter only acted as aIf you have numerous transactions inLosses on Section 1244 selling agent for the corporation.the commodity futures market during(Small Business) Stock
the year, the burden of proof is on youRECORDS
Stock dividends and reorganizations.StockYou can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanto show which transactions are hedging transac- you receive as a stock dividend qualifies asas a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, ortions. Clearly identify any hedging transactions section 1244 stock if:worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report theon your books and records before the end of the
loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,day you entered into the transaction. It may be 1. You receive it from a small business cor-
line 10.helpful to have separate brokerage accounts for poration in which you own stock, and
Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalyour hedging and nonhedging transactions. For 2. The stock you own meets the require-gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.specific requirements concerning identification ments when the stock dividend is distrib-Do not offset gains against losses that are withinof hedging transactions and the underlying item, uted.the ordinary loss limit, explained later in thisitems, or aggregate risk that is being hedged,
discussion, even if the transactions are in stocksee Regulations section 1.1221-2(f). If you trade your section 1244 stock for new
of the same company. Report the gain on stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza-
Schedule D (Form 1040). tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that is
If you must figure a net operating loss, anyonly a change in identity, form, or place of organ-Gains From Certain Constructive ordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stockization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if theOwnership Transactions is a business loss. stock you trade meets the requirements when
If you have a gain from a constructive ownership the trade occurs.Ordinary loss limit.The amount that you cantransaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in- If you hold section 1244 stock and otherdeduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000volving a financial asset (discussed later) and stock in the same corporation, not all of the stockeach year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000,the gain normally would be treated as long-term you receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani-even if only one spouse has this type of loss. Ifcapital gain, all or part of the gain may be treated zation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Onlyyour loss is $110,000 and your spouse has noinstead as ordinary income. In addition, if any that part based on the section 1244 stock youloss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinarygain is treated as ordinary income, your tax is hold will qualify.loss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is aincreased by an interest charge. capital loss. Example. Your basis for 100 shares of X
Constructive ownership transactions.The Section 1244 (small business) stock.This is common stock is $1,000. These shares qualify
following are constructive ownership transac-stock that was issued for money or property as section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stock
tions. (other than stock and securities) in a domestic dividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-
small business corporation. During its 5 most mon stock, the basis of which is determined from1. A notional principal contract in which yourecent tax years before the loss, this corporation the 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are alsohave the right to receive all or substantiallymust have derived more than 50% of its gross section 1244 stock.all of the investment yield on a financialreceipts from other than royalties, rents, divi- If you also own stock in the corporation thatasset and you are obligated to reimbursedends, interest, annuities, and gains from sales is not section 1244 stock when you receive theall or substantially all of any decline inand trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora- stock dividend, you must divide the shares youvalue of the financial asset. tion was in existence for at least 1 year, but less receive as a dividend between the section 1244
than 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax stock and the other stock. Only the shares from2. A forward or futures contract to acquire a
years ending before the loss. If the corporation the former can be section 1244 stock.financial asset.
was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% test3. The holding of a call option and writing of a Contributed property.To determine ordinaryapplies to the entire period the corporation wasput option on a financial asset at substan- loss on section 1244 stock you receive in a tradein existence before the day of the loss. However,tially the same strike price and maturity for property, you have to reduce the basis of theif the corporation’s deductions (other than thedate. stock if:net operating loss and dividends received de-
ductions) were more than its gross income dur-This provision does not apply if all the posi- 1. The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of theing this period, this 50% test does not apply.tions are marked to market. Marked to market property, immediately before the trade,The corporation must have been largely anrules for section 1256 contracts are discussed in was more than its fair market value, andoperating company for ordinary loss treatmentdetail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
to apply. 2. The basis of the stock is determined by theMarket, earlier.
If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984,basis of the property.Financial asset.A financial asset, for thisthe stock must be common stock. If issued afterReduce the basis of the stock by the differencepurpose, is any equity interest in a pass-throughJuly 18, 1984, the stock may be either commonbetween the adjusted basis of the property andentity. Pass-through entities include partner-or preferred. For more information about theits fair market value at the time of the trade. Youships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest-requirements of a small business corporation orreduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss.ment companies, and real estate investmentthe qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec-Do not reduce the basis of the stock for anytrusts. tion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and itsother purpose.regulations.Amount of ordinary income.Long-term cap-
ital gain is treated as ordinary income to theThe stock must be issued to the person tak-Example. You transfer property with an ad-
extent it is more than the net underlyinging the loss.You must be the original owner justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value of
long-term capital gain. The net underlying of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat- $250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figure disposed of the property is part of your holdingdisposition of that property is treated as a
the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis of period. long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-
your stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If you gardless of how long you actually held the prop-
Example. If you bought investment propertylater sell the section 1244 stock for $200, your erty.
on February 5, 2003, and sold it on February 5,$800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capital Real property bought. To figure how long2004, your holding period is not more than 1loss of $750. you have held real property bought under anyear and you have a short-term capital gain orunconditional contract, begin counting on theContributions to capital.If the basis of yourloss. If you sold it on February 6, 2004, yourday after you received title to it or on the daysection 1244 stock has increased, through con-holding period is more than 1 year and you haveafter you took possession of it and assumed thetributions to capital or otherwise, you must treata long-term capital gain or loss. burdens and privileges of ownership, whicheverthis increase as applying to stock that is notSecurities traded on an established market.happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinaryFor securities traded on an established securi-session of real property under an option agree-loss on its sale. ties market, your holding period begins the dayment is not enough to start the holding period.
after the trade date you bought the securities,The holding period cannot start until there is anExample. You buy 100 shares of sectionand ends on the trade date you sold them.actual contract of sale. The holding period of the1244 stock for $10,000. You are the original
seller cannot end before that time.owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution to Do not confuse the trade date with the
capital that increases the total basis of the 100settlement date, which is the date byReal property repossessed.If you sell real
shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 shares which the stock must be delivered andproperty but keep a security interest in it, and
CAUTION
!
for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You canpayment must be made. then later repossess the property under the
deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 × $10,000/$12,000) terms of the sales contract, your holding period
as an ordinary loss under these rules. The re- for a later sale includes the period you held theExample. You are a cash method, calendarmaining $500 is a capital loss. property before the original sale and the periodyear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-
after the repossession. Your holding periodcember 29, 2004. According to the rules of theRecordkeeping. You must keep rec-
does not include the time between the originalstock exchange, the sale was closed by deliveryords sufficient to show your stock quali-
sale and the repossession. That is, it does notof the stock 3 trading days after the sale, onfies as section 1244 stock. YourRECORDS
include the period during which the first buyerJanuary 3, 2005. You received payment of therecords must also distinguish your section 1244
held the property.sale price on that same day. Report your gain onstock from any other stock you own in the corpo-
your 2004 return, even though you received theration. Stock dividends.The holding period for stockpayment in 2005. The gain is long term or shortyou received as a taxable stock dividend beginsterm depending on whether you held the stockon the date of distribution.more than 1 year. Your holding period ended onLosses on Small Business The holding period for new stock you re-December 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss,Investment Company Stock ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onyou would also report it on your 2004 return.the same day as the holding period of the oldA small business investment company (SBIC) is stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired inU.S. Treasury notes and bonds.The holdingone that is licensed and operated under the a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock orperiod of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold atSmall Business Investment Act of 1958. securities in a controlled corporation.auction on the basis of yield starts the day afterIf you are an investor in SBIC stock, you canthe Secretary of the Treasury, through newsNontaxable stock rights.Your holding perioddeduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capitalreleases, gives notification of acceptance tofor nontaxable stock rights begins on the sameloss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless-successful bidders. The holding period of U.S.day as the holding period of the underlyingness of that stock. A gain from the sale or tradeTreasury notes and bonds sold through an offer-stock. The holding period for stock acquiredof that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset youring on a subscription basis at a specified yieldthrough the exercise of stock rights begins ongains and losses, even if they are on stock of thestarts the day after the subscription is submitted.the date the right was exercised.same company.
Automatic investment service. In determin-Section 1256 contracts.Gains or losses onHow to report.You report this type of ordinarying your holding period for shares bought by thesection 1256 contracts open at the end of theloss on Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition tobank or other agent, full shares are consideredyear, or terminated during the year, are treatedthe information required by the form, you mustbought first and any fractional shares are con-as 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-include the name and address of the companysidered bought last. Your holding period startsless of how long the contracts were held. Seethat issued the stock. Report a capital gain fromon the day after the bank’s purchase date. If aSection 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, ear-the sale of SBIC stock on Schedule D of Formshare was bought over more than one purchaselier.1040. date, your holding period for that share is a split
holding period. A part of the share is consideredOption exercised. Your holding period for
Short sale.If you close a short sale of SBICto have been bought on each date that stockproperty you acquire when you exercise an op-
stock with other SBIC stock that you bought onlywas bought by the bank with the proceeds oftion begins the day after you exercise the option.
for that purpose, any loss you have on the sale isavailable funds. Wash sales. Your holding period for substan-a capital loss. See Short Sales, later in this
Nontaxable trades.If you acquire investmenttially identical stock or securities you acquire in achapter, for more information.
property in a trade for other investment propertywash sale includes the period you held the old
and your basis for the new property is deter-stock or securities.Holding Period mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in theQualified small business stock.Your hold-old property, your holding period for the newIf you sold or traded investment property, you ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-freeproperty begins on the day following the datemust determine your holding period for the prop- rollover of gain from a sale of qualified smallyou acquired the old property.erty. Your holding period determines whether business stock, described later under Gains on
any capital gain or loss was a short-term or aProperty received as a gift.If you receive aQualified Small Business Stock, includes the
long-term capital gain or loss. gift of property and your basis is determined byperiod you held the old stock.
the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding periodLong-term or short-term.If you hold invest- Commodity futures. Futures transactions inis considered to have started on the same dayment property more than 1 year, any capital gain any commodity subject to the rules of a board ofthe donor’s holding period started.or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If you trade or commodity exchange are long term ifIf your basis is determined by the fair markethold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain the contract was held for more than 6 months.value of the property, your holding period startsor loss is a short-term capital gain or loss. Your holding period for a commodity re-on the day after the date of the gift.To determine how long you held the invest- ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futures
ment property, begin counting on the date afterInherited property.If you inherit investment contract, other than a regulated futures contract
the day you acquired the property. The day you property, your capital gain or loss on any later subject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 53

Page 54 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
includes your holding period for the futures con-Deductible nonbusiness bad debts.To be vestment or that you entered the guarantee
tract if you held the contract as a capital asset. deductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to- transaction with a profit motive. If you make the
tally worthless. You cannot deduct a partly guarantee as a favor to friends and do not re-
Securities futures contract.Your holding pe-worthless nonbusiness debt. ceive any consideration in return, your pay-
riod for a security received in satisfaction of a ments are considered a gift and you cannot takeGenuine debt required. A debt must besecurities futures contract, other than one that is a deduction.genuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt isa section 1256 contract, includes your holding
genuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela-period for the futures contract if you held the Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin-tionship based on a valid and enforceable obli-contract as a capital asset. cipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation,gation to repay a fixed or determinable sum ofYour holding period for a security received in guaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora-money.satisfaction of a securities futures contract to tion received. The corporation defaulted on the
sell, other than one that is a section 1256 con- loan and Henry made full payment. Because heLoan or gift.For a bad debt, you must show
tract, is determined by the rules that apply to guaranteed the loan to protect his investment inthat there was an intention at the time of the
short sales, discussed later under Short Sales. the corporation, Henry can take a nonbusinesstransaction to make a loan and not a gift. If you
bad debt deduction.lend money to a relative or friend with the under-Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6 standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid-months or less. If you hold stock in a regu- Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers.ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a badlated investment company (commonly called a Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note atdebt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a badmutual fund) or real estate investment trust their local credit union. John does not pay thedebt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela-(REIT) for 6 months or less and then sell it at a note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off thetionship between you and the person or organi-loss (other than under a periodic liquidation note. However, since he did not enter into thezation that owes you the money.plan), special rules may apply. guarantee agreement to protect an investmentWhen minor children borrow from their par-
or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debtents to pay for their basic needs, there is noCapital gain distributions received.The
deduction.genuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deductedloss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-
for such a loan.dends you received, as explained next) is Deductible in year paid.Unless you havetreated as a long-term capital loss up to the total rights against the borrower, discussed next, aBasis in bad debt required.To deduct aof any capital gain distributions you received payment you make on a loan you guaranteed isbad debt, you must have a basis in it—that is,and your share of any undistributed capital deductible in the year you make the payment.you must have already included the amount ingains. Any remaining loss is short-term capitalyour income or loaned out your cash. For exam-Rights against the borrower.When youloss. ple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction formake payment on a loan that you guaranteed,Exempt-interest dividends on mutual fundcourt-ordered child support not paid to you byyou may have the right to take the place of thestock. If you received exempt-interest divi- your former spouse. If you are a cash methodlender (the right of subrogation). The debt isdends on the stock, at least part of your loss is taxpayer (most individuals are), you generallythen owed to you. If you have this right, or somedisallowed. You can deduct only the amount of cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaidother right to demand payment from the bor-loss that is more than the exempt-interest divi- salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,rower, you cannot take a bad debt deductiondends. and similar items. until these rights become totally worthless.
When deductible. You can take a bad debtLoss on stock that paid qualified dividends. Debts owed by political parties.You cannotdeduction only in the year the debt becomesAny loss on the sale or trade of stock must be take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for anyworthless. You do not have to wait until a debt istreated as a long-term capital loss to the extent worthless debt owed to you by:due to determine whether it is worthless. A debtyou received, from that stock, qualified divi-
becomes worthless when there is no longer any1. A political party,dends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi-
chance that the amount owed will be paid.nary dividends. This is true regardless of how 2. A national, state, or local committee of aIt is not necessary to go to court if you canlong you actually held the stock. Generally, an political party, orshow that a judgment from the court would beextraordinary dividend is a dividend that equals
uncollectible. You must only show that you have3. A committee, association, or organizationor exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferred
taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. that either accepts contributions or spendsstock) of your adjusted basis in the stock.
Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-money to influence elections.
dence of the worthlessness of at least a part ofNonbusiness Bad Debts an unsecured and unpreferred debt. Mechanics’ and suppliers’ liens.Workers
If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in aand material suppliers may file liens againstIf someone owes you money that you cannot
financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent orproperty because of debts owed by a builder orcollect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to
Bankrupt Financial Institution, earlier. contractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo-deduct the amount owed to you when you figure
sure and loss of your property, you are entitledyour tax for the year the debt becomes worth-Filing a claim for refund.If you do not to repayment from the builder or contractor. Ifless. deduct a bad debt on your original return for thethe debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debtThere are two kinds of bad debts — busi-year it becomes worthless, you can file a claimdeduction.ness and nonbusiness. A business bad debt,for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do
generally, is one that comes from operating yourthis, use Form 1040X to amend your return forInsolvency of contractor.You can take a
trade or business and is deductible as a busi-the year the debt became worthless. You mustbad debt deduction for the amount you deposit
ness loss. All other bad debts are nonbusinessfile it within 7 years from the date your originalwith a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-
bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-return for that year had to be filed, or 2 yearsvent and you are unable to recover your deposit.
tal losses. from the date you paid the tax, whichever isIf the deposit is for work unrelated to your trade
later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthlessor business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-
Example. An architect made personal loanssecurities generally must be filed within 3 yearstion.
to several friends who were not clients. Shefrom the date a return is filed, or 2 years from theSecondary liability on home mortgage.Ifcould not collect on some of these loans. Theydate the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For morethe buyer of your home assumes your mort-are deductible only as nonbusiness bad debtsinformation about filing a claim, see Publicationgage, you may remain secondarily liable for re-because the architect was not in the business of556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyerlending money and the loans do not have anyand Claims for Refund. defaults on the loan and the house is then soldrelationship to her business.
Loan guarantees. If you guarantee a debt for less than the amount outstanding on the
Business bad debts.For information on busi- that becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad mortgage, you may have to make up the differ-
ness bad debts of an employee, see Publication debt deduction for your payments on the debt ence. You can take a bad debt deduction for the
529. For information on other business bad unless you can show either that your reason for amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if you
debts, see chapter 11 of Publication 535. making the guarantee was to protect your in- cannot collect it from the buyer.
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worthless securities.If you own securities Example. On May 3, 2004, you bought 100Reporting Substitute Payments
that become totally worthless, you can take a shares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000.
If any broker transferred your securities for usededuction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. See On September 3, 2004, you sold short 100
in a short sale, or similar transaction, and re-Worthless Securities under What Is a Sale or shares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. You
ceived certain substitute dividend payments onTrade, earlier in this chapter. made no other transactions involving Baker
your behalf while the short sale was open, thatstock for the rest of 2004 and the first 30 days of
broker must give you a Form 1099-MISC or aRecovery of a bad debt.If you deducted a 2005. Your short sale is treated as a construc-
similar statement, reporting the amount of thesebad debt and in a later tax year you recovertive sale of an appreciated financial position
payments. Form 1099-MISC must be used for(collect) all or part of it, you may have to includebecause a sale of your Baker stock on the date
those substitute payments totaling $10 or morethe amount you recover in your gross income.of the short sale would have resulted in a gain.
that are known on the payment’s record date toHowever, you can exclude from gross incomeYou recognize a $600 short-term capital gain
be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-the amount recovered up to the amount of thefrom the constructive sale and your new holding
tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution,deduction that did not reduce your tax in the yearperiod in the Baker stock begins on September
or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, ordeducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525.3.
that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do not
How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi- treat these substitute payments as dividends or
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on interest. Instead, report the substitute paymentsShort-Term or Long-Term
Schedule D (Form 1040). shown on Form 1099-MISC as “Other income”Capital Gain or Loss
On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the name on line 21 of Form 1040.
As a general rule, you determine whether youof the debtor and “statement attached” in col-
Substitute payment. A substitute paymenthave short-term or long-term capital gain or lossumn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in
means a payment in lieu of:on a short sale by the amount of time you actu-parentheses in column (f). Use a separate line
ally hold the property eventually delivered to thefor each bad debt.
1. Tax-exempt interest (including OID) thatlender to close the short sale.For each bad debt, attach a statement to
has accrued while the short sale wasyour return that contains:
open, andExample. Even though you do not own any
1. A description of the debt, including thestock of the Ace Corporation, you contract to sell2. A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is afteramount, and the date it became due, 100 shares of it, which you borrow from yourthe transfer of stock for use in a short sale
broker. After 13 months, when the price of theand before the closing of the short sale.2. The name of the debtor, and any businessstock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Aceor family relationship between you and theCorporation stock and immediately deliver themdebtor, Payments in lieu of dividends.If you borrowto your broker to close out the short sale. Your
stock to make a short sale, you may have to3. The efforts you made to collect the debt,loss is a short-term capital loss because your
remit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi-and holding period for the delivered property is less
dends distributed while you maintain your shortthan one day.4. Why you decided the debt was worthless. position. You can deduct these payments only ifFor example, you could show that the bor-Special rules.Special rules may apply to you hold the short sale open at least 46 daysrower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-gains and losses from short sales of stocks,(more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinarygal action to collect would probably notsecurities, and commodity and securities futuresdividend as defined below) and you itemize yourresult in payment of any part of the debt.(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac-deductions.
quired property substantially identical propertyYou deduct these payments as investment
to that sold short. But if the amount of propertyinterest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter-Short Sales you sold short is more than the amount of thatest Expenses in chapter 3 for more information.
substantially identical property, the special rulesIf you close the short sale by the 45th dayA short sale occurs when you agree to sell
do not apply to the gain or loss on the excess.after the date of the short sale (1 year or less inproperty you do not own (or own but do not wish
the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can-to sell). You make this type of sale in two steps.Gains and holding period.If you held the
not deduct the payment in lieu of the dividendsubstantially identical property for 1 year or less1. You sell short. You borrow property and that you make to the lender. Instead, you muston the date of the short sale, or if you acquireddeliver it to a buyer. increase the basis of the stock used to close thethe substantially identical property after the
short sale by that amount.2. You close the sale. At a later date, youshort sale and by the date of closing the short
To determine how long a short sale is kepteither buy substantially identical propertysale, then:
open, do not include any period during whichand deliver it to the lender or make deliv-
Rule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close theyou hold, have an option to buy, or are under aery out of property that you held at the time
short sale is a short-term capital gain, andcontractual obligation to buy substantially identi-of the sale. Delivery of property borrowed
cal stock or securities.from another lender does not satisfy thisRule 2. The holding period of the substantiallyIf your payment is made for a liquidatingrequirement. identical property begins on the date of thedistribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or ifclosing of the short sale or on the date of theYou do not realize gain or loss until delivery of you buy more shares equal to a stock distribu-sale of this property, whichever comes first.property to close the short sale. You will have a tion issued on the borrowed stock during yourcapital gain or loss if the property used to close short position, you have a capital expense. Youthe short sale is a capital asset. Losses. If, on the date of the short sale, youmust add the payment to the cost of the stock
held substantially identical property for moresold short.Exception if property becomes worthless. than 1 year, any loss you realize on the shortA different rule applies if the property sold short Exception. If you close the short sale withinsale is a long-term capital loss, even if you heldbecomes substantially worthless. In that case, 45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay inthe property used to close the sale for 1 year oryou must recognize gain as if the short sale were lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to theless. Certain losses on short sales of stock orclosed when the property became substantially extent the payments are more than the amountsecurities are also subject to wash sale treat-worthless. that you receive as ordinary income from thement. For information, see Wash Sales, later. lender of the stock for the use of collateral with
Exception for constructive sales.Entering Mixed straddles. Under certain elections,the short sale. This exception does not apply to
into a short sale may cause you to be treated as you can avoid the treatment of loss from a shortpayments in place of extraordinary dividends.
having made a constructive sale of property. In sale as long term under the special rule. These
that case, you will have to recognize gain on the elections are for positions that are part of aExtraordinary dividends.If the amount of
date of the constructive sale. For details, seemixed straddle. See Other elections under any dividend you receive on a share of preferred
Constructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po- Mixed Straddle Elections, later, for more infor- stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case of
sitions, earlier. mation about these elections. other stock) of the amount realized on the short
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 55

Page 56 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi- only if the warrants and stock are considered 2004, you bought 50 shares of substantially
nary dividend. substantially identical, as discussed next. identical stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000
loss. You must add half the disallowed lossSubstantially identical. In determining ($500) to the basis of the 50 shares bought onWash Sales whether stock or securities are substantiallyFebruary 10. Add the other half ($500) to theidentical, you must consider all the facts andbasis of the shares bought on February 11.You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradescircumstances in your particular case. Ordinar-of stock or securities in a wash sale. ily, stocks or securities of one corporation areLoss and gain on same day. Loss from aA wash sale occurs when you sell or tradenot considered substantially identical to stockswash sale of one block of stock or securitiesstock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysor securities of another corporation. However,cannot be used to reduce any gains on identicalbefore or after the sale you: they may be substantially identical in someblocks sold the same day.cases. For example, in a reorganization, the1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-stocks and securities of the predecessor andties, Example. During 1999, you bought 100successor corporations may be substantiallyshares of X stock on each of three occasions.2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-identical. You paid $158 a share for the first block of 100curities in a fully taxable trade, or Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor-shares, $100 a share for the second block, andporation are not ordinarily considered substan-3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub- $95 a share for the third block. On December 23,tially identical to the common stock of the samestantially identical stock or securities. 2004, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 acorporation. However, where the bonds or pre-share. On January 6, 2005, you bought 250If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora-ferred stock are convertible into common stockshares of identical X stock. You cannot deducttion you control buys substantially identicalof the same corporation, the relative values,the loss of $33 a share on the first block becausestock, you also have a wash sale. price changes, and other circumstances maywithin 30 days after the date of sale you boughtIf your loss was disallowed because of themake these bonds or preferred stock and the250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, youwash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to thecommon stock substantially identical. For exam-cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale ofcost of the new stock or securities. The result isple, preferred stock is substantially identical tothe second and third blocks of stock by this loss.your basis in the new stock or securities. Thisthe common stock if the preferred stock:
adjustment postpones the loss deduction until Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to a1. Is convertible into common stock,the disposition of the new stock or securities. dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from aYour holding period for the new stock or securi- transaction made in the ordinary course of busi-2. Has the same voting rights as the commonties begins on the same day as the holding ness.stock,period of the stock or securities sold.
3. Is subject to the same dividend restric-Short sales.The wash sale rules apply to ations,Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stock loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or enter
for $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 and into another short sale of, substantially identical4. Trades at prices that do not vary signifi-within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 shares stock or securities within a period beginning 30cantly from the conversion ratio, andof the same stock for $800. Because you bought days before the date the short sale is complete5. Is unrestricted as to convertibility.substantially identical stock, you cannot deduct and ending 30 days after that date.
your loss of $250 on the sale. However, you add For purposes of the wash sale rules, a shortMore or less stock bought than sold.If thethe disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of the sale is considered complete on the date thenumber of shares of substantially identical stocknew stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the new short sale is entered into, if: or securities you buy within 30 days before orstock, which is $1,050.
after the sale is either more or less than the1. On that date, you own stock or securities
number of shares you sold, you must determineExample 2. You are an employee of a cor- identical to those sold short (or by that
the particular shares to which the wash saleporation that has an incentive pay plan. Under date you enter into a contract or option to
rules apply. You do this by matching the sharesthis plan, you are given 10 shares of the acquire that stock or those securities), and
bought with an equal number of the shares sold.corporation’s stock as a bonus award. You in- 2. You later deliver the stock or securities toMatch the shares bought in the same order thatclude the fair market value of the stock in your close the short sale.you bought them, beginning with the first sharesgross income as additional pay. You later sell
bought. The shares or securities so matched arethese shares at a loss. If you receive another Otherwise, a short sale is not considered
subject to the wash sale rules.bonus award of substantially identical stock complete until the property is delivered to close
within 30 days of the sale, you cannot deduct the sale.
Example 1. You bought 100 shares of Myour loss on the sale. This treatment also applies to losses from
stock on September 24, 2003, for $5,000. Onthe sale, exchange, or termination of a securities
Options and futures contracts.The wash December 18, 2003, you bought 50 shares offutures contract to sell.
sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades ofsubstantially identical stock for $2,750. On De-
contracts and options to acquire or sell stock orcember 26, 2003, you bought 25 shares of sub-Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares of
securities. They do not apply to losses fromstantially identical stock for $1,125. On Januarystock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares of
sales or trades of commodity futures contracts6, 2004, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares youthe stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7,
and foreign currencies. See Coordination of bought in September. You have a $1,000 lossyou buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750.
Loss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules under on the sale. However, because you bought 75You close the short sale on November 17 by
Straddles, later, for information about the taxshares of substantially identical stock within 30delivering the shares bought on June 2. You
treatment of losses on the disposition of posi-days before the sale, you cannot deduct the losscannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750)
tions in a straddle. ($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the lossbecause the date of entering into the short sale
($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of the(October 6) is considered the date the sale isSecurities futures contract to sell.Losses 50 shares bought on December 18, 2003, iscomplete for wash sale purposes and youfrom the sale, exchange, or termination of aincreased by two-thirds (50 ÷ 75) of the $750 bought substantially identical stock within 30securities futures contract to sell generally aredisallowed loss. The new basis of those sharesdays from that date.treated in the same manner as losses from theis $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25closing of a short sale, discussed later in this Residual interests in a REMIC.The washshares bought on December 26, 2003, is in-section under Short sales. sale rules generally will apply to the sale of yourcreased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125
Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if you residual interest in a real estate mortgage in-+ $250).
sell common stock at a loss and, at the same vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the period
time, buy warrants for common stock of the Example 2. You bought 100 shares of M beginning 6 months before the sale of the inter-
same corporation. But if you sell warrants at a stock on September 24, 2003. On February 3, est and ending 6 months after that sale, you
loss and, at the same time, buy common stock in 2004, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss. acquire any residual interest in any REMIC or
the same corporation, the wash sale rules apply On each of the 4 days from February 10–13, any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that is
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
comparable to a residual interest. REMICs are straddle, the loss deferral rules covered later exercised (or repurchased), the amount you re-
discussed in chapter 1. under Straddles may also apply. For special ceive is a short-term capital gain.
rules that apply to nonequity options and dealerIf an option requiring you to buy or sell prop-How to report.Report a wash sale or trade onequity options, see Section 1256 Contracts erty is exercised, see Writers of calls and puts,line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),Marked to Market, earlier. later.whichever is appropriate. Show the full amountGain or loss from the sale or trade of an
of the loss in parentheses in column (f). On theoption to buy or sell property that is a capitalSection 1256 contract options.Gain or loss
next line, enter “Wash Sale” in column (a) andasset in your hands, or would be if you acquired is recognized on the exercise of an option on a
the amount of the loss not allowed as a positiveit, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not, or section 1256 contract. Section 1256 contracts
amount in column (f). would not be, a capital asset, the gain or loss isare defined under Section 1256 Contracts
ordinary gain or loss. Marked to Market, earlier.
Securities Futures Contracts Cash settlement option.A cash settlementExample 1. You purchased an option to buy
option is treated as an option to buy or sell100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stockA securities futures contract is a contract of sale property. A cash settlement option is any optionincreases in value and you sell the option forfor future delivery of a single security or of a that on exercise is settled in, or could be settledmore than you paid for it. Your gain is capitalnarrow-based security index. in, cash or property other than the underlyinggain because the stock underlying the optionGain or loss from the contract generally will property.would have been a capital asset in your hands.be treated in a manner similar to gain or loss
from transactions in the underlying security. This How to report.Gain or loss from the closing orExample 2. The facts are the same as inmeans gain or loss from the sale, exchange, or expiration of an option that is not a section 1256Example 1, except that the stock decreases intermination of the contract will generally have contract, but that is a capital asset in your hands,value and you sell the option for less than youthe same character as gain or loss from transac- is reported on Schedule D (Form 1040).paid for it. Your loss is a capital loss.tions in the property to which the contract re- If an option you purchased expired, enter thelates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale,Option not exercised.If you have a loss be-expiration date in column (c) and enter “Expired”exchange, or termination of a contract to sellcause you did not exercise an option to buy orin column (d).property will be considered short-term, regard-sell, you are considered to have sold or tradedIf an option that you wrote expired, enter theless of how long you hold the contract. Thesethe option on the date that it expired. expiration date in column (b) and enter “Expired”contracts are not section 1256 contracts (unless in column (e).they are dealer securities futures contracts).Writer of option.If you write (grant) an option,
how you report your gain or loss depends on
whether it was exercised.
Options Calls and PutsIf you are not in the business of writing op-
Options are generally subject to the rules de- tions and an option you write on stocks, securi-Calls and puts are options on securities and are
scribed in this section. If the option is part of a ties, commodities, or commodity futures is notcovered by the rules just discussed for options.
The following are specific applications of these
Table 4-1. Puts and Calls rules to holders and writers of options that are
bought, sold, or “closed out” in transactions on a
Puts national securities exchange, such as the Chi-
cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer: 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier, for
special rules that may apply to nonequity op-
Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you tions and dealer equity options.) These rules aresale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received foralso presented in Table 4-1.cost of the put. the put.
Calls and puts are issued by writers (grant-
ors) to holders for cash premiums. They areExpires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for
ended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse.loss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain.
A “call option” is the right to buy from the
writer of the option, at any time before a speci-Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you
cost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the fied future date, a stated number of shares of
receive for it as a capital gain or difference between the amount youstock at a specified price. Conversely, a “put
loss.* pay and the amount you received for option” is the right to sell to the writer, at any time
the put as a short-term capital gainbefore a specified future date, a stated numberor loss.) of shares at a specified price.
Holders of calls and puts.If you buy a call orCalls a put, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capital
expenditure.When a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer: If you sell the call or the put before you
exercise it, the difference between its cost andIs exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on the amount you receive for it is either ain the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you
long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-received for the call.
pending on how long you held it.
If the option expires, its cost is either aExpires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for
loss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain.long-term or short-term capital loss, depending
on your holding period, which ends on the expi-
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if youration date.
cost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basisreceive for it as a capital gain or difference between the amount youof the stock you bought. If you exercise a put,loss.* pay and the amount you received for reduce your amount realized on the sale of thethe call as a short-term capital gainunderlying stock by the cost of the put whenor loss.)
figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on the
sale of the underlying stock is long term or short
*See Holders of calls and puts and Writers of calls and puts in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or
loss is short term or long term. term depending on your holding period for the
underlying stock.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 57

Page 58 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Put option as short sale.Buying a put op- May 27, 2004. The buyer adds the cost of • Personal property includes stock if the
tion is generally treated as a short sale, and the stock is of a type which is actively tradedthe options to the basis of the stock bought
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos- and at least 1 of the offsetting positions isthrough the exercise of the options. The
ing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. If a position on that stock or substantiallywriter adds the amount received from writ-
you have held the underlying stock for 1 year or similar or related property, or situation (2)ing the options to the amount realized from
less at the time you buy the put, any gain on the above applies.selling the stock to figure gain or loss. The
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is again or loss is short term or long term de-
short-term capital gain. The same is true if youpending upon the holding period of thePosition. A position is an interest in personalbuy the underlying stock after you buy the putstock. property. A position can be a forward or futuresbut before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Your contract, or an option.4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are theholding period for the underlying stock begins on An interest in a loan that is denominated in asame as in (1), except the options werethe earliest of:
foreign currency is treated as a position in thatnonequity options, subject to the rules for
currency. For the straddle rules, foreign cur-section 1256 contracts. If you were a buyer1. The date you dispose of the stock,
rency for which there is an active interbank mar-of the options, you would recognize a2. The date you exercise the put, ket is considered to be actively-traded personalshort-term capital loss of $1,600, and a
3. The date you sell the put, or property. See also Foreign currency contractlong-term capital loss of $2,400. If you
under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar-were a writer of the options, you would4. The date the put expires. ket, earlier.recognize a short-term capital gain of
$1,600, and a long-term capital gain ofWriters of calls and puts.If you write (grant) Offsetting position.This is a position that$2,400. See Section 1256 Contractsa call or a put, do not include the amount you substantially reduces any risk of loss you mayMarked to Market, earlier, for more infor-receive for writing it in your income at the time of have from holding another position. However, ifmation.receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until: a position is part of a straddle that is not an
identified straddle (described later), do not treat1. Your obligation expires, Straddles it as offsetting to a position that is part of an
2. You sell, in the case of a call, or buy, in the identified straddle.This section discusses the loss deferral rulescase of a put, the underlying stock when Presumed offsetting positions.Two orthat apply to the sale or other disposition ofthe option is exercised, or more positions will be presumed to be offsettingpositions in a straddle. These rules do not apply3. You engage in a closing transaction. if:to the straddles described under Exceptions,
later.If your obligation expires, the amount you 1. The positions are established in the samereceived for writing the call or put is short-termA straddle is any set of offsetting positions onpersonal property (or in a contract for thiscapital gain. personal property. For example, a straddle mayproperty), and the value of one or moreIf a call you write is exercised and you sellconsist of a purchased option to buy and a positions varies inversely with the value ofthe underlying stock, increase your amount real-purchased option to sell on the same number ofone or more of the other positions,ized on the sale of the stock by the amount youshares of the security, with the same exercise
received for the call when figuring your gain or 2. The positions are in the same personalprice and period.
loss. The gain or loss is long term or short term property, even if this property is in a sub-New legislation changing the straddledepending on your holding period of the stock. stantially changed form, and the positions’rules went into effect on October 22,If a put you write is exercised and you buy values vary inversely as described in the2004. The changes are explained inCAUTION
!
the underlying stock, decrease your basis in the first condition,the “Notes” through the following discussion.stock by the amount you received for the put. 3. The positions are in debt instruments withYour holding period for the stock begins on the a similar maturity, and the positions’ valuesPersonal property.This is any property of adate you buy it, not on the date you wrote the vary inversely as described in the first con-type that is actively traded. It includes stockput. dition,If you enter into a closing transaction by options and contracts to buy stock, but generally
paying an amount equal to the value of the calldoes not include stock. 4. The positions are sold or marketed as off-
or put at the time of the payment, the difference setting positions, whether or not the posi-Straddle rules for stock.Although stock isbetween the amount you pay and the amount tions are called a straddle, spread,generally excluded from the definition of per-you receive for the call or put is a short-term butterfly, or any similar name, orsonal property when applying the straddle rules,capital gain or loss. it is included in the following two situations. 5. The aggregate margin requirement for the
positions is lower than the sum of the mar-Examples of non-dealer transactions.
1. The stock is part of a straddle in which atgin requirements for each position if held
1. Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is- least one of the offsetting positions is:separately.
sued on April 8, 2004, for $4,000. These
a. An option to buy or sell the stock orequity options expired in December 2004, Related persons. To determine if two orsubstantially identical stock or securi-without being exercised. If you were a more positions are offsetting, you will be treatedties,holder (buyer) of the options, you would as holding any position that your spouse holds
recognize a short-term capital loss of during the same period. If you take into accountb. A securities futures contract on the
$4,000. If you were a writer of the options, part or all of the gain or loss for a position held bystock or substantially identical stock or
you would recognize a short-term capital a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership orsecurities, or
gain of $4,000. trust, you are also considered to hold that posi-
c. A position on substantially similar or re-tion.2. Closing transaction. The facts are the lated property (other than stock).same as in (1), except that on May 10,
2004, the options were sold for $6,000. If2. The stock is in a corporation formed orLoss Deferral Rulesyou were the holder of the options who availed of to take positions in personalsold them, you would recognize a property that offset positions taken by anyGenerally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-short-term capital gain of $2,000. If youshareholder. tion of one or more positions only to the extentwere the writer of the options and you that the loss is more than any unrecognized gainbought them back, you would recognize a you have on offsetting positions. Unused lossesNote. The following changes apply to posi-short-term capital loss of $2,000. are treated as sustained in the next tax year.tions established after October 21, 2004.
3. Exercise. The facts are the same as in (1),
Unrecognized gain. This is:• Situations 1(a)-(c) above do not apply.except that the options were exercised on
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. For positions established after Octo- more than 90 days and a strike price of more
1. The amount of gain you would have hadber 21, 2004, identified straddles do not have tothan $50 is the second highest available strike
on an open position if you had sold it onmeet (2) and (3) above, and the losses are noprice that is less than the applicable stock price.
the last business day of the tax year at itslonger deferred until you dispose of all the posi-The availability of strike prices for equity op-
fair market value, and tions in the straddle. tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-
Instead, you increase the basis of each of thetermination of the LQB for an option that is not2. The amount of gain realized on a position
identified positions that offset the loss position inan equity option with flexible terms.if, as of the end of the tax year, gain has
the identified straddle. The increase is the lossThe applicable stock price for any stock forbeen realized, but not recognized.
multiplied by a fraction. The numerator of thewhich an option has been granted is:
fraction is the unrecognized gain (if any) on the
Example. On July 1, 2004, you entered intooffsetting position and the denominator of the 1. The closing price of the stock on the most
a straddle. On December 16, 2004, you closedfraction is the total unrecognized gain on allrecent day on which that stock was traded
one position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.positions that offset the loss position in the iden-before the date on which the option was
On December 31, 2004, the end of your taxtified straddle. For this purpose, your unrecog-granted, or
year, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750nized gain is the excess of the fair market value2. The opening price of the stock on the dayin the offsetting open position. On your 2004of the identified position that is part of an identi-on which the option was granted, but onlyreturn, your deductible loss on the position youfied straddle at the time you incur a loss onif that price is greater than 110% of theclosed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750). another identified position in the identified strad-price determined in (1).You must carry forward to 2005 the unused lossdle, over the fair market value of that position
of $12,750. when you identified it as a position in the strad- If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the
dle. LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of the
Note. If you physically settle a position es- applicable stock price. If the applicable stockNeither you nor anyone else can take into
tablished after October 21, 2004, that is part of a price is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated asaccount any loss on an identified position that is
straddle by delivering property to which the posi- not less than an amount that is $10 below thepart of an identified straddle to the extent that
tion relates (and you would realize a loss on that applicable stock price.the loss increases the basis of any identified
position if you terminated it), you are treated aspositions that offset the loss position in the iden-Example. On May 13, 2004, you held XYZhaving terminated the position for its fair markettified straddle. stock and you wrote an XYZ/September callvalue immediately before the settlement and asQualified covered call options and op- option with a strike price of $120. The closinghaving sold the property used to physically settletioned stock.A straddle is not subject to theprice of one share of XYZ stock on May 12,the position at its fair market value. loss deferral rules for straddles if both of the2004, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/
following are true. September call options offered on May 13,Exceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap- 2004, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125,ply to: 1. All of the offsetting positions consist of one$130, and $135. Because the option has a term
or more qualified covered call options andof more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, the1. A straddle that is an identified straddle atthe stock to be purchased from you undersecond highest strike price that is less thanthe end of the tax year, the options. $130.25, the applicable stock price. The call
option is a deep-in-the-money option because2. Certain straddles consisting of qualified2. The straddle is not part of a larger strad-
its strike price is lower than the LQB. Therefore,covered call options and the stock to be dle.
the option is not a qualified covered call option,purchased under the options, But see Special year-end rule, later, for an ex-and the loss deferral rules apply if you closed out3. Hedging transactions, described earlierception. the option or the stock at a loss during the year.under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to A qualified covered call option is any option
Capital loss on qualified covered callMarket, and you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stock
options. If you hold stock and you write ayou acquire in connection with granting the op-4. Straddles consisting entirely of section qualified covered call option on that stock with ation), but only if all of the following are true.1256 contracts, as described earlier under strike price less than the applicable stock price,
Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market treat any loss from the option as long-term capi-1. The option is traded on a national securi-(but see Identified straddle, next). tal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gainties exchange or other market approved by
on the sale or exchange of the stock would bethe Secretary of the Treasury.
treated as long-term capital gain. The holdingNote. For positions established after Octo-2. The option is granted more than 30 daysperiod of the stock does not include any periodber 21, 2004, you can identify the offsettingbefore its expiration date. during which you are the writer of the option.positions that make up a straddle at the time youFor covered call options entered into afterenter into the transaction that creates the strad- Special year-end rule.The loss deferralJuly 28, 2002, the option is granted notdle (including an unbalanced straddle). rules for straddles apply if all of the following aremore than 12 months before its expiration
true.date or satisfies term limitation and qualifiedIdentified straddle.Losses from positions
benchmark requirements published in thein an identified straddle are deferred until you 1. The qualified covered call options areInternal Revenue Bulletin.dispose of all the positions in the straddle. closed or the stock is disposed of at a lossAny straddle (other than a straddle described3. The option is not a deep-in-the-money op-during any tax year.in (2) or (3) above) is an identified straddle if alltion.
2. Gain on disposition of the stock or gain onof the following conditions exist. 4. You are not an options dealer who grantedthe options is includible in gross income in
the option in connection with your activitya later tax year.1. You clearly identified the straddle on your
of dealing in options.records before the close of the day on 3. The stock or options were held less thanwhich you acquired it. 5. Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or30 days after the closing of the options or
loss. the disposition of the stock.2. All of the original positions that you identify
were acquired on the same day.  A deep-in-the-money option is an option
with a strike price lower than the lowest qualified3. All of the positions included in item (2)benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price atHow To Report Gainswere disposed of on the same day duringwhich the option is to be exercised. Strike pricesand Losses (Form 6781)the tax year, or none of the positions wereare listed in the financial section of many news-disposed of by the end of the tax year. Report each position (whether or not it is part ofpapers. The LQB is the highest available strike
4. The straddle is not part of a larger strad- a straddle) on which you have unrecognizedprice that is less than the applicable stock price.
gain at the end of the tax year and the amount ofdle. However, the LQB for an option with a term of
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 59

Page 60 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
this unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781. the date it is allowed, even if you would treat the
1. The second position was offsetting to thegain or loss on any successor positions as ordi-Use Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains and
loss position that was sold. nary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of alosses on straddles before entering these
loss position (in the case of section 1256 con-amounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include a2. The successor position is entered into dur-
tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-termcopy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.ing a period beginning 30 days before, and
capital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss,ending 30 days after, the sale of the loss
you treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule,position.
even if you would treat any gain or loss on anyCoordination of Loss Deferral
successor positions as 100% long-term orRules and Wash Sale Rules Example 1. On November 1, 2004, you en-short-term capital gain or loss.tered into offsetting long and short positions inRules similar to the wash sale rules apply to any
non-section 1256 contracts. On November 12,Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad-disposition of a position or positions of a strad-
2004, you disposed of the long position at a $10dle losses and wash sales do not apply to thedle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, then
loss. On November 14, you entered into a newfollowing loss situations.apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only if
long position (successor position) that is offset-stocks or securities make up a position that is 1. Loss on the sale of one or more positionsting to the retained short position, but that is notpart of the straddle. If a position in the straddle in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans-substantially identical to the long position dis-does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2. actions are described under Section 1256posed of on November 12. You held both posi-
Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.)tions through year end, at which time there wasRule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-$10 of unrecognized gain in the successor long2. Loss on the sale of a loss position in asition of shares of stock or securities that makeposition and no unrecognized gain in the offset-mixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad-up the positions of a straddle if, within a periodting short position. Under these circumstances,dle account (Election C), later.)beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo-the entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2004sition and ending 30 days after that date, you 3. Loss on the sale of a position that is part ofbecause there is $10 of unrecognized gain in theacquired substantially identical stock or securi- a straddle consisting only of section 1256successor long position.ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to the contracts.following tax year, subject to any further applica-Example 2. The facts are the same as intion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will alsoExample 1, except that at year end you have $4apply if you entered into a contract or option toof unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-Holding Period andacquire the stock or securities within the timetion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsettingLoss Treatment Rulesperiod described above. See Loss carryover, short position. Under these circumstances, thelater, for more information about how to treat theentire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2004 be-The holding period of a position in a straddleloss in the following tax year. cause there is a total of $10 of unrecognizedgenerally begins no earlier than the date on
gain in the successor long position and offset-Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se- which the straddle ends (the date you no longer
ting short position.curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any hold an offsetting position). This rule does not
losses you sustained in the ordinary course of apply to any position you held more than 1 year
Example 3. The facts are the same as inyour business. before you established the straddle. But see
Example 1, except that at year end you have $8Exceptions, later.
of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-Example. You are not a dealer in stock or
tion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsettingsecurities. On December 2, 2004, you bought Example. On March 6, 2003, you acquired
short position. Under these circumstances, $8 ofgold. On January 5, 2004, you entered into anstock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off-
the total $10 realized loss will be disallowed foroffsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu-setting put option. On December 13, 2004, there
2004 because there is $8 of unrecognized gainlated futures contract). On April 1, 2004, youwas $20 of unrealized gain in the put option and
in the successor long position. disposed of the short gold forward contract at noyou sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem-
gain or loss. On April 8, 2004, you sold the goldber 16, the value of the put option had declined,
Loss carryover.If you have a disallowed lossat a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1eliminating all unrealized gain in the position. On
that resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2,year or less before the offsetting short positionDecember 16, you bought a second XX stock
you must carry it over to the next tax year andwas entered into, the holding period for the goldposition that is substantially identical to the XX
apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss.begins on April 1, 2004, the date the straddlestock you sold on December 13. At the end of
For example, a loss disallowed in 2003 underended. Gain recognized on the sale of the goldthe year there is no unrecognized gain in the put
Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2004, unless thewill be treated as short-term capital gain.option or in the XX stock. Under these circum-
substantially identical stock or securities (whichstances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2004
Loss treatment.Treat the loss on the sale ofcaused the loss to be disallowed in 2003) wereunder Rule 1 because, within a period beginning
one or more positions (the loss position) of adisposed of during 2004. In addition, the carry-30 days before December 13, and ending 30
straddle as a long-term capital loss if both of theover loss will not be allowed in 2004 if Rule 1 ordays after that date, you bought stock substan-
following are true.Rule 2 disallows it.tially identical to the XX stock you sold.
1. You held (directly or indirectly) one orExample. The facts are the same as in theRule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo- more offsetting positions to the loss posi-example under Rule 1 above. On December 30,sition of less than all of the positions of a strad- tion on the date you entered into the loss2005, you sell the second XX stock at a $20 lossdle (your loss position) to the extent that any position.and there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the putunrecognized gain at the close of the tax year inoption. Under these circumstances, you cannot2. You would have treated all gain or loss onone or more of the following positions is morededuct in 2005 either the $20 loss disallowed inone or more of the straddle positions asthan the amount of any loss disallowed under2004 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De-long-term capital gain or loss if you hadRule 1. cember 30, 2005, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 doessold these positions on the day you en-
not apply because the substantially identical XXtered into the loss position.1. Successor positions. stock was sold during the year and no substan-
2. Offsetting positions to the loss position.tially identical stock or securities were boughtMixed straddles.Special rules apply to a
within the 61-day period. However, Rule 2 doesloss position that is part of a mixed straddle and3. Offsetting positions to any successor posi-apply because there is $40 of unrecognized gainthat is a non-section 1256 position. A mixedtion. in the put option, an offsetting position to the lossstraddle is a straddle:
positions.Successor position.A successor position 1. That is not part of a larger straddle,is a position that is or was at any time offsettingCapital loss carryover.If the sale of a loss
to a second position, if both of the followingposition would have resulted in a capital loss, 2. In which all positions are held as capital
conditions are met. you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss on assets,
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. In which at least one (but not all) of the You can make this election if: non-section 1256 position will be offset against
positions is a section 1256 contract, and the $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. The
1. At least one (but not all) of the positions isnet gain of $200 from the straddle will be treated4. For which the mixed straddle election a section 1256 contract, and as 60% long-term capital gain and 40%(Election A, discussed later) has not been short-term capital gain because it is due to the2. Each position forming part of the straddlemade. section 1256 contract.is clearly identified as being part of that
Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss andstraddle on the day the first section 1256Mixed straddle account (Election C).You40% short-term capital loss, if all of the followingcontract forming part of the straddle is ac-may elect to establish one or more accounts forconditions apply. quired. determining gains and losses from all positions
in a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa-1. Gain or loss from the sale of one or more If you make this election, it will apply for all
rate mixed straddle account for each separateof the straddle positions that are section later years as well. It cannot be revoked without
designated class of activities.1256 contracts would be considered gain the consent of the IRS. If you made this election,
Generally, you must determine gain or lossor loss from the sale or exchange of a check box A of Form 6781. Do not report the
for each position in a mixed straddle account ascapital asset. section 1256 component in Part I.
of the close of each business day of the tax year.Other elections. You can avoid the 60%2. The sale of no position in the straddle, You offset the net section 1256 contractslong-term capital loss treatment required for aother than a section 1256 contract, would against the net non-section 1256 positions tonon-section 1256 loss position that is part of aresult in a long-term capital gain or loss. determine the “daily account net gain or loss.”mixed straddle, described earlier, if you chooseIf the daily account amount is due to3. You have not made a straddle-by-straddleeither of the two following elections to offsetnon-section 1256 positions, the amount isidentification election (Election B) or mixedgains and losses for these positions. treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If thestraddle account election (Election C), both
daily account amount is due to section 1256discussed later. 1. Election B. Make a separate identificationcontracts, the amount is treated as 60%of the positions of each mixed straddle forlong-term and 40% short-term capital gain orwhich you are electing this treatment (theExample. On March 1, 2004, you entered loss.straddle-by-straddle identification method).into a long gold forward contract. On July 15, On the last business day of the tax year, you2004, you entered into an offsetting short gold2. Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac-determine the “annual account net gain or loss”regulated futures contract. You did not make ancount for a class of activities for whichfor each account by netting the daily accountelection to offset gains and losses from positionsgains and losses will be recognized andamounts for that account for the tax year. Thein a mixed straddle. On August 9, 2004, you offset on a periodic basis. “total annual account net gain or loss” is deter-disposed of the long forward contract at a loss. mined by netting the annual account amountsThese two elections are alternatives to theBecause the gold forward contract was part of a for all mixed straddle accounts that you hadmixed straddle election. You can choose onlymixed straddle and the disposition of this established.one of the three elections. Use Form 6781 tonon-section 1256 position would not result in The net amounts keep their long-term orindicate your election choice by checking box A,long-term capital loss, the loss recognized on short-term classification. However, no moreB, or C, whichever applies.the termination of the gold forward contract will than 50% of the total annual account net gain forbe treated as a 60% long-term and 40% Straddle-by-straddle identification elec-the tax year can be treated as long-term capitalshort-term capital loss. tion (Election B).Under this election, yougain. Any remaining gain is treated asmust clearly identify each position that is part ofExceptions. The special holding period and short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40%the identified mixed straddle by the earlier of:loss treatment for straddle positions does not of the total annual account net loss can be
apply to positions that: treated as short-term capital loss. Any remaining1. The close of the day the identified mixedloss is treated as long-term capital loss.straddle is established, or1. Constitute part of a hedging transaction, The election to establish one or more mixed
2. The time the position is disposed of.straddle accounts for each tax year must be2. Are included in a straddle consisting only
made by the due date (without extensions) ofof section 1256 contracts, or If you dispose of a position in the mixed straddle
your income tax return for the immediately pre-before the end of the day on which the straddle3. Are included in a mixed straddle account ceding tax year. If you begin trading in a newis established, this identification must be made(Election C), discussed later. class of activities during a tax year, you mustby the time you dispose of the position. You are
make the election for the new class of activitiespresumed to have properly identified a mixed
by the later of either:straddle if independent verification is used.
Mixed Straddle Elections The basic tax treatment of gain or loss under1. The due date of your return for the immedi-this election depends on which side of the strad-If you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle ately preceding tax year (without exten-dle produced the total net gain or loss. If the netand make one of the elections described in the sions), orgain or loss from the straddle is due to thefollowing discussions, report your gain or loss assection 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated as 2. 60 days after you entered into the firstindicated in those discussions. If you do not60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40% mixed straddle in the new class of activi-make any of the elections, report your gain orshort-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain ties.loss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed ofor loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify thethe section 1256 component of the straddle, You make the election on Form 6781 byelection by checking box B.enter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in-If the net gain or loss is due to the non-sec-your gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Form come tax return for the immediately precedingtion 1256 positions, gain or loss is short-term6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13 tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies.capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain or loss on(Part II). Report the annual account net gain or loss fromPart I of Schedule D and identify the election.a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781.Mixed straddle election (Election A).You For the specific application of the rules of thisIn addition, you must attach a statement to Formcan elect out of the marked to market rules,election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-3T.6781 specifically designating the class of activi-discussed under Section 1256 Contracts ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab-Marked to Market, earlier, for all section 1256Example. On April 1, you entered into alished.contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In- non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec-For the specific application of the rules of thisstead, the gain and loss rules for straddles will tion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec-election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-4T.apply to these contracts. However, if you make tion to treat this straddle as an identified mixed
this election for an option on a section 1256straddle. On April 8, you disposed of the Interest expense and carrying charges re-
contract, the gain or loss treatment discussed non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and thelating to mixed straddle account positions.
earlier under Options will apply, subject to the section 1256 contract at an $800 gain. UnderYou cannot deduct interest and carrying
gain and loss rules for straddles. these circumstances, the $600 loss on the charges that are allocable to any positions held
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 61

Page 62 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in a mixed straddle account. Treat these c. For a sale that was part of a single,
1. The amount realized on the sale, minuscharges as an adjustment to the annual account interrelated transaction under a prear-
net gain or loss and allocate them proportion- ranged agreement between taxpayers 2. The cost of any common stock or partner-
ately between the net short-term and the net involving other sales of qualified securi-ship interest in an SSBIC that you bought
long-term capital gains or losses. ties, the names and identifying numbers during the 60-day period beginning on the
of the other taxpayers under the agree-To find the amount of interest and carrying date of sale (and did not previously take
ment and the number of shares sold bycharges that is not deductible and that must be into account on an earlier sale of publicly
the other taxpayers.added to the annual account net gain or loss, traded securities).
apply the rules described earlier to the positions If this amount is less than the amount of your2. A notarized “statement of purchase”held in the mixed straddle account. See Interest gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,describing the qualified replacement prop-expense and carrying charges on straddles in subject to the limit described next. If this amounterty, date of purchase, and the cost of thechapter 3 under Nondeductible Expense. is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,property and declaring the property to be
you must recognize the full amount of your gain.qualified replacement property for the qual-Sales of Stock to ESOPs ified stock you sold. The statement mustLimit on gain postponed.The amount ofor Certain Cooperatives have been notarized no later than 30 daysgain you can postpone each year is limited to the
after the purchase. If you have not yet pur-smaller of:If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3chased the qualified replacement property,years to an employee stock ownership plan 1. $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married andyou must attach the notarized “statement(ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative, file a separate return), orof purchase” to your income tax return foryou may be able to elect to postpone all or partthe year following the election year (or theof the gain on the sale if you bought qualified 2. $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married andelection will not be valid).replacement property (certain securities) within file a separate return), minus the amount
the period that began 3 months before the sale of gain you postponed for all earlier years.3. A verified written statement of the domes-
and ended 12 months after the sale. If you maketic corporation whose employees are cov-
the election, you must recognize gain on theered by the ESOP acquiring the securities,Basis of replacement property.You must
sale only to the extent the proceeds from theor of any authorized officer of the coopera-subtract the amount of postponed gain from the
sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace-tive, consenting to the taxes under sec-basis of your replacement property.
ment property. tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internal
How to report and postpone gain. ReportYou must reduce the basis of the replace- Revenue Code on certain dispositions, and
the entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 orment property by any postponed gain. If you prohibited allocations of the stock pur-
line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever isdispose of any replacement property, you may chased by the ESOP or cooperative.
appropriate. To make the choice to postponehave to recognize all of the postponed gain.
gain, enter “SSBIC Rollover” in column (a) of theGenerally, to qualify for the election theMore information. For details, see section
line directly below the line on which you reportedESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Regula-
the gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed inthe outstanding stock of the corporation thattions section 1.1042-1T.
column (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).issued the qualified securities. Also, the quali-
Also, attach a schedule showing how youfied replacement property must have been is-Rollover of Gain figured the postponed gain, the name of thesued by a domestic operating corporation.From Publicly SSBIC in which you purchased common stock
or a partnership interest, the date of thatTraded SecuritiesHow to make the election.You must make
purchase, and your new basis in that SSBICthe election no later than the due date (including
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainstock or partnership interest.extensions) for filing your tax return for the year
gains from the sale of publicly traded securities.You must make the choice to postpone gainin which you sold the stock. If your original return
This means that if you buy certain replacementno later than the due date (including extensions)was filed on time, you may make the election on
property and make the choice described in thisfor filing your tax return for the year in which youan amended return filed no later than 6 months
section, you postpone part or all of your gain.sold the securities. If your original return wasafter the due date of your return (excluding ex-
You postpone the gain by adjusting the basisfiled on time, you may make the choice on antensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to section
of the replacement property as described in Ba- amended return filed no later than 6 months301.9100-2” at the top of the amended return,
sis of replacement property, later. This after the due date of your return (excluding ex-and file it at the same address you used for your
postpones your gain until the year you disposetensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to sectionoriginal return.
of the replacement property. 301.9100-2” at the top of the amended return,How to report and postpone gain.Report You qualify to make this choice if you meetand file it at the same address you used for yourthe entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D.all the following tests. original return.To make the choice to postpone gain, enter Your choice is revocable with the consent of1. You sell publicly traded securities at a“Section 1042 election” in column (a) of the line the IRS.gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-directly below the line on which you reported the
ties traded on an established securitiesgain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gain Gains on Qualifiedmarket.you are postponing or expecting to postpone.
Small Business StockEnter it as a loss (in parentheses). If the actual2. Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.postponed gain is different from the amount you
This section discusses two provisions of the law3. During the 60-day period beginning on thereport, file an amended return.
that may apply to gain from the sale or trade ofdate of the sale, you buy replacementAlso attach the following statements. qualified small business stock. You may qualifyproperty. This replacement property must
for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.1. A “statement of election” that indicates yoube either common stock or a partnership
You may be able to exclude part of the gain fromare making an election under section interest in a specialized small business in-
your income.1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and vestment company (SSBIC). This is any
that includes the following information. partnership or corporation licensed by theQualified small business stock. This isSmall Business Administration under sec-stock that meets all the following tests.a. A description of the securities sold, thetion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest-date of the sale, the amount realized onment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13,1. It must be stock in a C corporation.the sale, and the adjusted basis of the1993.securities. 2. It must have been originally issued after
August 10, 1993.b. The name of the ESOP or cooperativeAmount of gain recognized.If you make the
to which the qualified securities were choice described in this section, you must rec- 3. The corporation must have total gross as-
sold. ognize gain only up to the following amount: sets of $50 million or less at all times after
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
August 9, 1993, and before it issued the 5. A real estate mortgage investment conduitBasis of replacement stock.You must sub-
stock. Its total gross assets immediately af- (REMIC), tract the amount of postponed gain from the
ter it issued the stock must also be $50 basis of your replacement stock.6. A financial asset securitization investmentmillion or less. trust (FASIT), or Holding period of replacement stock.YourWhen figuring the corporation’s total
holding period for the replacement stock in-7. A cooperative.gross assets, you must also count the as-
cludes your holding period for the stock sold,sets of any predecessor of the corporation.
except for the purpose of applying the 6-monthQualified trade or business.This is anyIn addition, you must treat all corporations
holding period requirement for choosing to rolltrade or business other than:that are members of the same parent-sub-
over the gain on its sale.sidiary controlled group as one corporation. 1. One involving services performed in the
4. You must have acquired the stock at its Pass-through entity.A pass-through entity (afields of health, law, engineering, architec-
original issue, directly or through an under- partnership, S corporation, or mutual fund orture, accounting, actuarial science, per-
writer, in exchange for money or other other regulated investment company) also mayforming arts, consulting, athletics, financial
property (not including stock), or as pay for make the choice to postpone gain. The benefit ofservices, or brokerage services,
services provided to the corporation (other the postponed gain applies to your share of the2. One whose principal asset is the reputa-than services performed as an underwriter entity’s postponed gain if you held an interest intion or skill of one or more employees,of the stock). In certain cases, your stock the entity for the entire period the entity held the
may also meet this test if you acquired it3. Any banking, insurance, financing, leasing, stock.
from another person who met this test, orinvesting, or similar business, If a pass-through entity sold qualified small
through a conversion or trade of qualified business stock held for more than 6 months and4. Any farming business (including the busi-small business stock that you held. you held an interest in the entity for the entireness of raising or harvesting trees),period the entity held the stock, you also may5. The corporation must have met the active5. Any business involving the production orchoose to postpone gain if you, rather than thebusiness test, defined next, and must haveextraction of products for which percent-pass-through entity, buy the replacement stockbeen a C corporation during substantiallyage depletion can be claimed, or within the 60-day period.all the time you held the stock.
6. Any business of operating a hotel, motel,6. Within the period beginning 2 years before How to report gain. Report the entire gainrestaurant, or similar business.and ending 2 years after the stock was realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 of
issued, the corporation cannot have Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri-
bought more than a de minimis amount of ate. To make the choice to postpone the gain,
its stock from you or a related party.
Rollover of Gain enter “Section 1045 Rollover” in column (a) of
the line directly below the line on which you7. Within the period beginning 1 year beforeYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capitalreported the gain. Enter the amount of gainand ending 1 year after the stock was is-gain from the sale of qualified small businesspostponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (insued, the corporation cannot have boughtstock held more than 6 months. This means that,parentheses).more than a de minimis amount of its stockif you buy certain replacement stock and makeYou must make the choice to postpone gainfrom anyone, unless the total value of thethe choice described in this section, you post-no later than the due date (including extensions)stock it bought is 5% or less of the totalpone part or all of your gain. for filing your tax return for the year in which youvalue of all its stock. You postpone the gain by adjusting the basissold the stock. If your original return was filed on
For more information about tests 6 and 7, see of the replacement stock as described in Basis time, you may make the choice on an amended
the regulations under section 1202 of the Inter-of replacement stock, later. This postpones yourreturn filed no later than 6 months after the due
nal Revenue Code. gain until the year you dispose of the replace- date of your return (excluding extensions). Enter
ment stock. “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2” at the top
Active business test.A corporation meets of the amended return, and file it at the sameYou can make this choice if you meet all the
this test for any period of time if, during that address you used for your original return.following tests.
period, both the following are true.
1. You buy replacement stock during the
1. It was an eligible corporation, defined be-60-day period beginning on the date of theSection 1202 Exclusion
low. sale.
You generally can exclude from your income2. It used at least 80% (by value) of its assets2. The replacement stock is qualified smallone-half of your gain from the sale or trade ofin the active conduct of at least one quali-business stock. qualified small business stock held by you forfied trade or business, defined below. more than 5 years. The taxable part of your gain3. The replacement stock continues to meet
equal to your section 1202 exclusion is a 28%the active business requirement for smallException for SSBIC. Any specialized rate gain. See Capital Gain Tax Rates, later.business stock for at least the first 6small business investment company (SSBIC) ismonths after you buy it.treated as meeting the active business test. An SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized small
SSBIC is an eligible corporation that is licensed business investment company (SSBIC) stock
to operate under section 301(d) of the SmallAmount of gain recognized.If you make thethat you bought as replacement property for
Business Investment Act of 1958 as in effect onchoice described in this section, you must rec-publicly traded securities you sold at a gain, you
May 13, 1993. ognize the capital gain only up to the followingmust reduce the basis of the stock by the
amount: amount of any postponed gain on that earlierEligible corporation.This is any U.S. cor-
sale, as explained earlier under Rollover of Gainporation other than: 1. The amount realized on the sale, minusFrom Publicly Traded Securities. But do not re-
duce your basis by that amount when figuring2. The cost of any qualified small business1. A Domestic International Sales Corpora-
your section 1202 exclusion.stock you bought during the 60-day periodtion (DISC) or a former DISC,
beginning on the date of sale (and did not2. A corporation that has made, or whose Limit on eligible gain.The amount of yourpreviously take into account on an earliersubsidiary has made, an election under gain from the stock of any one issuer that issale of qualified small business stock).section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code, eligible for the exclusion in 2004 is limited to the
If this amount is less than the amount of yourconcerning the Puerto Rico and posses- greater of:
capital gain, you can postpone the rest of thatsion tax credit,
gain. If this amount equals or is more than the 1. Ten times your basis in all qualified stock3. A regulated investment company, amount of your capital gain, you must recognize of the issuer that you sold or exchanged
4. A real estate investment trust (REIT), the full amount of your gain. during the year, or
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 63

Page 64 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. $10 million ($5 million for married individu-Basis of replacement property.You must Passive activity gains and losses.If you
als filing separately) minus the amount of have gains or losses from a passive activity, yousubtract the amount of postponed gain from the
gain from the stock of the same issuer that may also have to report them on Form 8582. Inbasis of the qualified empowerment zone assets
you used to figure your exclusion in earlier some cases, the loss may be limited under theyou bought as replacement property.
years. passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its
How to report and postpone capital gain. separate instructions for more information about
Report the entire gain realized from the sale onreporting capital gains and losses from a pas-How to report gain. Report the entire gainSchedule D (Form 1040), line 8, as you other-sive activity.realized from the sale on Schedule D (Formwise would without regard to the choice to post-1040), line 8, column (f). Directly below the line Form 1099-B transactions.If you sold prop-pone gain. To make the choice to postpone gain,on which you report the gain, enter “Section erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-enter “Section 1397B Rollover” in column (a) of1202 exclusion” in column (a) and enter the ties, through a broker, you should receive Formthe line directly below the line on which youamount of the allowable exclusion in column (f). 1099-B or an equivalent statement from the bro-reported the gain. Enter the amount of gainEnter it as a loss (in parentheses). If you are ker. Use the Form 1099-B or equivalent state-postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (incompleting line 18 of Schedule D, enter as a ment to complete Schedule D.parentheses).positive number the amount of the exclusion on Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of
line 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in columnMore information. For more informationSchedule D instructions. (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,about empowerment zones, see Publication
whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Communi-More information.For information about ad- vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that grossties. For more information about this rollover ofditional requirements that may apply, see sec- proceeds (gross sales price) less commissionsgain, see section 1397B of the Internal Revenuetion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code. and option premiums were reported to the IRS,Code.
enter that net sales price in column (d) of either
Rollover of Gain line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.
If the net sales price is entered in column (d),From Sale of
do not include the commissions and option pre-Empowerment Zone Assets Reporting Capital miums in column (e).
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainGains and Losses Section 1256 contracts and straddles.
gains from the sale of qualified empowerment Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses from
zone assets. This means that if you buy certainThis section discusses how to report your capitalsection 1256 contracts and straddles before en-
replacement property and make the choice de-gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040).tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include a
scribed in this section, you postpone part or all ofEnter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds,copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.
the recognition of your gain. etc., and real estate (if not reported on FormMarket discount bonds.Report the sale orYou qualify to make this choice if you meet4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or 8824) on line 1 oftrade of a market discount bond on Schedule Dall the following tests. Part I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate. Include(Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or tradeall these transactions even if you did not receiveresults in a gain and you did not choose to1. You hold a qualified empowerment zonea Form 1099-B or 1099-S (or substitute state-include market discount in income currently,asset for more than 1 year and sell it at ament). You can use Schedule D-1 as a continua-enter “Accrued Market Discount” on the next linegain. tion schedule to report more transactions.in column (a) and the amount of the accruedBe sure to add all sales price entries in col-2. Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. market discount as a loss in column (f). Alsoumn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total onreport the amount of accrued market discount as3. During the 60-day period beginning on theline 3. Also add all sales price entries in columninterest income on Schedule B (Form 1040), linedate of the sale, you buy a replacement(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.1, and identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.”qualified empowerment zone asset in theThen add the following amounts reported to yousame zone as the asset sold. for 2004 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-SForm 1099-S transactions. If you sold or
(or on substitute statements): traded reportable real estate, you generallyAny part of the gain that is ordinary should receive from the real estate reportingincome cannot be postponed and must1. Proceeds from transactions involving person a Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Realbe recognized.CAUTION
!
stocks, bonds, and other securities, andEstate Transactions, showing the gross pro-
ceeds.2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-Qualified empowerment zone asset. This “Reportable real estate” is defined as anytions (other than the sale of your mainmeans certain stock or partnership interests in present or future ownership interest in any of thehome if you had no taxable gain) not re-an enterprise zone business. It also includes following:ported on another form or schedule.certain tangible property used in an enterprise
1. Improved or unimproved land, including airIf this total is more than the total of lines 3 andzone business. You must have acquired the
space,10, attach a statement to your return explainingasset after December 21, 2000.
the difference. 2. Inherently permanent structures, includingAmount of gain recognized.If you make the any residential, commercial, or industrialInstallment sales.You cannot use the install-choice described in this section, you must rec- building,ment method to report a gain from the sale ofognize gain only up to the following amount:
3. A condominium unit and its accessory fix-stock or securities traded on an established se-
1. The amount realized on the sale, minus tures and common elements, includingcurities market. You must report the entire gain
land, andin the year of sale (the year in which the trade2. The cost of any qualified empowermentdate occurs).zone asset that you bought during the 4. Stock in a cooperative housing corporation
60-day period beginning on the date of (as defined in section 216 of the InternalAt-risk rules.Special at-risk rules apply tosale (and did not previously take into ac- Revenue Code).most income-producing activities. These rulescount in rolling over gain on an earlier salelimit the amount of loss you can deduct to theA “real estate reporting person” could includeof qualified empowerment zone assets).amount you risk losing in the activity. The at-riskthe buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title or
rules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade ofIf this amount is equal to or more than the escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-
an asset used in an activity to which the at-riskamount of your gain, you must recognize the full ker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiring
rules apply. For more information, see Publica-amount of your gain. If this amount is less than the biggest interest in the property.
tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules.the amount of your gain, you can postpone the Your Form 1099-S will show the gross pro-
Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figurerest of your gain by adjusting the basis of your ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-
the amount of loss you can deduct.replacement property as described next. low the instructions for Schedule D to report
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
these transactions, and include them on line 1 orSale of property bought at various times.If 4. Long-term capital loss carryovers.
you sell a block of stock or other property that8 as appropriate. The result after combining these items withyou bought at various times, report theIt is unlawful for any real estate reporting your other long-term capital gains and losses isshort-term gain or loss from the sale on one lineperson to separately charge you for complying your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 ofin Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain orwith the requirement to file Form 1099-S. Schedule D).loss on one line in Part II. Enter “Various” in
Capital gain distributions only.You docolumn (b) for the “Date acquired.” See theNominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow-Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your ing are true.name but actually belong to someone else),Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba-
report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only the 1. The only amounts you would have to re-sis any expense of sale such as broker’s fees,
proceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol- port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and
lowing amounts reported to you for 2004 on butions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (oroption premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in
Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state- substitute statement).column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule
ments) that you are not reporting on anotherD, whichever applies, unless you reported the2. You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,form or schedule included with your return:net sales price amount in column (d). or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substitute
statement).Short-term gains and losses.Capital gain or1. Proceeds from transactions involving
loss on the sale or trade of investment propertystocks, bonds, and other securities, and If both of the above statements are true, report
held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain oryour capital gain distributions directly on line 132. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If theof Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also,tions (other than the sale of your mainamount you report in column (f) is a loss, show ituse the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gainhome if you are not required to report it).in parentheses. Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to
You combine your share of short-term capitalfigure your tax.If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total of
gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,You can report your capital gain distributionslines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your return
and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital losson line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Formexplaining the reason for the difference.
carryover, with your other short-term capital1040, if both of the following are true.File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with thegains and losses to figure your net short-term
IRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi- 1. None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substitutecapital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.
nee in 2004, you must file a Form 1099-B or statements) you received have an amount
Long-term gains and losses.A capital gainForm 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS. in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.
or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a 2. You do not have to file Form 1040 for anyerty held more than 1 year is a long-term capitalForm 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of other capital gains or losses.gain or loss. You report it in Part II of ScheduleU.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-
D. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,nue Service Center by February 28, 2005 Total net gain or loss.To figure your total netshow it in parentheses.(March 31, 2005, if you file Form 1099-B or Form gain or loss, combine your net short-term capitalYou also report the following in Part II of1099-S electronically). Give the actual owner of gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-termSchedule D:the proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result on
Form 1099-S by January 31, 2005. On Form Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses are1. Undistributed long-term capital gains from1099-B, you should be listed as the “Payer.” The more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.a regulated investment company (mutualother owner should be listed as the “Recipient.” If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 42 offund) or real estate investment trust
On Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain(REIT),
“Filer.” The other owner should be listed as the Tax Rates, later.2. Your share of long-term capital gains or“Transferor.” You do not, however, have to file a
losses from partnerships, S corporations,Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds Capital Lossesand fiduciaries,for your spouse. For more information about the
reporting requirements and the penalties for fail-3. All capital gain distributions from mutual If your capital losses are more than your capital
ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,funds and REITs not reported directly on gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.
see the General Instructions for Forms 1099,line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,
1098, 5498, and W-2G. 1040, and enclosed in parentheses.
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2004 to 2005 if Schedule D, line 21, is a loss and (a) that loss is a
smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 16, or (b) Form 1040, line 40, is a loss. Otherwise, you do not have any carryovers.
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 40. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses............ 1.
2. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 21, as a positive amount............................... 2.
3. Combine lines 1 and 2. If zero or less, enter -0-......................................... 3.
4. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 3.................................................. 4.
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 5; otherwise, enter -0- on line 5 and go to line 9.
5. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7, as a positive amount............................... 5.
6. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 15................................ 6.
7. Add lines 4 and 6.............................................................. 7.
8. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2005. Subtract line 7 from line 5. If zero or less, enter -0-...... 8.
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 9; otherwise, skip lines 9 through 13.
9. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 15, as a positive amount............................... 9.
10. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7................................. 10.
11. Subtract line 5 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0-........................ 11.
12. Add lines 10 and 11............................................................ 12.
13. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2005. Subtract line 12 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0-..... 13.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 65

Page 66 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limit on deduction. Your allowable capital If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirInvestment interest deducted.If you claim a
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.deduction for investment interest, you may have
lesser of: They would have no carryover. to reduce the amount of your net capital gain
that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.Use short-term losses first.When you fig-1. $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gainure your capital loss carryover, use youra separate return), or you choose to include in investment incomeshort-term capital losses first, even if you in-when figuring the limit on your investment inter-2. Your total net loss as shown on line 16 ofcurred them after a long-term capital loss. If youest deduction. This is done on the Schedule DSchedule D. have not reached the limit on the capital lossTax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends anddeduction after using the short-term capitalYou can use your total net loss to reduce your Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-losses, use the long-term capital losses until youincome dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit. tion about the limit on investment interest, seereach the limit. Interest Expenses in chapter 3.
Capital loss carryover.If you have a total netDecedent’s capital loss.A capital loss
loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more thansustained by a decedent during his or her last28% rate gain.This gain includes gain or lossthe yearly limit on capital loss deductions, youtax year (or carried over to that year from anfrom the sale of collectibles and the taxable partcan carry over the unused part to the next yearearlier year) can be deducted only on the finalof gain equal to your section 1202 exclusionand treat it as if you had incurred it in that nextreturn filed for the decedent. The capital lossfrom the sale of qualified small business stock.year. If part of the loss is still unused, you canlimits discussed earlier still apply in this situa-Collectibles gain or loss.This is gain orcarry it over to later years until it is completelytion. The decedent’s estate cannot deduct anyloss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,used up. of the loss or carry it over to following years.antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-When you figure the amount of any capitalJoint and separate returns.If you and yournum bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-loss carryover to the next year, you must takespouse once filed separate returns and are nowerage held more than 1 year.the current year’s allowable deduction into ac-filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-Collectibles gain includes gain from the salecount, whether or not you claimed it. tal loss carryovers. However, if you and yourof an interest in a partnership, S corporation, orWhen you carry over a loss, it remains longspouse once filed a joint return and are nowtrust due to unrealized appreciation of col-term or short term. A long-term capital loss youfiling separate returns, any capital loss carryoverlectibles.carry over to the next tax year will reduce thatfrom the joint return can be deducted only on theyear’s long-term capital gains before it reduces Gain on qualified small business stock.Ifreturn of the spouse who actually had the loss.that year’s short-term capital gains. you realized a gain from qualified small business
stock that you held more than 5 years, youFiguring your carryover.The amount of Capital Gain Tax Rates generally can exclude one-half of your gain fromyour capital loss carryover is the amount of your
your income. The taxable part of your gain equaltotal net loss that is more than the lesser of:The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are
to your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rategenerally lower than the tax rates that apply to
1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for gain. See Gains on Qualified Small Businessother income. These lower rates are called the
the year, or Stock, earlier in this chapter.maximum capital gain rates.
The term “net capital gain” means the2. Your taxable income increased by your al- Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.Generally,amount by which your net long-term capital gainlowable capital loss deduction for the year this is any part of your capital gain from sellingfor the year is more than your net short-termand your deduction for personal exemp- section 1250 property (real property) that is duecapital loss.tions. to depreciation (but not more than your net sec-For 2004, the maximum capital gain ratesIf your deductions are more than your gross tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in theare 5%, 15%, 25%, and 28%. See Table 4-2 forincome for the tax year, use your negative tax- 28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250details.able income in computing the amount in item (2). Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions
If you figure your tax using the maxi-Complete Worksheet 4-1 to determine the to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
mum capital gain rate and the regularpart of your capital loss for 2004 that you can For more information about section 1250 prop-
tax computation results in a lower tax,carry over to 2005.
TIP
erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of
the regular tax computation applies. Publication 544.
Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities in
2004. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofExample. All of your net capital gain is fromTax computation using maximum capital
$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate wouldgains rates.Use the Qualified Dividends and
Their taxable income was $26,000. On their jointbe 28%. Because you are single and your tax-Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D
2004 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-able income is $25,000, none of your taxableTax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure
used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), income will be taxed above the 15% rate. Theyour tax if you have qualified dividends or net
can be carried over to 2005. 28% rate does not apply. capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-
ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains.
Table 4-2. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate? Schedule D Tax Worksheet.You must use
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the ScheduleTHEN your maximum D instructions to figure your tax if:IF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ...
• You have to file Schedule D, andcollectibles gain 28%
• Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or linegain on qualified small business stock equal to the section 19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is1202 exclusion 28% more than zero.
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% See the Comprehensive Example later for an
example of how to figure your tax using theother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25%
Schedule D Tax Worksheet.or higher 15%
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Taxother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is Worksheet. If you do not have to use thelower than 25% 5% Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained
above) and any of the following apply, use the1“Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-
sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form
1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a long-term loss, regardless of how long she and 2004 profit.) These amounts are shown in boxes• You received qualified dividends. (See 8, 9, and 10 of the Form 1099-B she receivedher father actually held the stock. She enters theQualified Dividends in chapter 1.) from her broker for these transactions. Box 11loss in column (f) of line 8.
• You do not have to file Schedule D and shows her combined profit of $15,000 ($27,000In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.
you received capital gain distributions. − $1,000 − $11,000). She reports this gain instock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of those
(See Capital gain distributions only ear- Part I of Form 6781 (not shown). She showsshares in 1993, for $1,000. She had bought 100
lier.) 40% ($6,000) as short-term gain on line 4, col-more shares in 1995 for $2,200, and an addi-
umn (f) of Schedule D and 60% ($9,000) astional 300 shares in 1998 for $1,500. Her total• Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both long-term gain on line 11 of Schedule D.basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300more than zero. The Form 1099-B that Emily received from($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she
her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.enters in column (f) of line 8.
Alternative minimum tax.These capital gain In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.Capital loss carryover from 2003.Emilyrates are also used in figuring alternative mini-stock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi-has a capital loss carryover to 2004 of $800, ofmum tax. ness stock that she had bought in Septemberwhich $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500
1999. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000is long-term capital loss. She enters these
Comprehensive Example gain, which she enters in column (f) of line 8.amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. She
Because she held the stock more than 5 years,also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wagesshe has a $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. Sheryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-from her job, she has income from stocks andclaims the exclusion on the line below by enter-sheet.other securities. For the 2004 tax year, she hading $1,500 as a loss in column (f). She alsoShe kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-the following capital gains and losses, which sheenters the exclusion as a positive amount on lineover Worksheet in her 2003 edition of Publica-reports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule D2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. tion 550 (not shown), so she could properlyis shown at the end of this example. She received a Form 1099-B (not shown)report her loss carryover for the 2004 tax year
Capital gains and losses—Schedule D. from her broker for each of these transactions.without refiguring it.
Emily sold stock in two different companies that The entries shown in box 2 of these forms total
she held for less than a year. In June, she sold $14,100. Tax computation. Because Emily has gains
100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she had on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D, sheReconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emilybought in February. She had an adjusted basis checks the “Yes” box on line 17 and goes to linemakes sure that the total of the amounts re-of $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for a 18. On line 18 she enters $1,000 from line 7 ofported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18ule D is not less than the total of the amountsComputer Co. stock that she bought in June. is greater than zero, she checks the “No” box onshown on the Forms 1099-B she received fromShe had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000 line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheether broker. For 2004, the total of lines 3 and 10and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. She to figure her tax.of Schedule D is $14,100, which is the samereports these short-term transactions on line 1 in After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13amount reported by the broker on Forms 1099-BPart I of Schedule D. of her Form 1040, she completes the rest of(not shown).Emily had three other stock sales that she Form 1040 through line 42. She enters the
Form 6781. On June 2, 2004, Emily had areports as long-term transactions on line 8 in amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of the
realized loss from a regulated futures contract ofPart II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60 Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out the
$11,000. She also had an unrealized marked toshares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax is
market gain on open contracts of $27,000 at thethe Car stock from her father. Its fair market $3,352. This is less than the tax she would have
end of 2004. She had reported an unrealizedvalue at the time of his death was $2,500, which figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,244.
marked to market gain of $1,000 on her 2003 taxbecame her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.   .
return. (This $1,000 must be subtracted from herBecause she had inherited the stock, her loss is  .
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 67

Page 68 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 34 of the Instructions for Form 1040 to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or
• Form 1040, line 42, is zero or less.
Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 43.
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 42.............................................. 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b....... 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4g . . .3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e* . . .4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-.......... 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-...................... 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D......... 7. 9,900
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4.................... 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-...................... 9. 9,900
10. Add lines 6 and 9......................................................... 10. 9,900
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D................................ 11. 1,000
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11............................................. 12. 1,000
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10.............................................................. 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-.............................................. 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
}
• The amount on line 1 or
• $29,050 if single or married filing separately; ....... 15. 29,050
$58,100 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$38,900 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15............................... 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-......... 17. 20,100
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17........................................... /H1707518. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 and 20 and go to line 21. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15................................................ /H1707519. 7,950
20. Multiply line 19 by 5% (.05).............................................................. 20. 398
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13................................ 21. 8,900
22. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-)................ 22. 7,950
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0-............................... /H1707523. 950
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15)............................................................. 24. 143
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19.................. 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 18.............................. 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above.................... 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0-.................... 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0-............................... /H1707529.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25)............................................................. 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 18, 19, 23, and 29.................................................. 31. 30,000
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1.................................................. 32. 0
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28)............................................................. 33. 0
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies...... 34. 2,811
35. Add lines 20, 24, 30, 33, and 34........................................................... 35. 3,352
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies....... 36. 4,244
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36.
Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 43.................................................. 37. 3,352
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain Worksheet—Line 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of
Schedules D and D-1........................................................... 1.
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1......................................................... 2. 1,500.00
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824............................ 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d,
}
............. 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041),5. ( 500.00)line 13c.....................................................................
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0-..................... 6.()
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18............................................................ 7. 1,000.00
XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, PA 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
1,000(11,000)
27,000 15,000
Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
Transactions
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B (keep for your records)
OMB No. 1545-0715PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale or exchange1a
CUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$
Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$ $
RECIPIENT’S name No. of shares exchanged 5
Street address (including apt. no.) Description 7
City, state, and ZIP code
2nd TIN not.Account number (optional)
/H20854
Form 1099-B
8
$
Profit or (loss) realized in
2004
9 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2003
10 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts–12/31/2004
11 Aggregate profit or (loss)
$
$$
Classes of stock
exchanged
6
CORPORATION’S name, street address, city, state, and ZIP code
12 If this box is checked, you cannot take a loss on your
tax return based on the amount in box 2
2004
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 69

Page 70 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 111 00 1111
100 sh
Trucking Co.
25 sh
Computer Co.
2-12-04
6-29-04
6-12-04
7-30-04
400
2,500
1,150
2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
60 sh
Car Co.
500 sh
Furniture Co.
20 sh
Toy Co.
INHERITED
VARIOUS
9-28-99
2-3-04
6-29-04
12-15-04
2,100
5,000
4,100
11,200
2,500
4,700
1,100
300
500
(750)
5,450
(400)
3,000
9,000
9,900
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in
column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-6 of the instructions
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts. Add lines 8 and 9 in
column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-1 of the instructions
14
15
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 13 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-6 of the instructions ( )
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to
Part III on the back 15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2004Cat. No. 11338H
()
4 4
Part I
Part II
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
2004
7
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
Page 70 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 71 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
15,350
1,000
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2004
Summary
Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result. If line 16 is a loss, skip lines 17 through 20, and
go to line 21. If a gain, enter the gain on Form 1040, line 13, and then go to line 17 below
16
16
18
Part III
Page 2
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-7 of the
instructions /H17075
Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank?
19
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2004
21
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on
page D-8 of the instructions /H17075
20
If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of:21
19
● The loss on line 16 or
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 42, and then complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 34 of the Instructions for Form 1040. Do not complete
lines 21 and 22 below.
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 42, and then complete the Schedule D Tax Worksheet
on page D-9 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below.
Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b?22
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 42, and then complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 34 of the Instructions for Form 1040.
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040.
( )
Are lines 15 and 16 both gains?17
Yes. Go to line 18.
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
Note. When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers.
/H12011
/H12011
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 71

Page 72 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must keep detailed records to distinguishHow To Make the
the securities. The securities held for investmentMark-to-Market ElectionSpecial Rules for
must be identified as such in your records on the
To make the mark-to-market election for 2005,day you got them (for example, by holding themTraders in Securities
you must file a statement by April 15, 2005. Thisin a separate brokerage account).
statement should be attached to either yourSpecial rules apply if you are a trader in securi-
2004 individual income tax return or a requestties in the business of buying and selling securi-How To Report for an extension of time to file that return. Theties for your own account. To be engaged in
statement must include the following informa-Transactions from trading activities result in cap-business as a trader in securities, you must
tion.ital gains and losses and must be reported onmeet all the following conditions.
Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from these 1. That you are making an election under• You must seek to profit from daily markettransactions are subject to the limit on capitalsection 475(f) of the Internal Revenuemovements in the prices of securities andlosses explained earlier in this chapter. Code.not from dividends, interest, or capital ap-
Mark-to-market election made.If you madepreciation. 2. The first tax year for which the election isthe mark-to-market election, you should reporteffective.• Your activity must be substantial. all gains and losses from trading as ordinary
gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, instead3. The trade or business for which you are• You must carry on the activity with con-
of as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. Inmaking the election.tinuity and regularity.
that case, securities held at the end of the yearIf you are not required to file a 2004 incomein your business as a trader are marked to mar-The following facts and circumstances should tax return, you make the election by placing theket by treating them as if they were sold (andbe considered in determining if your activity is a above statement in your books and records noreacquired) for fair market value on the lastsecurities trading business. later than March 15, 2005. Attach a copy of thebusiness day of the year. But do not mark tostatement to your 2005 return.• Typical holding periods for securitiesmarket any securities you held for investment.After making the election to change to thebought and sold. Report sales from those securities on Schedulemark-to-market method of accounting, you mustD, not Form 4797.• The frequency and dollar amount of your change your method of accounting for securitiestrades during the year. Expenses. Interest expense and other invest-under Revenue Procedure 2002-9. Revenue
ment expenses that an investor would deduct on• The extent to which you pursue the activity Procedure 2002-9 requires you to file Form
Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by ato produce income for a livelihood. 3115, Application for Change in Accounting
trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit orMethod. Follow its instructions. Label the Form• The amount of time you devote to the ac-Loss From Business, if the expenses are from3115 as filed under “Section 10A of the Appen-tivity. the trading business. Commissions and otherdix of Rev. Proc. 2002-9.”
costs of acquiring or disposing of securities areOnce you make the election, it will apply toIf your trading activities are not a business,not deductible but must be used to figure gain or2005 and all later tax years, unless you getyou are considered an investor, and not a trader.loss. The limit on investment interest expense,permission from IRS to revoke it. The effect ofIt does not matter whether you call yourself awhich applies to investors, does not apply tomaking the election is described undertrader or a “day trader.” interest paid or incurred in a trading business.Mark-to-market election made, earlier.
For more information on this election, seeSelf-employment tax.Gains and losses fromNote. You may be a trader in some securi- Revenue Procedure 99-17, 1999-1 CB 503.selling securities as part of a trading businessties and have other securities you hold for in-
are not subject to self-employment tax. This isvestment. The special rules discussed here do
true whether the election is made or not.not apply to the securities held for investment.
Page 72 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 73 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Research your tax questions online. we use several methods to evaluate the quality
of our telephone services. One method is for a• Search publications online by topic orsecond IRS representative to sometimes listenkeyword.5. in on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)some callers to complete a short survey at the
published in the last few years. end of the call.
• Figure your withholding allowances usingHow To Get Tax
Walk-in. Many products and servicesour Form W-4 calculator.
are available on a walk-in basis.• Sign up to receive local and national taxHelp
news by email.
• Products. You can walk in to many post• Get information on starting and operatingYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upa small business.order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- certain forms, instructions, and publica-tions, and get more information from the IRS in tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryseveral ways. By selecting the method that is stores, copy centers, city and county gov-best for you, you will have quick and easy ac- Fax. You can get over 100 of the most ernment offices, credit unions, and officecess to tax help. requested forms and instructions 24 supply stores have a collection of productshours a day, 7 days a week, by fax. available to print from a CD-ROM or pho-Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you Just call 703-368-9694 from the telephone con-tocopy from reproducible proofs. Also,have attempted to deal with an IRS problemnected to your fax machine. When you call, yousome IRS offices and libraries have theunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-will hear instructions on how to use the service.Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter-payer Advocate. The items you request will be faxed to you. nal Revenue Bulletins, and CumulativeThe Taxpayer Advocate independently rep- For help with transmission problems, call Bulletins available for research purposes.resents your interests and concerns within the703-487-4608.
IRS by protecting your rights and resolving • Services. You can walk in to your localLong-distance charges may apply.
problems that have not been fixed through nor- Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can- Phone. Many services are available by ness day to ask tax questions or get help
not change the tax law or make a technical tax phone. with a tax problem. An employee can ex-decision, they can clear up problems that re- plain IRS letters, request adjustments tosulted from previous contacts and ensure that your account, or help you set up a pay-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-your case is given a complete and impartial ment plan. You can set up an appointmenttions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to orderreview. by calling your local Center and, at thecurrent-year forms, instructions, and publi-To contact your Taxpayer Advocate: prompt, leaving a message requestingcations and prior-year forms and instruc-
Everyday Tax Solutions help. A represen-tions. You should receive your order within• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at
10 days. tative will call you back within 2 business1-877-777-4778.
days to schedule an in-person appoint-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate ment at your convenience. To find theyour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.office in your area. number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts
• Solving problems. You can get• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a or look in the phone book under United
face-to-face help solving tax problemsTTY/TDD user. States Government, Internal Revenue
every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- Service.• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. sistance Centers. An employee can ex-
plain IRS letters, request adjustments to Mail. You can send your order forFor more information, see Publication 1546,your account, or help you set up a pay- forms, instructions, and publications toThe Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS— ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis- the Distribution Center nearest to youHow To Get Help With Unresolved Tax tance Center for an appointment. To findand receive a response within 10 business daysProblems. the number, go to after your request is received. Use the addresswww.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in theFree tax services.To find out what services that applies to your part of the country.phone book under United States Govern-are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide toment, Internal Revenue Service. • Western part of U.S.:Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax Western Area Distribution Center• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesspublications and an index of tax topics. It also Rancho Cordova, CA 95743-0001to TTY/TDD equipment, calldescribes other free tax information services,
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toincluding tax education and assistance pro- • Central part of U.S.:
order forms and publications.grams and a list of TeleTax topics. Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 andInternet. You can access the IRS web- Bloomington, IL 61702-8903press 2 to listen to pre-recordedsite 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, at
messages covering various tax topics.www.irs.gov to: • Eastern part of U.S. and foreign
addresses:• Refund information. If you would like to• E-file your return. Find out about commer- Eastern Area Distribution Centercheck the status of your 2004 refund, callcial tax preparation and e-file services
P.O. Box 850741-800-829-4477 and press 1 for auto-available free to eligible taxpayers.
Richmond, VA 23261-5074mated refund information or call• Check the status of your 2004 refund. 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6Click on Where’s My Refund. Be sure to CD-ROM for tax products. You canweeks from the date you filed your returnwait at least 6 weeks from the date you order Publication 1796, IRS Federal(3 weeks if you filed electronically). Havefiled your return (3 weeks if you filed elec- Tax Products CD-ROM, and obtain:your 2004 tax return available becausetronically). Have your 2004 tax return you will need to know your filing status• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-available because you will need to know and the exact whole dollar amount of yourlications.your filing status and the exact whole dol-refund.lar amount of your refund. • Prior-year forms and instructions.
• Download forms, instructions, and publica- • Frequently requested tax forms that mayEvaluating the quality of our telephone serv-tions. be filled in electronically, printed out forices. To ensure that IRS representatives give
• Order IRS products online. accurate, courteous, and professional answers, submission, or saved for recordkeeping.
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 73

Page 74 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins. taxpayer about to start a business. This handy, and quick and incorporates file formats and
interactive CD contains all the business taxbrowsers that can be run on virtually any
Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In-forms, instructions, and publications needed to desktop or laptop computer.
formation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/ successfully manage a business. In addition, the It is available in early April. You can get a
cdorders for $22 (no handling fee) or callCD provides other helpful information, such as free copy by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visit-
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the CD-ROM forhow to prepare a business plan, finding financ- ing www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
$22 (plus a $5 handling fee). The first release ising for your business, and much more. The de-
available in early January and the final release issign of the CD makes finding information easy
available in late February.
CD-ROM for small businesses. Pub-
lication 3207, The Small Business Re-
source Guide, CD-ROM 2004, is a
must for every small business owner or any
Page 74 Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Page 75 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2. The transaction is one of theInvestment interest:The inter- Passive activity:An activity in-
volving the conduct of a trade orare the meanings of the terms as following. est you paid or accrued on money
business in which you do not mate-used in this publication. The same you borrowed that is allocable to
a. A straddle, including any rially participate and any rental ac-term used in another publication property held for investment.
set of offsetting positions tivity. However, the rental of realmay have a slightly different mean-
on stock. Limited partner: A partner estate is not a passive activity ifing.
whose participation in partnershipboth of the following are true.b. Any transaction in whichAccrual method: An accounting activities is restricted, and whoseyou acquire property 1. More than one-half of the per-method under which you report personal liability for partnership(whether or not actively sonal services you performyour income when you earn it, debts is limited to the amount oftraded) at substantially the during the year in all trades orwhether or not you have received it. money or other property that he orsame time that you con- businesses are performed inYou generally deduct your ex- she contributed or may have totract to sell the same prop- real property trades or busi-penses when you incur a liability for contribute.erty or substantially nesses in which you materi-them, rather than when you pay identical property at a price ally participate.Listed option:Any option that isthem. set in the contract. traded on, or subject to the rules of,2. You perform more than 750At-risk rules:Rules that limit the a qualified board or exchange.c. Any other transaction that hours of services during theamount of loss you may deduct to is marketed or sold as pro- year in real property trades orMarked to market rule: Thethe amount you risk losing in the ducing capital gains from a businesses in which you ma-treatment of each section 1256activity. transaction described in terially participate.contract ( defined later) held by a(1).Basis: Basis is the amount of taxpayer at the close of the year as
your investment in property for tax Portfolio income:Gross incomeif it were sold for its fair marketpurposes. The basis of property from interest, dividends, annuities,value on the last business day ofDemand loan: A loan payable inyou buy is usually the cost. Basis is or royalties that is not derived in thefull at any time upon demand by thethe year.used to figure gain or loss on the ordinary course of a trade or busi-lender.sale or disposition of investment ness. It includes gains from theMarket discount: The stated re-
property. sale or trade of property (other thanDividend: A distribution of demption price of a bond at matur-
an interest in a passive activity)money or other property made by aity minus your basis in the bondBelow-market loan: A demand producing portfolio income or heldcorporation to its shareholders outimmediately after you acquire it.loan (defined later) on which inter- for investment.of its earnings and profits. Market discount arises when theest is payable at a rate below the value of a debt obligation de-applicable federal rate, or a term Premium: The amount by whichEquity option:Any option: creases after its issue date. your cost or other basis in a bondloan where the amount loaned is
1. To buy or sell stock, or right after you get it is more thanmore than the present value of all Market discount bond: Any
the total of all amounts payable onpayments due under the loan. bond having market discount ex-2. That is valued directly or indi- the bond after you get it (other thancept:rectly by reference to anyCall: An option that entitles the payments of qualified stated inter-stock or narrow-based secur-purchaser to buy, at any time est).1. Short-term obligations withity index.before a specified future date, fixed maturity dates of up to 1Private activity bond:A bondproperty such as a stated number year from the date of issue,that is part of a state or local gov-Fair market value:The price atof shares of stock at a specified
ernment bond issue of which:which property would change 2. Tax-exempt obligations thatprice.
hands between a willing buyer and you bought before May 1,
1. More than 10% of the pro-Cash method: An accounting a willing seller, both having reason-1993, ceeds are to be used for amethod under which you report able knowledge of the relevant 3. U.S. savings bonds, and private business use, andyour income in the year in whichfacts.
you actually or constructively re- 4. Certain installment obliga- 2. More than 10% of the pay-Forgone interest: The amountceive it. You generally deduct your tions. ment of the principal or inter-of interest that would be payable forexpenses in the year you pay them. est is:any period if interest accrued at theNominee: A person who re-Commodities trader: A person applicable federal rate and was a. Secured by an interest inceives, in his or her name, incomewho is actively engaged in tradingpayable annually on December 31, property to be used for athat actually belongs to someonesection 1256 contracts and is regis-minus any interest payable on the private business use (orelse.tered with a domestic board of loan for that period. payments for the property),trade designated as a contract orNonequity option: Any listedmarket by the Commodities Fu- Forward contract:A contract tooption that is not an equity option,b. Derived from payments fortures Trading Commission. deliver a substantially fixed amountsuch as debt options, commodity property (or borrowedof property (including cash) for afutures options, currency options,Commodity future: A contract money) used for a privatesubstantially fixed price. and broad-based stock index op-made on a commodity exchange, business use.
tions.calling for the sale or purchase of aFutures contract: An
fixed amount of a commodity at aexchange-traded contract to buy orOptions dealer:Any person reg- Put: An option that entitles thefuture date for a fixed price. sell a specified commodity or finan-istered with an appropriate nationalpurchaser to sell, at any timecial instrument at a specified pricesecurities exchange as a marketConversion transaction: Any before a specified future date,at a specified future date. See alsotransaction that you entered into maker or specialist in listed op- property such as a stated numberCommodity future.after April 30, 1993, that meets tions. of shares of stock at a specified
both of these tests. Gift loan:Any below-market loan price.Original issue discount (OID):where the forgone interest is in the
The amount by which the stated1. Substantially all of your ex- Real estate mortgage invest-nature of a gift.
redemption price at maturity of apected return from the trans- ment conduit (REMIC): An en-
debt instrument is more than its is-Interest:Compensation for theaction is due to the time value tity that is formed for the purpose of
sue price.of your net investment. use or forbearance of money. holding a fixed pool of mortgages
Page 75

Page 76 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
secured by interests in real prop-Restricted stock:Stock you get borrow the property to deliver to a b. Does not participate in cor-
for services you perform that is buyer and, at a later date, you buy porate growth to any signif-erty, with multiple classes of inter-
nontransferable and is subject to a substantially identical property and icant extent, andests held by investors. These
substantial risk of forfeiture. deliver it to the lender.interests may be either regular or c. Has a fixed redemption
residual. price.Section 1256 contract:Any: Straddle: Generally, a set of off-
setting positions on personal prop-Regulated futures contract:A 1. Regulated futures contract,erty. A straddle may consist of asection 1256 contract that: Term loan: Any loan that is not apurchased option to buy and a pur-2. Foreign currency contract as demand loan.chased option to sell on the samedefined in chapter 4 under1. Provides that amounts that number of shares of the security,Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-Section 1256 Contractsmust be deposited to, or may with the same exercise price andcurities at a loss within 30 daysMarked to Market,be withdrawn from, your mar- period. before or after you buy or acquire ingin account depend on daily 3. Nonequity option, a fully taxable trade, or acquire amarket conditions (a system Stripped preferred stock:Stock contract or option to buy, substan-4. Dealer equity option, orof marking to market), and that meets the following tests.tially identical stock or securities.5. Dealer securities futures con-2. Is traded on, or subject to the 1. There has been a separationtract.rules of, a qualified board of in ownership between the
exchange, such as a domestic stock and any dividend on theSecurities futures contract:Aboard of trade designated as stock that has not becomecontract of sale for future deliverya contract market by the Com- payable.of a single security or of amodity Futures Trading Com-narrow-based security index. 2. The stock:mission or any board of trade
or exchange approved by theShort sale:The sale of property a. Is limited and preferred as
Secretary of the Treasury. that you generally do not own. You to dividends, ■
Page 76

Page 77 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Redemption or retirement Gifts to ..................... 5 Market discount bonds (SeeA
o f ....................... 3 9 Market discount bonds)Investment income of.....3 ,  3 4Abusive tax shelters (See Tax
Original issue discount (SeeSold between interest Qualified dividends......... 3 4shelters)
Original issue discount (OID))dates.................... 1 1Savings account with parent asAccounting fees............. 3 6
Short-term obligations..... 1 5 ,State and local trustee.................... 5Accrual method ...... 7 ,  16, 25, 49government.............. 4 9 U.S. savings bond owner.... 833, 75 Stripped bonds andStripped............12, 14, 45 Clerical help................. 3 6Accuracy-related penalty..... 5 coupons ................. 1 4Tax-exempt................ 4 9Co-owners of U.S. savingsAcquisition discount....16, 45 Traded flat.................. 6 Discounted debtbonds ...................... 8Adjusted basis.......21, 43, 45 U.S. savings (See U.S. savings instruments............... 1 3Collateralized debt obligationsAlaska Permanent Fund bonds) Discounted tax-exempt(CDOs) .................... 2 6dividends .............23, 34 U.S. Treasury (See U.S. obligations................ 4 5Comments on publication.... 2Amortization of bond Treasury bills, notes, and Dividends: (See also FormCommodities traders........ 7 5premium ...............34-36 bonds) 1099-DIV) ..........19-24, 75Commodity futures......51, 53,Annuities: Brokerage fees..........36, 65 Alaska Permanent75Borrowing on............... 3 7 Fund ................23, 34Community property:Interest on.................. 6 Exempt-interest...... 5 ,  22, 54U.S. savings bonds.......... 8Life insurance proceeds used toC Extraordinary.............. 5 5
Constructive ownershipb u y...................... 1 1Calls and puts...........57, 75 Holding period............. 2 0
transactions..........48, 52Sale of..................... 5 1Table 4-1.................. 5 8 Insurance policies.......... 2 2
Single-premium............ 3 7 Constructive receipt......... 1 6Capital assets............... 4 9 Money market funds........ 2 1
Trade for...............39, 47 Constructive sales.......... 4 0 Nominees ..............19, 24Capital gain
Applicable federal rate....... 6 Ordinary................... 1 9Contractors, insolvencydistributions......21, 24, 34,
Appreciated financial Patronage ................. 2 3of ......................... 5 454
positions.................. 4 0 Payments in lieu of......... 5 5ConversionCapital gain tax
Qualified............20, 24, 34Arbitrage bonds............. 1 2 transactions..........51, 75computation .............. 6 7
Qualified foreignAssistance (See Tax help) Convertible stocks andCapital gains and
corporation.............. 2 0bonds ..................... 4 7At-risk rules..........32, 64, 75 losses..................49-54
Received in January........ 1 9Constructive ownership Cooperatives, sales of stockAttorneys’ fees.............. 3 6 Reinvestment plans....21, 36,transactions............. 5 2 to ......................... 6 2Automatic investment 44Definition.................. 4 9Corporate distributions..... 1 9service.............36, 44, 53 Reporting requirements.... 1 9 ,Empowerment zone Capital gain.........24, 34, 54 23-24assets................... 6 4Constructive............... 2 2 Restricted stock............ 2 4B Investment property........ 4 9 Dividends (See Dividends) Sale or trade vs............. 3 9Long-term .............55, 65Backup withholding.......... 3 Fractional shares........... 2 2 Scrip...................... 2 2Long-term debtBad debts ...............51, 54 Liquidating.............21, 24 Sold stock................. 1 9instruments.............. 5 0Bankrupt financial institutions: Nondividend...........21, 24 Stock..................44, 53Losses, limit on............ 6 6Deposit in.................. 5 1 Return of capital............ 2 1 Underreported.............. 3Passive activities........... 6 4Bargain purchases.......... 4 2 Stock rights................ 2 1 Veterans’ insurance......5 ,  2 3Qualified covered callBasis.................42-47, 75 Undistributed capital Divorce .................43, 47options.................. 5 9Adjusted............21, 43, 45 gains.................... 2 1Qualified small businessCost....................... 4 2 Corporatestock.................... 6 2Inherited property.......... 4 3 reorganizations........... 4 6EReporting requirements.... 5 9 ,Investment property........ 4 2 Cost basis................... 4 2Education Savings Bond63, 64Like-kind exchanges........ 4 6 Coupon bonds .............. 1 6 Program ...............10-11Rollover of gain from sale ofOther than cost............. 4 2 Interest excluded under..... 1 8securities................ 6 2REITs ..................... 4 4 RecordkeepingShort-term.............55, 65REMIC, residual interest.... 2 5 D requirements............. 1 1Tax rates.................. 6 6Replacement stock......... 6 3 Day traders.................. 7 2Employee stock ownership28% rate gain worksheet,Stocks and bonds......21, 22, Dealer equity options........ 4 1 plans (ESOPs), sales of stockcompleted sample..... 6 635, 43 to ......................... 6 2Dealer securities futuresTable 4-2................ 6 6Bearer obligations.......14, 50 contracts.................. 4 1Employer identificationCapital loss carryover...... 6 0 ,Below-market loans.....6-7, 75 numbers (EINs) ........... 2 6Debt instruments, retirement65, 67Bonds: of ......................... 5 0Worksheet 4-1............. 6 6 Empowerment zone ......... 6 4Accrued interest on......... 1 9 Decedents ...............43, 66Cash method ...... 7 ,  16, 33, 75 Endowment contracts ....... 3 7Amortization of premium.... 3 4 U.S. savings bond interest,Reporting options for savings Enterprise zone facilityArbitrage................... 1 2 reporting of............... 9bond interest.............. 7 bonds ..................... 1 2Basis..................35, 43 Demand loans ............... 7 5Cash-settled options........ 4 1 Equity option............41, 75Capital asset............... 4 9 Demutualization............. 4 7Casualty losses............. 5 1 Estate income received byConvertible................ 4 7
Deposits, loss on............ 5 1CDOs (Collateralized debt beneficiary................. 3Coupon .................... 1 6
obligations)............... 2 6Discount on debt Exempt-interest dividends onEnterprise zone facility...... 1 2
instruments............12-16Certificates of deposit mutual fund stock......... 5 4Federally guaranteed....... 1 2
(CDs) ..................... 1 4Certificates of deposit....... 1 4Identification............... 4 4 Expenses of producing
Election to report all interest asChildren:Market discount....12, 33, 45, income .................... 3 6
O I D ..................... 1 6Alaska Permanent Fund50, 64, 75
Face-amount certificates.... 1 4dividends................ 3 4New York Liberty bonds.... 1 2
FGain or loss treatment...... 4 9Capital gain distributions.... 3 4Premiums on........35, 45, 75
Custodian account for....... 3 Inflation-indexed........... 1 4Private activity.........12, 75 Face-amount certificates.... 1 4
Page 77

Page 78 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value....42, 43, 46, Insurance dividends ......... 6 Local government obligationsG
75 (See State or local governmentMoney market certificates.... 5Gains on qualified small
obligations)Money market funds......... 5Federal guarantee on business stock............ 6 2
Nominee distributions........ 5bonds ..................... 1 2 Long-term capital gains andGains on sales or trades: (See
Prepaid insurance losses.................55, 65Fees to buy or sell.......... 3 6 also Capital gains and
premiums ................. 6Long-term debtlosses).............45, 48, 49Financial asset securitization
Reporting...............16-19 instruments............... 5 0investment trusts Gifts.............. 5 ,  43, 53, 75
Savings certificates.......... 5(FASITs) .................. 2 6 Losses on sales or trades: (SeeGlossary .................75-76 Seller-financed also Capital gains andForeign currency Government obligations..... 1 6 mortgage ............17, 18 losses).................... 4 9transactions.............. 4 0
Tax refunds................. 6 Amount calculation......... 4 5Foreign income .............. 2 Tax-exempt............12, 17 Carryback election.....41, 42HForgone interest............ 7 5 Taxable............5-6, 11, 12 Mutual fund or REIT stock heldHedging transactions...... 4 1 ,Form 1040 ...............17, 23 U.S. savings bonds, person 6 months or less......... 5 442, 51Schedule B................ 1 7 responsible for tax (Table Passive activities.......26, 27,Help (See Tax help)Form 1040, Schedule D..... 5 5 , 1-2)...................... 8 32, 34Holding period:57, 63, 67 Underreported.............. 3 Related parties............. 4 8Investment property........ 5 3Worksheet, completed Usurious interest............ 6 Section 1244 (small business)Replacement stock......... 6 3sample .................. 6 8 VA insurance dividends...... 5 stock.................... 5 2Straddles.................. 6 0Form 1040A .............16, 23 Investment clubs.........26-27 Small business investmentForm 1040X ................. 4 0 Investment counsel and company stock........... 5 3
Form 1041 ................... 2 7 advice..................... 3 6Wash sales................ 6 0I
Form 1065 ................... 2 6 Investment expenses.....32-38Income from sources outsideSchedule K-1.............. 2 7 Allocated.................. 2 5U.S......................... 2 MForm 1066, Schedule Q...... 2 5 At-risk rules................ 3 2Income tax treaties (Table Mark-to-market election..... 7 2Form 1096 ............19, 24, 65 Deductible ................. 3 61-3)....................... 2 0
Marked to market rules..... 4 1 ,Limits on deductions........ 3 2Form 1099-B .....39, 64, 65, 67Indian tribal government.... 1 2 72, 75Nondeductible............. 3 7Form 1099-DIV .... 3 ,  19, 23, 24 Individual retirement Pass-through entities....... 3 7Market discount bonds..... 1 2 ,Form 1099-INT ..... 3 ,  5 ,  10, 17, arrangements (IRAs): 15, 33, 45, 50, 64, 75Reporting requirements..... 3 819, 25, 26 Interest income.............. 5 Accrued marketInvestment income.........2 ,  3Form 1099-MISC .........19, 55 Inflation-indexed debt discount................. 1 5Children.................3 ,  3 4Form 1099-OID ....5 ,  13, 18, 25, instruments............... 1 4 Maximum rate of capital gainsGeneral Information......... 326 Inherited property: (Table 4-2)................ 6 6Net income................ 3 3Form 1099-S ............64, 65 Basis ...................... 4 3Records to keep............. 3Mechanics’ and suppliers’Holding period............. 5 3Form 1120 ................... 2 7 Reporting of (Table 1-1)..... 5 liens...................... 5 4Transfer by inheritance..... 3 9Form 1120-A ................ 2 7 Investment property......... 3 2Meetings, expenses ofInsolvency ofForm 2439 ................... 2 1 Basis...................... 4 2attending.................. 3 7contractors............... 5 4Form 3115 ............. 8 ,  36, 72 Definition.................. 3 9Missing children, photographsInstallment sales............ 6 4Form 4684 ................... 5 1 Gain or loss treatment...... 4 9 of .......................... 2Insurance:Form 4797 ............46, 52, 53 Gift, received as............ 4 3Mixed straddles.........55, 60Borrowing on............... 3 7Form 4952 ................... 3 4 Holding period............. 5 3Money market certificates.... 5Dividends, interest on.....6 ,  2 2Liquidation, received in..... 4 5Form 6198 ................... 6 4 Money market funds ........ 2 1Interest option on........... 1 1 Nontaxable trades, receivedForm 6781 .....42, 51, 59, 64, 67 Interest income.............. 5Life insurance companies, i n ....................... 4 3Form 8271 ................... 3 0 demutualization.......... 4 7 More information (See Tax help)Sales and trades........... 3 9Form 8275 ................... 3 0Life, paid to beneficiary..... 1 1 Mortgages:Services, received for....... 4 2Form 8275-R ................ 3 0 Prepaid premiums........... 6 Revenue bonds ............ 1 2Spouse, received from...... 4 3Single-premium life......... 3 7Form 8582 ................... 2 6 Secondary liability onTaxable trades, receivedTrades..................... 4 7 home .................... 5 4Form 8614 .................... 3 i n ....................... 4 2Veterans’ dividends, interest Seller-financed............. 1 8Form 8615 .................... 3
o n.....................5 ,  2 3 Municipal bonds: (See also StateForm 8815 ...............10, 18
Interest expenses: or local governmentJForm 8824 ................... 4 6Allocation of................ 3 2 obligations).........12, 17, 49Joint accounts............... 4Form 8832 ................... 2 6Investment interest.....32, 75 Mutual funds.....21, 32, 34, 37,Joint and separateForm 8886 ...............29, 30 Limit on.................. 3 3 44, 54returns................31, 66Form: When to deduct.......... 3 3 publicly offered............. 3 71066 (Schedule Q)......... 3 7 Margin accounts........... 3 3
3115 ....................... 8 Paid in advance............ 3 3L4952 ...................... 3 4Straddles.................. 3 7 NLife insurance companies:Form SS-4 ................... 2 6Unstated................... 4 2 New York Liberty bonds..... 1 2demutualization............ 4 7Form W-8BEN ................ 4Interest income.............. 5 Nominee distributions:Like-kind exchanges....46, 48Annuity contracts............ 6Form W-9 .................... 3 Dividends..............19, 24Basis of propertyBonds traded flat............ 6Forward contracts........... 7 5 Interest income...........5 ,  1 9received................. 4 6Condemnation awards....... 6Fractional shares........22, 53 Original issue discount...... 1 3Reporting requirements..... 4 6Deferred interestFree tax services............ 7 3 Nominee, defined........... 7 5Limited partners............. 7 5accounts ................. 5Frozen deposits...........6 ,  1 9 Nonbusiness bad debts.... 5 1 ,LiquidatingDividends on deposit or share 54Futures contracts: distributions..........21, 45accounts ................. 5
Noncapital assets........... 4 9Definition.................. 7 5 Listed options...........41, 75Frozen deposits..........6 ,  1 9
Regulated .............40, 76 Nondeductible investmentLoans:Gift for opening account..... 6
expenses ................. 3 7Securities...........54, 56, 57 Below-market..........6-7, 75Individual retirement
NondividendFutures, commodity.....51, 53, Gift and demand.........6 ,  7 5arrangements (IRAs)...... 5
distributions.............. 2 175 Guarantees................ 5 4Installment sale
Wash sales................ 5 6 payments ................. 6 Term ....................6 ,  7 6Nonequity options.......41, 75
Page 78

Page 79 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonqualified preferred Publications  (See Tax help) Return of capital (See Spouses:
stock...................... 4 6 Nondividend distributions) Transfers between: (See alsoPuts and calls...........57, 75
Related partyNonresident aliens: Revocable trust, trustee’sTable 4-1.................. 5 8
transactions)......43, 47, 48Backup withholding.......... 4 commissions for.......... 3 7
State or local governmentNontaxable return of Rollover of gain from sale:
Q obligations................ 1 2capital.................... 2 1 Empowerment zone
Qualified dividends.......... 2 4 Market discount bonds (SeeNontaxable stock rights..... 5 3 assets................... 6 4
Market discount bonds)Qualified small businessNontaxable trades.......46, 53 Securities ..............62, 63
Private activity bonds...... 1 2 ,stock...............45, 53, 62Notes: 75Gains on................... 6 2Individuals, bought at Registration requirement.... 1 2Sdiscount................. 5 0 Tax-exempt interest........ 1 2S corporations..........26, 45U.S. Treasury (See U.S. R Taxable interest............ 1 2Safe deposit box............ 3 6Treasury bills, notes, and
Real estate investment trusts Stock:bonds) Sales and trades of investment(REITs).............21, 44, 54 Basis...........21, 22, 43, 63property................39-72 Capital asset............... 4 9Real estate mortgage Definition.................. 3 9Constructive ownership..... 4 8investment conduitsO Savings bonds (See U.S. Convertible................ 4 7(REMICs) ...........25, 37, 75Office expenses............. 3 6 savings bonds; U.S. savings Corporate.................. 4 6Regular interest............ 2 5Options ..................57-58 bonds) Dividends (See Dividends)Residual interest.......25, 56Calls and puts..........57, 75 SBIC stock (See Small business Fractional shares.......22, 53Recordkeeping .............. 5 3Cash settlement........41, 57 investment company stock) Identification............... 4 4Dealer equity............... 4 1Recordkeeping requirements: Scrip dividends............. 2 2 Installment sales........... 6 4Deep-in-the-money......... 5 9 Education Savings Bond Section 1202 gain........... 6 3 Nonqualified preferredEquity.................41, 75 Program ................. 1 1Section 1244 stock.......... 5 2 stock.................... 4 6Gain or loss............57, 59 Investment income.......... 3 Public utility,Section 1256 contracts..... 4 0 ,Holding period............. 5 3 Small business stock....... 5 3 reinvestment............. 4 453, 57, 64, 76Listed.................41, 75 Redemption of stock........ 3 9 Redemption of............. 3 9Net gain on................ 4 1Nonequity..............41, 75 Redemption or retirement of Replacement stock......... 6 3Net loss on................ 4 1Qualified covered call....... 5 9 bonds ..................... 3 9 Restricted stock........24, 76Reporting requirements..... 5 7 Reporting requirements..... 4 1Regulated futures Rights..............21, 44, 53Section 1256 contracts.... 4 0 , Securities:contract...............40, 76 S corporations............. 4 557 Holding period............. 5 3REITs (See Real estate Sales to ESOPs orWash sales................ 5 6 Installment sales........... 6 4investment trusts (REITs)) cooperatives............. 6 2Options dealer.............. 7 5 Lost, stolen, etc., cost ofRelated party Small business.........45, 53Ordinary gains and replacing................ 3 6transactions..........38, 48 Specialized small businesslosses.................49, 51 Rollover of gain from investment company..... 4 5Related persons............. 5 8Original issue discount sale.................62, 63 Splits...................... 4 4REMICs  (See Real estate(OID)........12, 13-14, 45, 75 Traders in.................. 7 2Straddles (See Straddles)mortgage investment conduitsAdjustment to.............. 1 9 Stripped preferred stock . . . 24,Worthless..............40, 55(REMICs))Reporting requirements..... 1 3 76Securities futuresReorganizations,Rules...................... 1 3 Surrender of............... 3 9contracts.......41, 54, 57, 76corporate ................. 4 6
Trades..................... 4 6Self-employment income.... 4 2Reporting requirements: Trust instruments treatedSelf-employment tax........ 7 2P Bad debts.................. 5 5 a s....................... 4 0Bond premium Seller-financedPass-through entities: Straddles.................58-62amortization............. 3 6 mortgages ................ 1 8Rollover of gain............ 6 3 Defined.................... 7 6Capital gains and Short sales.................. 5 5Passive activities............ 7 5 Holding period............. 6 0losses............59, 63, 64Gains and losses.......26, 27, Adjusted basis............. 4 5 Interest expense and carryingDividend income........... 2 332, 34, 64 Defined.................... 7 6 charges ................. 3 7Exempt-interest dividends.... 5Patronage dividends........ 2 3 Expenses of............... 3 7 Loss deferral rules.......... 5 8Interest on U.S. savingsPenalties: Extraordinary dividends..... 5 5 Mixed ..............55, 60, 61bonds ..................7 ,  8Accuracy-related.........5 ,  3 0 Reporting requirements..... 6 4Puts....................... 5 8Investment expenses....... 3 8Backup withholding.......... 4 Stripped bonds andSmall business investmentLike-kind exchanges........ 4 6Civil fraud.................. 3 1 coupons ...........12, 14, 45company stock........... 5 3Options.................... 5 7Early withdrawal..........5 ,  1 9 Stripped preferred stock... 2 4 ,Short-term capital gains andOriginal issue discount...... 1 3Failure to pay tax........... 3 1 76losses.................55, 65S corporation income,Failure to supply SSN....... 3 Substitute payments........ 5 5Short-termdeductions, andSubstantial obligations......15-16, 45, 49 Suggestions forcredits................... 2 6understatement.......... 3 0 publication................. 2Interest deduction, limitValuation misstatement..... 3 0 Section 1256 contracts..... 4 1
o n....................... 3 3State or local governmentPolitical parties:
Sixty/forty rule.............. 4 1obligations............... 1 2Debts owed by............. 5 4 TSmall business investmentStraddles.................. 6 4Portfolio income............ 7 5 Tables:company stock ........53, 63Substitute payments........ 5 5Preferred stock: Capital gains maximum rateReporting requirements..... 5 3Tax-exempt interestNonqualified............... 4 6 (Table 4-2)............... 6 6income .................. 1 7Small business stock....... 4 5 ,Redeemable at a Income tax treaties (Table53, 62Trades..................... 7 2premium ................. 2 2 1-3)..................... 2 0Wash sales................ 5 7Social security number (SSN):Stripped...............24, 76 Investment income, reporting ofRepossession of real Custodial accounts.......... 3Premiums on bonds .....35, 45, (Table 1-1)................ 5property................... 5 375 Joint accounts .............. 3 Puts and calls (Table
Restricted property.......... 4 2 Requirement to give......... 3Private activity bonds...... 1 2 , 4-1)..................... 5 8
Restricted stock.........24, 7675 Specialized small business U.S. savings bonds, person
Retirement of debt investment companyPublic utility stock responsible for tax (Table
instrument................ 5 0 stock..................45, 63reinvestment.............. 4 4 1-2)...................... 8
Page 79

Page 80 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax help..................... 7 3Taxpayer Advocate.......... 7 3Treasury inflation-protected V
securities (TIPS)......11, 14Tax rates: Taxpayer identification Veterans’ insurance:
Capital gain and losses..... 6 6 numbers (TINs): Treaties, income tax (Table Dividends on............... 2 3
Aliens...................... 2 1-3)....................... 2 0Tax refunds:
Interest on.................. 6Term loans................6 ,  7 6Trust income received by Wbeneficiary................. 3Tax shelters..............28-31 TIPS ......................... 1 1 Warrants .................... 5 6Penalties.................. 3 0 Trustee’s commission forTrade or business........... 3 2 Wash sales...........56-57, 76Projected income revocable trust............ 3 7Traders in securities........ 7 2 Holding period............. 5 3investment............... 2 9 TTY/TDD information........ 7 3Trades: Loss deferral rules,Registration number........ 3 0 Insurance.................. 4 7 straddles................ 6 0Reporting requirements..... 2 9 Investment property........ 3 9 Reporting requirements..... 5 7URules to curb abuse........ 2 8 Like-kind...............46, 48 Withholding, backup......... 3U.S. savings bonds: (See alsoTax-exempt bonds .......... 4 9 Nontaxable.........43, 46, 53 Education Savings Bond Worksheets:Tax-exempt income: Reporting requirements..... 7 2 Program) .......... 6 ,  7-11, 11 Capital gains, 28% rateExpenses of............... 3 7 Stock...................... 4 6Reporting interest on......6 ,  7 worksheet, completedInterest on.............12, 17 Taxable.................... 4 2Retirement or profit-sharing sample .................. 6 9Tax-exempt obligations.... 1 2 , U.S. Treasury notes or plan, distributed from...... 9 Capital loss carryover....... 6 614, 45 bonds ................... 4 7 Worksheet............... 1 8Worthless securities....40, 55Taxable income, expenses Treasury bills, notes, and bonds Tax, responsible person (Table
of ......................... 3 7 (See U.S. Treasury bills, notes, ■1-2)...................... 8
and bonds)Taxes: U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and
State and local transfer..... 3 6Treasury inflation-indexed bonds ........ 6 ,  11-12, 47, 53
State income............... 3 7 securities.............11, 14 Usurious interest............. 6
Page 80

Page 81 of 81 of Publication 550 12:58 -  6-JAN-2005
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2005
Highlights of 2004 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service—How
to Get Help With Unresolved Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465 14842
Page 81