Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P525.cvt (31-Dec-2003) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\RBSwan00\documents\Epicfiles\03P525.sgm
Page 1 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047d
Important Changes for 2003......... 1Department
of the Important Reminders.............. 2Taxable andTreasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Nontaxable Employee Compensation ........... 2Service
Miscellaneous Compensation....... 3
Fringe Benefits................ 3Income Retirement Plan Contributions...... 7
Stock Options................. 9
Restricted Property.............. 10
For use in preparing Special Rules for Certain
Employees ................... 11
Clergy ...................... 112003 Returns Members of Religious Orders....... 12
Foreign Employer............... 12
Military...................... 12
Volunteers................... 13
Business and Investment Income..... 13
Rents From Personal Property...... 13
Royalties.................... 13
Partnership Income............. 14
S Corporation Income............ 14
Sickness and Injury Benefits......... 14
Disability Pensions.............. 14
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts................. 15
Workers’ Compensation.......... 15
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits.................. 16
Miscellaneous Income ............. 16
Bartering.................... 16
Canceled Debts................ 17
Life Insurance Proceeds.......... 17
Recoveries................... 18
Survivor Benefits............... 24
Unemployment Benefits.......... 24
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits.......... 25
Other Income................. 25
Repayments .................... 30
How To Get Tax Help.............. 31
Index.......................... 32
Important Changes for
2003
Adoption assistance. Beginning in 2003, if
the adoption of a child with special needs be-
comes final during the year, the maximum exclu-
sion for certain amounts paid or reimbursed by
your employer for qualifying adoption expenses
Get forms and other information under an adoption assistance program will be
allowed regardless of whether you have qualify-
faster and easier by:
ing expenses. See Adoption Assistance under
Fringe Benefits.Internet • www.irs.gov or FTP • ftp.irs.gov
Elective deferrals.The limit on the amount of
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine) your wages you can elect to defer into certain
retirement plans (such as section 401(k) plans)

Page 2 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
increases each year through 2006. If you arePhotographs of missing children.The Inter- You can e-mail us at *taxforms@irs.gov.
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-age 50 or older, you may be able to make addi-
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- ject line.tional catch-up elective deferrals. See Elective
dren. Photographs of missing children selectedDeferrals in the discussion on retirement plan You can write to us at the following address:
by the Center may appear in this publication oncontributions under Employee Compensation.
pages that would otherwise be blank. You canInternal Revenue Service
help bring these children home by looking at theIndividual Forms and Publications Branch
photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child. 1111 Constitution Ave. NWImportant Reminders
Washington, DC 20224
Retirement planning services.If your em-
ployer has a qualified retirement plan, qualified We respond to many letters by telephone.Introductionretirement planning services provided for you (or Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
You can receive income in the form of money,your spouse) by your employer are not included clude your daytime phone number, including the
property, or services. This publication discussesin your income. For more information, see Re- area code, in your correspondence.
many kinds of income and explains whethertirement Planning Services under Fringe Bene-
they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-fits. Useful Itemscussions on employee wages and fringe bene-You may want to see:Employer-provided educational assistance.fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, S
You can exclude from your income up to $5,250corporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-Publicationof employer-provided educational assistance.mation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-
ceeds, and welfare and other public assistanceThis benefit includes graduate-level as well as ❏ 523 Selling Your Home
benefits. Check the index for the location of aundergraduate-level courses. For more informa- ❏ 527 Residential Rental Propertyspecific subject.tion, see chapter 11 in Publication 970, Tax (Including Rental of VacationGenerally, an amount included in your in-Benefits for Education. Homes)come is taxable unless it is specifically ex-
Qualified tuition program (QTP).A distribu-empted by law. Income that is taxable must be❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
tion from a QTP established and maintained byreported on your return and is subject to tax. (Including Capital Gains and
a state (or an agency or instrumentality of theIncome that is nontaxable may have to be Losses)
state) can be excluded from your income if theshown on your tax return but is not taxable.❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andamount distributed is used for qualified higher AdministratorsConstructively-received income.You areeducation expenses. You can make contribu-
generally taxed on income that is available to❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributionstions to a QTP established and maintained by
you, regardless of whether it is actually in yourone or more eligible educational institutions. ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Incomepossession.However, earnings on the account will be tax-
A valid check that you received or that was❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalentable if withdrawn before January 1, 2004. For
made available to you before the end of the tax Railroad Retirement Benefitsmore information on QTPs, see chapter 8 inyear is considered income constructively re-Publication 970. ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Educationceived in that year, even if you do not cash the
check or deposit it to your account until the nextTerrorist attacks.You can exclude from in- See How To Get Tax Help, near the end of
year. For example, if the postal service tries tocome certain disaster assistance, disability, and this publication, for information about getting
deliver a check to you on the last day of the taxthese publications.death payments received as a result of a terror-
year but you are not at home to receive it, youist or military action. For more information, see
must include the amount in your income for thatPublication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter-
tax year. If the check was mailed so that it couldrorist Attacks.
not possibly reach you until after the end of theAstronauts. Recent legislation extended the Employeetax year, and you could not otherwise get theexclusion for death payments to astronauts dy-funds before the end of the year, you include theCompensationing in the line of duty after 2002. See Publicationamount in your income for the next tax year.553, Highlights of 2003 Tax Changes. Income received by an agent for you is in-Generally, you must include in gross incomecome you constructively received in the year thePayments received by Holocaust victims. everything you receive in payment for personalagent received it. If you agree by contract that aYou can exclude from income certain payments services. In addition to wages, salaries, commis-
third party is to receive income for you, you mustreceived as restitution to a Holocaust victim (or sions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms of
include the amount in your income when thean heir of a Holocaust victim). For more informa- compensation such as fringe benefits and stock
third party receives it.tion, see Holocaust victims restitution under options.
Other Income, later. You should receive a Form W–2, Wage andExample. You and your employer agree Tax Statement, from your employer showing thethat part of your salary is to be paid directly toForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or pay you received for your services. Include youryour former spouse. You must include thatresident alien, you must report income from pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or onamount in your income when your formersources outside the United States (foreign in- line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re-spouse receives it.come) on your tax return unless it is exempt by ceive a Form W–2.
U.S. law. This is true whether you reside insidePrepaid income. Prepaid income, such asor outside the United States and whether or not Childcare providers. If you provide childcompensation for future services, is generallyyou receive a Form W–2, Wage and Tax State- care, either in the child’s home or in your homeincluded in your income in the year you receivement, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This or other place of business, the pay you receiveit. However, if you use an accrual method ofapplies to earned income (such as wages and must be included in your income. If you are notaccounting, you can defer prepaid income youtips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- an employee, you are probably self-employedreceive for services to be performed before theest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, and must include payments for your services onend of the next tax year. In this case, you includeand royalties). Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss Fromthe payment in your income as you earn it by
If you reside outside the United States, you Business, or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040), Netperforming the services.
may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign Profit From Business. You generally are not an
source earned income. For details, see Publica-Comments and suggestions. We welcome employee unless you are subject to the will and
tion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-your comments about this publication and your control of the person who employs you as to
dent Aliens Abroad. suggestions for future editions. what you are to do and how you are to do it.
Page 2

Page 3 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Baby-sitting.If you baby-sit for relatives or received another length-of-service awardOutplacement services. If you choose to
neighborhood children, whether on a regular during the year or the previous 4 years. accept a reduced amount of severance pay so
basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare that you can receive outplacement services
• A safety achievement award if you are aproviders apply to you. (such as training in resum´e writing and interviewmanager, administrator, clerical employee,techniques), you must include the unreducedor other professional employee or if moreamount of the severance pay in income.Miscellaneous than 10% of eligible employees previouslyHowever, you can deduct the value of thesereceived safety achievement awards dur-Compensation outplacement services (up to the difference be-ing the year. tween the severance pay included in incomeThis section discusses many types of employee and the amount actually received) as a miscella-compensation. The subjects are arranged in al-Example. Ben Green received three em- neous deduction (subject to the 2% limit) onphabetical order. ployee achievement awards during the year: aSchedule A (Form 1040).
nonqualified plan award of a watch valued atAdvance commissions and other earnings. Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoIf you receive advance commissions or other while you are sick or injured is part of your salaryvalued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued atamounts for services to be performed in the or wages. In addition, you must include in your$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-future and you are a cash method taxpayer, you income sick pay benefits received from any offied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachmust include these amounts in your income in the following payers.award by itself would be excluded from income.the year you receive them.
However, because the $1,750 total value of the• A welfare fund.If you repay unearned commissions or other
awards is more than $1,600, Ben must includeamounts in the same year you receive them, • A state sickness or disability fund.$150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income.reduce the amount included in your income by
• An association of employers or employ-the repayment. If you repay them in a later taxGovernment cost-of-living allowances. ees.year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-Cost-of-living allowances generally are included
ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),in your income. However, they are not included• An insurance company, if your employer
or you may be able to take a credit for that year.in your income if you are a federal civilian em-paid for the plan.
See Repayments, later. ployee or a federal court employee who is sta-However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the Uniteddent or health insurance policy, the benefits youAllowances and reimbursements. If you re-States. receive under the policy are not taxable. Forceive travel, transportation, or other businessAllowances and differentials that increasemore information, see Other Sickness and Injuryexpense allowances or reimbursements fromyour basic pay as an incentive for taking a lessBenefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits,your employer, get Publication 463, Travel, En- desirable post of duty are part of your compen-later.tertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you are sation and must be included in income. For
reimbursed for moving expenses, get Publica-example, your compensation includes ForeignSocial security and Medicare taxes paid bytion 521, Moving Expenses. Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropicalemployer. If you and your employer have andifferentials. For more information, get Publica-agreement that your employer pays your socialBack pay awards. Include in income amountstion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employeessecurity and Medicare taxes without deductingyou are awarded in a settlement or judgment forStationed Abroad. them from your gross wages, you must reportback pay. These include payments made to you
the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wagesNote received for services.If your employerfor damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,
on your tax return. The payment is also treatedgives you a secured note as payment for yourand unpaid health insurance premiums. They
as wages for figuring your social security andservices, you must include the fair market valueshould be reported to you by your employer on
Medicare taxes and your social security and(usually the discount value) of the note in yourForm W–2.
Medicare benefits. However, these paymentsincome for the year you receive it. When you
are not treated as social security and MedicareBonuses and awards.  Bonuses or awards later receive payments on the note, a propor-
wages if you are a household worker or a farmyou receive for outstanding work are included intionate part of each payment is the recovery of
worker.your income and should be shown on your Formthe fair market value that you previously in-
W–2. These include prizes such as vacationcluded in your income. Do not include that partStock appreciation rights.Do not include atrips for meeting sales goals. If the prize oragain in your income. Include the rest of thestock appreciation right granted by your em-award you receive is goods or services, youpayment in your income in the year of payment.ployer in income until you exercise (use) themust include the fair market value of the goodsIf your employer gives you a nonnegotiableright. When you use the right, you are entitled toor services in your income. However, if yourunsecured note as payment for your services,a cash payment equal to the fair market value ofemployer merely promises to pay you a bonus orpayments on the note that are credited towardthe corporation’s stock on the date of use, minusaward at some future time, it is not taxable untilthe principal amount of the note are compensa-the fair market value on the date the right wasyou receive it or it is made available to you.tion income when you receive them. granted. You include the cash payment in in-
Employee achievement award. If you re- come in the year you use the right.Severance pay. Amounts you receive as sev-
ceive tangible personal property (other thanerance pay are taxable. A lump-sum payment
cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) asfor cancellation of your employment contractFringe Benefits
an award for length-of-service or safety achieve-must be included in your income in the tax year
ment, you generally can exclude its value from Fringe benefits you receive in connection withyou receive it.
your income. However, the amount you can ex- the performance of your services are included inAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed-clude is limited to your employer’s cost and your income as compensation unless you payeral employee and receive a lump-sum paymentcannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awards fair market value for them or they are specificallyfor accrued annual leave when you retire orthat are not qualified plan awards) for all such excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-resign, this amount will be included as wages onawards you receive during the year. Your em- ance of services (for example, under a covenantyour Form W–2.ployer can tell you whether your award is a not to compete) is treated as the performance ofIf you resign from one agency and are reem-qualified plan award. Your employer must make services for purposes of these rules.ployed by another agency, you may have tothe award as part of a meaningful presentation, See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in thisrepay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-under conditions and circumstances that do not discussion, for information on how to determinement to the second agency. You can reducecreate a significant likelihood of it being dis- the amount to include in income.gross wages by the amount you repaid in theguised pay. same tax year in which you received it. Attach toRecipient of fringe benefit.You are the re-However, the exclusion does not apply to theyour tax return a copy of the receipt or statement cipient of a fringe benefit if you perform thefollowing awards. given to you by the agency you repaid to explain services for which the fringe benefit is provided.
• A length-of-service award if you received the difference between the wages on your return You are considered to be the recipient even if it
it for less than 5 years of service or if you and the wages on your Forms W–2. is given to another person, such as a member of
Page 3

Page 4 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your family. An example is a car your employer reported in box 12 of Form W–2 with code R. The amount you can exclude is limited to the
gives to your spouse for services you perform.You must report this amount on Form 8853, lesser of:
The car is considered to have been provided toArcher MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance • The total amount of dependent care bene-you and not to your spouse. Contracts. File the form with your return. fits you received during the year,You do not have to be an employee of the
provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. If • The total amount of qualified expenses
you are a partner, director, or independent con-Adoption Assistance you incurred during the year,
tractor, you can also be the recipient of a fringe
• Your earned income,You may be able to exclude from your incomebenefit.
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-• Your spouse’s earned income, orProvider of benefit.Your employer or an- ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-other person for whom you perform services is • $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-nection with your adoption of an eligible child.the provider of a fringe benefit regardless of rately).See Publication 968, Tax Benefits for Adoption,whether that person actually provides the fringefor more information.benefit to you. The provider can be a client or Your employer must show the total amount ofAdoption benefits are reported by your em-customer of an independent contractor. dependent care benefits provided to you duringployer in box 12 of Form W–2 with code T. They
the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of yourAccounting period. You must use the same also are included as social security and Medi-
Form W–2. Your employer also will include anyaccounting period your employer uses to reportcare wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are
dependent care benefits over $5,000 in youryour taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-not included as wages in box 1. To determine
wages shown in box 1 of your Form W–2.ployer has the option to report taxable noncashthe taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must
fringe benefits by using either of the following To claim the exclusion, you must completecomplete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-
rules. either Part III of Form 2441, Child and Depen-tion Expenses. File the form with your return.
dent Care Expenses, or Part III of Schedule 2• The general rule: benefits are reported for (Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex-a full calendar year (January 1 – Decem- penses for Form 1040A Filers. (You cannot useAthletic Facilitiesber 31). Form 1040EZ.)
If your employer provides you with the free or• The special accounting period rule: bene- See the instructions for Form 2441 or Sched-low-cost use of an employer-operated gym orfits provided during the last 2 months of ule 2 (Form 1040A) for more information.other athletic club on your employer’s premises,the calendar year (or any shorter period)
the value is not included in your compensation.are treated as paid during the following
The gym must be used primarily by employees,calendar year. For example, each year Educational Assistancetheir spouses, and their dependent children.your employer reports the value of bene-
fits provided during the last 2 months of You can exclude from your income up to $5,250If your employer pays for a fitness program
the prior year and the first 10 months of of qualified employer-provided educational as-provided to you at an off-site resort hotel or
the current year. sistance. The exclusion applies to undergradu-athletic club, the value of the program is in-
ate and graduate-level courses. For morecluded in your compensation.Your employer does not have to use the same information, get Publication 970.accounting period for each fringe benefit, but
must use the same period for all employees whoDe Minimis (Minimal) Benefitsreceive a particular benefit. Employee Discounts
If your employer provides you with a product orYou must use the same accounting period
If your employer sells you property or services atservice and the cost of it is so small that it wouldthat you use to report the benefit to claim an
a discount, you may be able to exclude thebe unreasonable for the employer to account foremployee business deduction (for use of a car,
amount of the discount from your income. Theit, the value is not included in your income.for example).
exclusion applies to discounts on property orGenerally, the value of benefits such as dis-Form W–2. Your employer reports your tax-counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home services offered to customers in the ordinaryable fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otherwhen working overtime, and company picnicscourse of the line of business in which you work.compensation) of Form W–2. The total value ofare not included in your income. Also see Em- However, it does not apply to discounts on realyour fringe benefits may also be noted in box 12.ployee Discounts, later. property or property commonly held for invest-The value of your fringe benefits may be added ment (such as stocks or bonds).to your other compensation on one Form W–2,Holiday gifts.If your employer gives you a The exclusion is limited to the price chargedor you may receive a separate Form W–2 show-turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atnonemployee customers multiplied by the fol-ing just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1Christmas or other holidays, do not include thelowing percentage.with a notation in box 12. value of the gift in your income. However, if your
• For a discount on property, youremployer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or a
employer’s gross profit percentage (grosssimilar item that you can easily exchange forAccident or Health Plan profit divided by gross sales) on all prop-cash, you include the value of that gift as extra
erty sold during the employer’s previoussalary or wages regardless of the amount in-Generally, the value of accident or health plan
tax year. (Ask your employer for this per-volved.coverage provided to you by your employer is
centage.)not included in your income. Benefits you re-
ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex- • For a discount on services, 20%.Dependent Care Benefitsplained, later, under Sickness and Injury
Benefits.
If your employer provides dependent care bene-Financial Counseling FeesLong-term care coverage. Contributions byfits under a qualified plan, you may be able to
your employer to provide coverage for long-term Financial counseling fees paid for you by yourexclude these benefits from your income. De-
care services generally are not included in your employer are included in your income and mustpendent care benefits include:
income. However, contributions made through a be reported as part of wages. If the fees are for
• Amounts your employer pays directly toflexible spending or similar arrangement (such tax or investment counseling, they can be de-
either you or your care provider for theas a cafeteria plan) must be included in your ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel-
care of your qualifying person while youincome. This amount will be reported as wages laneous deduction (subject to the 2% limit).
work, andin box 1 of your Form W–2. Qualified retirement planning services paid
• The fair market value of care in a daycare for you by your employer may be excluded fromArcher MSA contributions.Contributions by
facility provided or sponsored by your em-your income. For more information, see Retire-your employer to your Archer MSA generally are
ployer.not included in your income. Their total will be ment Planning Services, later.
Page 4

Page 5 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income. However, you cannot reduce theGroup-Term Life Insurance Worksheet 1. Figuring the Cost of
amount to include in your income by:Group-Term Life Insurance To
Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 of Include in Income • Payments for coverage in a different taxgroup-term life insurance coverage provided to
year,you by your employer (or former employer) is not1.Enter the total amount of
included in your income. However, you must your insurance coverage • Payments for coverage through a cafeteriainclude in income the cost of employer-providedfrom your employer(s).... 1. plan, unless the payments are after-taxinsurance that is more than the cost of $50,000 contributions, orof coverage reduced by any amount you pay 2.Limit on exclusion for
• Payments for coverage not taxed to youtoward the purchase of the insurance. employer-provided
because of the exceptions discussed laterFor exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost group-term life insurance
coverage ............ 2. 50,000 under Entire cost excluded.excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later.
If your employer provided more than $50,000
3.Subtract line 2 from line 13.of coverage, the amount included in your in- Example. You are 51 years old and work forcome is reported as part of your wages in box 1 employers A and B. Both employers provide4.Divide line 3 by $1,000.of your Form W–2. It is also shown separately in group-term life insurance coverage for you forFigure to the nearest tenth4.box 12 with code C. the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with
employer A and $45,000 with employer B. YouGroup-term life insurance.This insurance is 5.Go to Table 1. Using your pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-term life insurance protection (insurance for aage on the last day of the
ployer B group plan. You figure the amount tofixed period of time) that: tax year, find your age
include in your income as follows.group in the left column,• Provides a general death benefit, and enter the cost from the
column on the right for your• Is provided to a group of employees, Worksheet 1. Figuring the Cost of
age group............ 5. Group-Term Life Insurance To• Is provided under a policy carried by the
Include in Income—Illustratedemployer, and 6.Multiply line 4 by line 5 . . .6.
• Provides an amount of insurance to each 1.Enter the total amount of7.Enter the number of fullemployee based on a formula that pre- your insurance coveragemonths of coverage at thisvents individual selection. from your employer(s).... 1. 80,000cost................ 7. 2.Limit on exclusion for
Permanent benefits.If your group-term life employer-provided8.Multiply line 6 by line 7 . . .8.insurance policy includes permanent benefits, group-term life insurance
coverage............. 2. 50,000such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you
9.Enter the 3.Subtract line 2 from line 1 . .3. 30,000must include in your income, as wages, the costpremiums youof the permanent benefits minus the amount you 4.Divide line 3 by $1,000.paid per month 9. Figure to the nearest tenth4. 30.0pay for them. Your employer should be able to
5.Go to Table 1. Using yourtell you the amount to include in your income.10.Enter the age on the last day of the taxAccidental death benefits.Insurance that number of year, find your age group inmonths you paidprovides accidental or other death benefits but the left column, and enter thethe premiums 10.does not provide general death benefits (travel cost from the column on the
insurance, for example) is not group-term life right for your age group . . .5. .2311.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . .11.insurance. 6.Multiply line 4 by line 5.... 6. 6.90
7.Enter the number of fullFormer employer. If your former employer 12.Subtract line 11 from line 8. months of coverage at thisprovides more than $50,000 of group-term lifeInclude this amount in cost................. 7. 12insurance coverage during the year, the amountyour income as wages .. 12. 8.Multiply line 6 by line 7.... 8. 82.80included in your income is reported as wages in 9.Enter the premiumsbox 1 of Form W–2. Also, it is shown separately you paid per month9. 4.15in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show theTable 1. Cost of $1,000 of 10.Enter the numberamount of uncollected social security and Medi-Group-Term Life Insurance for One of months you paidcare taxes on the excess coverage, with codesMonth the premiums . . .10. 12M and N. You must pay these taxes with your 11.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . .11. 49.80income tax return. Include them in your total taxAge Cost 12.Subtract line 11 from line 8.on line 60, Form 1040, and enter “UT” and theUnder 25 ............ $  . 0 5 Include this amount in youramount of the taxes on the dotted line next to25 through 29.........  . 0 6 income as wages ....... 12. 33.00line 60.
30 through 34......... . 0 8 The total amount to include in income for theTwo or more employers. Your exclusion for 35 through 39......... . 0 9 cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33.employer-provided group-term life insurance
coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur-40 through 44......... . 1 0coverage, whether the insurance is provided by ance coverage, so the wages shown on your45 through 49......... . 1 5a single employer or multiple employers. If two Forms W–2 do not include any part of that $33.
or more employers provide insurance coverage You must add it to the wages shown on your50 through 54......... . 2 3that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re- Forms W–2 and include the total on your return.55 through 59......... . 4 3ported as wages on your Forms W–2 will not be
correct. You must figure how much to include in Entire cost excluded.You are not taxed on60 through 64......... . 6 6your income. Reduce the amount you figure by the cost of group-term life insurance if any of the65 through 69......... 1.27any amount reported with code C in box 12 of following circumstances apply.70 and older.......... 2.06your Forms W–2, add the result to the wages
reported in box 1, and report the total on your 1) You are permanently and totally disabledIf you pay any part of the cost of the insurance,return. and have ended your employment.your entire payment reduces, dollar for dollar,
2) Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-Figuring the taxable cost.Use the followingthe amount you would otherwise include in your
icy for the entire period the insurance is inworksheet to figure the amount to include in your
income. force during the tax year.
Page 5

Page 6 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) A charitable organization to which contri-• It receives payments for graduate medical train tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv-
butions are deductible is the only benefi- education under the Social Security Act.ices.
ciary of the policy for the entire period the• One of its principal purposes or functionsinsurance is in force during the tax year. Example. You are employed as a flight at-is to provide and teach basic and clinical(You are not entitled to a deduction for a tendant for a company that owns both an airlinemedical science and research using itscharitable contribution for naming a chari- and a hotel chain. Your employer allows you toown faculty.table organization as the beneficiary of take personal flights (if there is an unoccupied
your policy.) seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if thereQualified campus lodging.Qualified cam-
is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. Thepus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your4) The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:
value of the personal flight is not included in yourspouse, or one of your dependents by, or on
a) You retired before January 2, 1984, income. However, the value of the hotel room isbehalf of, the institution or center for use as a
and were covered by the plan when included in your income because you do nothome. The lodging must be located on or near a
you retired, or work in the hotel business.campus of the educational institution or aca-
demic health center.b) You reached age 55 before January 2,
1984, and were employed by the em- Adequate rent. The amount of rent you payRetirement Planning Servicesployer or its predecessor in 1983. for the year for qualified campus lodging is con-
sidered adequate if it is at least equal to theIf your employer has a qualified retirement plan,
lesser of: qualified retirement planning services provided
Entire cost taxed.You are taxed on the entire to you (and your spouse) by your employer are• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging,cost of group-term life insurance if either of the not included in your income. Qualified servicesorfollowing circumstances apply. include retirement planning advice, information
• The average of rentals paid by individualsabout your employer’s retirement plan, and in-• The insurance is provided by your em-
(other than employees or students) forployer through a qualified employees’ formation about how the plan may fit into your
comparable lodging held for rent by thetrust, such as a pension trust or a qualified overall individual retirement income plan. You
educational institution.annuity plan. cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,
accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-If the amount you pay is less than the lesser of• You are a key employee and your
vided by your employer. Also, see Financialthese amounts, you must include the differenceemployer’s plan discriminates in favor of
Counseling Fees, earlier.in your income.key employees.
The lodging must be appraised by an inde-
pendent appraiser and the appraisal must beMeals and Lodging Transportation
reviewed on an annual basis.
You do not include in your income the value of If your employer provides you with a qualified
meals and lodging provided to you and your Example. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes-transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded
family by your employer at no charge if thesor for State University, rents a home from thefrom your income, up to certain limits. A qualified
following conditions are met. university that is qualified campus lodging. Thetransportation fringe benefit is:
house is appraised at $100,000. The average1) The meals are: • Transportation in a commuter highway ve-rent paid for comparable university lodging by
hicle (such as a van) between your homepersons other than employees or students isa) Furnished on the business premises of and work place,$7,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent ofyour employer, and $5,500. Carl does not include in his income any• A transit pass, orb) Furnished for the convenience of yourrental value because the rent he pays equals at
employer. • Qualified parking.least 5% of the appraised value of the house
(5% × $100,000 = $5,000). If Carl paid annualCash reimbursement by your employer for these2) The lodging is: rent of only $4,000, he would have to includeexpenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-$1,000 in his income ($5,000 − $4,000). rangement is also excludable. However, casha) Furnished on the business premises of
reimbursement for a transit pass is excludableyour employer,
only if a voucher or similar item that can beMoving Expense Reimbursementsb) Furnished for the convenience of your exchanged only for a transit pass is not readilyemployer, and available for direct distribution to you.Generally, if your employer pays for your moving
c) A condition of your employment. (Youexpenses (either directly or indirectly) and the
must accept it in order to be able to Exclusion limit.The exclusion for commuterexpenses would have been deductible if you
properly perform your duties.) highway vehicle transportation and transit passpaid them yourself, the value is not included in
fringe benefits cannot be more than a total ofyour income. Get Publication 521 for more infor-
You also do not include in your income themation. $100 a month.
value of meals or meal money that qualifies as a The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe
de minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini- benefit cannot be more than $190 a month.mal) Benefits, earlier. No-Additional-Cost Services If the benefits have a value that is more than
these limits, the excess must be included in yourThe value of services you receive from yourFaculty lodging. If you are an employee of an income.employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced priceeducational institution or an academic healthis not included in your income if your employer:center and you are provided with lodging that Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high-does not meet the three conditions above, you• Offers the same service for sale to cus-way vehicle that seats at least six adults (notstill may not have to include the value of thetomers in the ordinary course of the line ofincluding the driver). At least 80% of thelodging in income. However, the lodging mustbusiness in which you work, and vehicle’s mileage must reasonably be expectedbe qualified campus lodging, and you must pay
to be:an adequate rent. • Does not have a substantial additional
cost (including any sales income given up)• For transporting employees between theirAcademic health center.This is an organi- to provide you with the service (regardlesshomes and work place, andzation that meets the following conditions. of what you paid for the service).
• On trips during which employees occupy• Its principal purpose or function is to pro-
at least half of the vehicle’s adult seatingvide medical or hospital care or medical Generally, no-additional-cost services are ex-
capacity (not including the driver).education or research. cess capacity services, such as airline, bus, or
Page 6

Page 7 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Transit pass.This is any pass, token, fare- If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit, tions 1.61–21(g) and 1.61–21(h) of the regula-
no amount is included in your income.card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person tions.
to ride mass transit (whether public or private)Fair market value.The fair market value offree or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter Retirement Plana fringe benefit is determined by all the facts andhighway vehicle operated by a person in thecircumstances. It is the amount you would haveContributionsbusiness of transporting persons for compensa-to pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit.tion.  Your employer’s contributions to a qualifiedThis is determined without regard to:
retirement plan for you are not included in in-• Your perceived value of the benefit, orQualified parking.This is parking provided to come at the time contributed. (Your employer
an employee at or near the employer’s place of can tell you whether your retirement plan is• The amount your employer paid for the
business. It also includes parking provided on orbenefit. qualified.) However, the cost of life insurance
near a location from which the employee com- coverage included in the plan may have to be
mutes to work by mass transit, in a commuterEmployer-provided vehicles.If your em- included. See Group-Term Life Insurance, ear-highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in-ployer provides a car (or other highway motorlier, under Fringe Benefits.clude parking at or near the employee’s home.vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car isIf your employer pays into a nonqualified
usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.plan for you, you generally must include the
Under the general valuation rules, the valuecontributions in your income as wages for theTuition Reduction of an employer-provided vehicle is the amounttax year in which the contributions are made.
you would have to pay a third party to lease theHowever, if your interest in the plan is not trans-You can exclude a qualified tuition reductionsame or a similar vehicle on the same or compa-ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei-from your income. This is the amount of a reduc-rable terms in the same geographic area whereture (you have a good chance of losing it) at thetion in tuition: you use the vehicle. An example of a compara-time of the contribution, you do not have toble lease term is the amount of time the vehicle• For education (below graduate level) fur- include the value of your interest in your incomeis available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-nished by an educational institution to an until it is transferable or is no longer subject to ariod. The value cannot be determined by multi-employee, former employee who retired or substantial risk of forfeiture.plying a cents-per-mile rate times the number ofbecame disabled, or his or her spouse and
miles driven unless you prove the vehicle coulddependent children.
have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis.Elective Deferrals• For education furnished to a graduate stu-
Flights on employer-provided aircraft.dent at an educational institution if the If you are covered by certain kinds of retirementUnder the general valuation rules, if your flightgraduate student is engaged in teaching plans, you can choose to have part of youron an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-or research activities for that institution. compensation contributed by your employer to amarily personal and you control the use of the• Representing payment for teaching, re- retirement fund, rather than have it paid to you.aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount itsearch, or other services if you receive the The amount you set aside (called an electivewould cost to charter the flight from a third party.amount under the National Health Service deferral) is treated as an employer contributionIf there is more than one employee on theCorps Scholarship Program or the Armed to a qualified plan. It is not included in wagesflight, the cost to charter the aircraft must beForces Health Professions Scholarship subject to income tax at the time contributed.divided among those employees. The divisionand Financial Assistance Program. However, it is included in wages subject to socialmust be based on all the facts, including which
security and Medicare taxes.employee or employees control the use of theFor more information, get Publication 970.
aircraft. Elective deferrals include elective contribu-
tions to the following retirement plans. Working Condition Benefits
Special valuation rules.You generally can
use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefitIf your employer provides you with a product or 1) Cash or deferred arrangements (section
only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-service and the cost of it would have been allow- 401(k) plans).
ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannotable as a business or depreciation deduction if 2) The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-use a different special rule to value that benefit.you paid for it yourself, the cost is not included in ees.You always can use the general valuation ruleyour income.
discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-3) Salary reduction simplified employee pen-
Example. You work as an engineer and stances, even if your employer uses a specialsion plans (SARSEP).
your employer provides you with a subscriptionrule. 4) Savings incentive match plans for employ-to an engineering trade magazine. The cost ofIf you and your employer use a special valua-ees (SIMPLE plans).the subscription is not included in your incometion rule, you must include in your income the
because the cost would have been allowable toamount your employer determines under the 5) Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b)
you as a business deduction if you had paid forspecial rule minus the sum of: plans).
the subscription yourself.
6) Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re-1) Any amount you repaid your employer,
porting by employer, later.)plus
Valuation of Fringe Benefits 7) Section 457 plans.2) Any amount specifically excluded from in-
come by law.If a fringe benefit is included in your income, the
amount included is generally its value deter-The special valuation rules are the following.Overall limit on deferrals.For 2003, you gen-
mined under the general valuation rule or erally should not have deferred more than a total• The automobile lease rule.under the special valuation rules. For an ex- of $12,000 of contributions to the plans listed in
ception, see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier. • The vehicle cents-per-mile rule. (1) through (6) above. You should not have
deferred more than the lesser of your includible• The commuting rule.General valuation rule.You must include in compensation (defined later) or $12,000 of con-
• The unsafe conditions commuting rule.your income the amount by which the fair market tributions to the plan listed in (7) above (section
value of the fringe benefit is more than the sum 457 plan).• The employer-operated eating-facility rule.of: Your employer or plan administrator should
apply the proper annual limit when figuring yourFor more information on these rules, see Pub-1) The amount, if any, you paid for the bene- plan contributions. However, you are responsi-lication 15–B, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringefit, plus ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensureBenefits.
that the deferrals are not more than the overall2) The amount, if any, specifically excludedFor information on the non-commercial flight
from your income by law. and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec- limit.
Page 7

Page 8 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Catch-up contributions.You may be allowed e) A savings incentive match plan for em- checkbox in box 13 and show the total amount
catch-up contributions (additional elective defer- ployees (SIMPLE plan). deferred in box 12.
rals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of your Section 501(c)(18)(D) contributions.f) A section 125 cafeteria plan.tax year. For more information about catch-up Wages shown in box 1 of your Form W–2contributions to 403(b) plans, see chapter 6 of should not have been reduced for contributionsInstead of using the amounts listed above toPublication 571, Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans you made to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirementdetermine your includible compensation, your(403(b) Plans). plan. The amount you contributed should beemployer can use any of the following amounts.For more information about additional elec- identified with code “H” in box 12. You may
• Your wages as defined for income taxtive deferrals to: deduct the amount deferred subject to the limitswithholding purposes. that apply. Include your deduction in the total on• SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary Reduction
line 33 (Form 1040). Enter the amount and• Your wages as reported in box 1 of FormSimplified Employee Pension in Publica-
“501(c)(18)(D)” on the dotted line next to line 33.W–2, Wage and Tax Statement.tion 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-
ness. • Your wages that are subject to social se-Excess deferrals.If your deferrals exceed the
curity withholding (including elective defer-• Simple plans, see How Much Can Be limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-
rals).Contributed to a SIMPLE IRA on Your Be- quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex-
half in chapter 3 of Publication 590, Indi- cess amount will be distributed to you. If you
Increased limit.During any, or all, of thevidual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs). participate in more than one plan, you can have
last 3 years ending before you reach normalthe excess paid out of any of the plans that• Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferralsretirement age under the plan, your plan maypermit these distributions. You must notify eachunder section 457 plans, later. provide that your limit is the lesser of:plan by the date required by that plan of the
amount to be paid from that particular plan. The1) Twice the dollar limit for the year, orLimit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans.If plan must then pay you the amount of the ex-
you are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, you cess, along with any income earned on that2) The limit for prior years minus the amount
generally should not have deferred more than amount, by April 15 of the following year.you deferred in prior years plus the lesser
$8,000 in 2003.  Amounts you defer under a You must include the excess deferral in yourof:
SIMPLE plan count toward the overall limit income for the year of the deferral. File Form
($12,000 for 2003) and may affect the amount a) Your includible compensation for the1040 to add the excess deferral amount to your
you can defer under other elective deferral current year, or wages on line 7. Do not use Form 1040A or
plans. Form 1040EZ to report excess deferralb) The dollar limit for the current year.amounts.Limit for deferrals under section 457 plans.
If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (a Excess not distributed.If you do not takeCatch-up contributions. You generallydeferred compensation plan for employees of out the excess amount, you cannot include it incan have additional elective deferrals made tostate or local governments or tax-exempt orga- the cost of the contract even though you in-your section 457 plan if:nizations), you should have deferred no more cluded it in your income. Therefore, you are
than the lesser of your includible compensa- • You reached age 50 by the end of the taxed twice on the excess deferral left in the
tion or $12,000. However, if you are within 3 year, and plan—once when you contribute it, and again
years of normal retirement age, you may be when you receive it as a distribution.• No other elective deferrals can be madeallowed an increased limit if the plan allows it.for you to the plan for the year because ofExcess distributed to you.If you take outSee Increased limit, later. limits or restrictions. the excess after the year of the deferral and you
Includible compensation.This is the pay receive the corrective distribution by April 15 ofIf you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of youryou received for the year from the employer who the following year, do not include it in incomeincludible compensation or $12,000 ($13,000maintained the section 457 plan. It generally again in the year you receive it. If you receive itfor 2004), plus $2,000 ($3,000 for 2004). How-includes all the following payments. later, you must include it in income in both theever, if you are within 3 years of retirement ageyear of the deferral and the year you receive it.and your plan provides the increased limit ear-1) Wages and salaries. Any income on the excess deferral taken out islier, that limit may be higher. taxable in the tax year in which you take it out. If2) Fees for professional services.
you take out part of the excess deferral and theLimit for tax-sheltered annuities.If you are a3) The value of any employer-provided quali- income on it, allocate the distribution proportion-participant in a tax-sheltered annuity planfied transportation fringe benefit (defined ately between the excess deferral and the in-(403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals forunder Transportation, earlier) that is not come.2003 generally is $12,000 ($13,000 for 2004).included in your income. You should receive a Form 1099–R, Distri-However, if you have at least 15 years of service
butions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement4) Other amounts received (cash or noncash)with a public school system, a hospital, a home
or Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-for personal services you performed, in-health service agency, a health and welfare
tracts, etc., for the year in which the excesscluding, but not limited to, the followingservice agency, a church, or a convention or
deferral is distributed to you. Use the followingitems. association of churches (or associated organi-
rules to report a corrective distribution shown onzation), the limit on elective deferrals is in-a) Commissions and tips. Form 1099–R for 2003.creased by the least of the following amounts.
b) Fringe benefits. • If the distribution was for a 2003 excess1) $3,000. deferral, your Form 1099–R should havec) Bonuses.
the code “8” in box 7. Add the excess2) $15,000, reduced by increases to the over-
deferral amount to your wages on yourall limit that you were allowed in earlier5) Employer contributions (elective deferrals)
2003 tax return.years because of this years-of-serviceto:
rule. • If the distribution was for a 2002 excessa) The section 457 plan. deferral, your Form 1099–R should have3) $5,000 times your number of years of
the code “P” in box 7. If you did not addb) Qualified cash or deferred arrange- service for the organization, minus the to-
the excess deferral amount to your wagesments (section 401(k) plans) that are tal elective deferrals under the plan for
on your 2002 tax return, you must file annot included in your income. earlier years.
amended return on Form 1040X,c) A salary reduction simplified employeeReporting by employer.Your employer gen- Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-pension (SARSEP). erally should not include elective deferrals inturn. If you did not receive the distribution
d) A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b) your wages in box 1 of Form W–2. Instead, your by April 15, 2003, you also must add it to
plan). employer should mark the Retirement plan your wages on your 2003 tax return.
Page 8

Page 9 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• If the distribution was for a 2001 excess or “D” is in box 7, you may have to file an• You can transfer the option.deferral, your Form 1099–R should have amended 2002 or 2001 return on Form 1040X to
• You can exercise the option immediatelythe code “D” in box 7. If you did not add add the excess contributions or earnings to your
the excess deferral amount to your wages wages in the year of the contribution. in full.
on your 2001 tax return, you must file an Even though a corrective distribution of
• The option or the property subject to theamended return on Form 1040X. You also excess contributions is reported on option is not subject to any condition ormust add it to your wages on your 2003 Form 1099–R, it is not otherwise restriction (other than a condition to se-
TIP
income tax return. treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotcure payment of the purchase price) that
• If the distribution was for the income be rolled over into another plan, and it is nothas a significant effect on the fair market
earned on an excess deferral, your Formsubject to the additional tax on early distribu-value of the option.
1099–R should have the code “8” in boxtions. • The fair market value of the option privi-7. Add the income amount to your wages lege can be readily determined.on your 2003 income tax return, regard-
less of when the excess deferral was The option privilege for an option to buy is theExcess Annual Additions
made. opportunity to benefit during the option’s exer-
The amount contributed in 2003 to a definedcise period from any increase in the value ofReport a loss on a corrective distribution of contribution plan is generally limited to theproperty subject to the option without risking anyan excess deferral in the year the excesslesser of 100% of your compensation or capital. For example, if during the exercise pe-amount (reduced by the loss) is distributed to$40,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu-riod the fair market value of stock subject to anyou. Include the loss as a negative amount ontions that exceed these limits (excess annualoption is greater than the option’s exercise price,line 21 (Form 1040) and identify it as “Loss onadditions) may be corrected by a distribution ofa profit may be realized by exercising the optionExcess Deferral Distribution.” your elective deferrals or a return of yourand immediately selling the stock at its higher
after-tax contributions and earnings from thesevalue. The option privilege for an option to sell isEven though a corrective distribution ofcontributions. the opportunity to benefit during the exerciseexcess deferrals is reported on FormA corrective payment of excess annual addi-period from a decrease in the value of the prop-1099–R, it is not otherwise treated as
TIP
tions consisting of elective deferrals or earningserty subject to the option.a distribution from the plan. It cannot be rolledfrom your after-tax contributions is fully taxableover into another plan, and it is not subject to thein the year paid. A corrective payment consistingOption with readily determined value.If youadditional tax on early distributions. of your after-tax contributions is not taxable.receive a nonstatutory stock option that has a
If you received a corrective payment of ex-readily determined fair market value at the time it
cess annual additions, you should receive ais granted to you, the option is treated like otherExcess Contributions separate Form 1099–R for the year of the pay-property received as compensation. See Re-
ment with the code “E” in box 7. Report the totalstricted Property, later, for rules on how muchIf you are a highly compensated employee, thepayment shown in box 1 of Form 1099–R on income to include and when to include it. How-total of your elective deferrals and other contri-line 16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Formever, the rule described in that discussion forbutions made for you for any year under a sec-1040A. Report the taxable amount shown in boxchoosing to include the value of property in yourtion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as a 2a of Form 1099–R on line 16b of Form 1040 orincome for the year of the transfer does notpercentage of pay, no more than 125% of theline 12b of Form 1040A. apply to a nonstatutory option.average deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligible
nonhighly compensated employees. Even though a corrective distribution of
Option without readily determined value.IfIf the total contributed to the plan is more excess annual additions is reported on
the fair market value of the option is not readilythan the amount allowed under the ADP test, the Form 1099–R, it is not otherwise
TIP
determined at the time it is granted to you (evenexcess contributions must be either distributedtreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot
if it is determined later), you do not have incometo you or recharacterized as after-tax employeebe rolled over into another plan, and it is not
until you transfer or exercise the option. Whencontributions by treating them as distributed tosubject to the additional tax on early distribu-
you exercise this kind of option, the restrictedyou and then contributed by you to the plan. Youtions.
property rules apply to the property received.must include the excess contributions in your
The amount to include in your income is theincome as wages on line 7 of Form 1040. YouStock Options difference between the amount you pay for thecannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to
property and its fair market value when it be-report excess contribution amounts. If you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sellcomes substantially vested. Your basis in theIf you receive excess contributions from astock or other property as payment for yourproperty you acquire under the option is the401(k) plan and any income earned on the con-services, you usually will have income when youamount you pay for it plus any amount you musttributions within 21/2 months after the close of thereceive the option, when you exercise the optioninclude in your gross income under this rule. Forplan year, you must include them in your income(use it to buy or sell the stock or other property),more information on restricted property, see Re-in the year of the contribution. If you receiveor when you sell or otherwise dispose of thestricted Property, later.them later, or receive less than $100 excessoption. However, if your option is a statutory
contributions, include the excess contributions If you transferred this kind of option in anstock option (defined later), you will not have any
and earnings in your income in the year distrib- arm’s-length transaction, you must include inincome until you sell or exchange your stock.
uted. If the excess contributions are recharacter- your income the money or other property youYour employer can tell you which kind of option
ized, you must include them in income in the received for the transfer, as if you had exercisedyou hold.
year a corrective distribution would have oc- the option.
curred. For a SARSEP, the employer must notify This does not apply to a transfer of theyou by March 15 following the year in whichNonstatutory Stock Options option to a related person after July 1,excess contributions are made that you must 2003. See Temporary RegulationsCAUTION
!
withdraw the excess and earnings. You must If you are granted a nonstatutory stock option,section 1.83–7T for the definition of a relatedinclude the excess contributions in your income the amount of income to include and the time toperson.in the year of the contribution (or the year of the include it depend on whether the fair market
notification if less than $100) and include the value of the option can be readily determined.
Tax form. If you receive compensation fromearnings in your income in the year withdrawn. The fair market value of an option can be readily
employer-provided nonstatutory stock options, itdetermined if it is actively traded on an estab-You should receive a Form 1099–R for the
is reported in box 1 of Form W–2. It is alsolished market.year in which the excess contributions are dis-
reported in box 12 using code “V.”tributed to you (or are recharacterized). Add The fair market value of an option that is not
If you are a nonemployee spouse and youexcess contributions or earnings shown ontraded on an established market can be readily
exercise nonstatutory stock options you re-Form 1099–R for 2003 to your wages on your determined only if all of the following conditions
ceived incident to a divorce, the income is re-2003 tax return if code “8” is in box 7. If code “P” exist.
Page 9

Page 10 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ported to you on Form 1099–MISC, stock for more than a year, less than 2 years had granted, the option price is figured as if the
Miscellaneous Income, in box 3. passed from the time you were granted the op- option had been exercised at the time it was
tion. In 2003, you must report the differencegranted.
between the option price ($10) and the value ofAny excess gain is capital gain. If you have aStatutory Stock Options the stock when you exercised the option ($12)loss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you doas wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain,not have any ordinary income.There are two kinds of statutory stock options.figured as follows:
• Incentive stock options (ISOs), and Example. Your employer, Y Corporation,Selling price ($15 × 100 shares)..... $  1,500 granted you an option under its employee stockPurchase price ($10 × 100 shares) . . .−1,000• Options granted under employee stock purchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of YGain ....................... $  5 0 0purchase plans.
Corporation for $20 a share at a time when theAmount reported as wages
stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteen[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000]...... − 200For either kind of option, you must be an
months later, when the value of the stock wasemployee of the company granting the option, orAmount reported as capital gain $ 300 $23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14a related company, at all times beginning with
months after that you sold your stock for $30 athe date the option is granted, until 3 monthsAlternative minimum tax (AMT).For the share. In the year of sale, you must report asbefore you exercise the option (for an incentiveAMT, you must treat stock acquired through thewages the difference between the option pricestock option, 1 year before if you are disabled).exercise of an ISO as if no special treatment($20) and the value at the time the option wasAlso, the option must be nontransferable exceptapplied. This means that, when your rights in thegranted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 perat death. If you do not meet the employmentstock are transferable or no longer subject to ashare) is capital gain, figured as follows:requirements, or you receive a transferable op-substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include as
tion, your option is a nonstatutory stock option.an adjustment in figuring alternative minimumSelling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $  3,000See Nonstatutory Stock Options, earlier in thistaxable income the amount by which the fairPurchase price (option price)discussion. market value of the stock exceeds the option($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000If you receive a statutory stock option, do notprice. Enter this adjustment on line 13 of FormGain ...................... $  1,000include any amount in your income either when6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals. Amount reported as wagesthe option is granted or when you exercise it.Increase your AMT basis in any stock you ac-[($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 200You have taxable income or deductible lossquire by exercising the ISO by the amount of the
Amount reported as capital gain $ 800when you sell the stock that you bought byadjustment. However, no adjustment is required
exercising the option. Your income or loss is theif you dispose of the stock in the same year you
Holding period requirement not met.Ifdifference between the amount you paid for theexercise the option.
you do not meet the holding period requirement,stock (the option price) and the amount youSee Restricted Property, later, for more infor-
your ordinary income is the amount by which thereceive when you sell it. You generally treat thismation.
stock’s fair market value when you exercised theamount as capital gain or loss and report it on Your AMT basis in stock acquired option exceeded the option price. This ordinarySchedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains and through an ISO is likely to differ fromincome is not limited to your gain from the saleLosses, for the year of the sale. your regular tax basis. Therefore, keepRECORDS
of the stock. Increase your basis in the stock byHowever, you may have ordinary income foradequate records for both the AMT and regularthe amount of this ordinary income. The differ-the year that you sell or otherwise dispose of thetax so that you can figure your adjusted gain orence between your increased basis and the sell-stock in either of the following situations.loss. ing price of the stock is a capital gain or loss.
• You do not meet the holding period re-
Example. The facts are the same as in thequirement. This situation applies only if Example. The facts are the same as in the
previous example. On January 17, 2003, whenyou sell the stock within 1 year after its previous example, except that you sold the
the stock was selling on the open market for $14transfer to you or within 2 years after the stock only 6 months after you exercised the
a share, your rights to the stock first becameoption was granted. option. You did not hold the stock long enough,
transferable. You include $400 ($1,400 valueso you must report $300 as wages and $700 as• You meet the holding period requirementwhen your rights first became transferable mi-capital gain, figured as follows:but the option was granted under an em-nus $1,000 purchase price) as an adjustment onployee stock purchase plan for an optionline 13 of Form 6251. Selling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $3,000price that was less than the stock’s fair Purchase price (option price)market value at that time. ($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000Employee stock purchase plan.If you sold
Gain ...................... $1,000Report your ordinary income as wages on line 7,stock acquired by exercising an option granted
Amount reported as wagesForm 1040, for the year of the sale. under an employee stock purchase plan, deter-
[($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 300mine your ordinary income and your capital gain
Incentive stock options (ISOs).If you sellor loss as follows. Amount reported as capital gain
stock acquired by exercising an ISO and meet [$3,000 – ($2,000 + $300)] $700Option granted at a discount.If at the timethe holding period requirement, your gain or lossthe option was granted, the option price perfrom the sale is capital gain or loss. share was less than 100% (but not less thanRestricted PropertyIf you do not meet the holding period require-85%) of the fair market value of the share, andment and you have a gain from the sale, the gainyou dispose of the share after meeting the hold-Generally, if you receive property for your serv-is ordinary income up to the amount by whiching period requirement, or you die while owningices, you must include its fair market value inthe stock’s fair market value when you exercisedthe share, you must include in your income asyour income in the year you receive the prop-the option exceeded the option price. Any ex-compensation, the lesser of: erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-cess gain is capital gain. If you have a loss from
erty that has certain restrictions that affect its• The amount, if any, by which the pricethe sale, it is a capital loss and you do not have
value, you do not include the value of the prop-paid under the option was exceeded byany ordinary income.
erty in your income until it has been substan-the fair market value of the share at the
tially vested. (You can choose to include theExample. Your employer, X Corporation, time the option was granted, or
value of the property in your income in the year itgranted you an ISO on March 11, 2001, to buy• The amount, if any, by which the priceis transferred to you, as discussed later, rather100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a paid under the option was exceeded bythan the year it is substantially vested.)share, its fair market value at the time. Youthe fair market value of the share at theUntil the property becomes substantiallyexercised the option on January 17, 2002, whentime of the disposition or death. vested, it is owned by the person who makes thethe stock was selling on the open market for $12
transfer to you, usually your employer. However,a share. On January 24, 2003, you sold the For this purpose, if the option price was not fixed
stock for $15 a share. Although you held the or determinable at the time the option was any income from the property, or the right to use
Page 10

Page 11 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the property, is included in your income as addi-If you make this choice, you cannotof property that you did not choose to include in
tional compensation in the year you receive the revoke it without the consent of theyour income in the year transferred and that is
income or have the right to use the property. Internal Revenue Service. Consent willnot substantially vested.CAUTION
!
When the property becomes substantiallybe given only if you were under a mistake of factIf you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-
vested, you must include its fair market value,as to the underlying transaction. erty in an arm’s-length transaction, include in
minus any amount you paid for it, in your income your income as compensation for the year ofIf you forfeit the property after you have in-
for that year. sale the amount realized minus the amount youcluded its value in income, your loss is the
paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-amount you paid for the property minus any
Example. Your employer, the RST Corpo- erty in an arm’s-length transaction for otheramount you realized on the forfeiture.
ration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 a property that is not substantially vested, treat the
You cannot make this choice for a non-share. At the time of the sale the fair market new property as if it were substituted for the
statutory stock option.value of the stock is $100 a share. Under the exchanged property.
terms of the sale, the stock is under a substantial
CAUTION
!
The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-
risk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of tory stock option to a related person after July 1,
losing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not 2003, is not considered an arm’s-length transac-
How to make the choice. You make thesubstantially vested when it is transferred, so tion. See Temporary Regulations section
choice by filing a written statement with the Inter-you do not include any amount in your income in 1.83–7T for the definition of a related person.
nal Revenue Service center where you file yourthe year you buy it. At the end of the 5-year If you sell the property in a transaction that isreturn. You must file this statement no later thanperiod, the fair market value of the stock is $200 not at arm’s length, include in your income as30 days after the date the property was trans-a share. You must include $19,000 in your in- compensation for the year of sale the total of anyferred. A copy of the statement must be attachedcome [100 shares × ($200 fair market value − money you received and the fair market value ofto your tax return for the year the property was$10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor- any substantially vested property you receivedtransferred. You also must give a copy of thisporation on your 100 shares of stock are taxable on the sale. In addition, you will have to reportstatement to the person for whom you per-to you as additional compensation during the income when the original property becomesformed the services and, if someone other thanperiod the stock can be forfeited. substantially vested, as if you still held it. Reportyou received the property, to that person.as compensation its fair market value minus the
You must sign the statement and indicate onSubstantially vested.Property is substan- total of the amount you paid for the property and
it that you are making the choice under sectiontially vested when: the amount included in your income from the
83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-earlier sale.• It is transferable, or ment must contain all of the following informa-
• It is not subject to a substantial risk of tion. Example. In 2000, you paid your employer
forfeiture. (You do not have a good $50 for a share of stock that had a fair market• Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-chance of losing it.) value of $100 and was subject to forfeiture untilcation number. 2003. In 2002, you sold the stock to your spouse
Transferable property.Property is trans- • A description of each property for whichfor $10 in a transaction not at arm’s length. You
ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge youryou are making the choice. had compensation of $10 from this transaction.
interest in the property to any person (other than In 2003, when the stock had a fair market value• The date or dates on which the propertythe transferor), and if the person receiving your of $120, it became substantially vested. Forwas transferred and the tax year for whichinterest in the property is not required to give up 2003, you must report additional compensationyou are making the choice.the property, or its value, if the substantial risk of of $60, figured as follows:
forfeiture occurs. • The nature of any restrictions on the prop-
erty. Fair market value of stock at timeSubstantial risk of forfeiture.A substan- of substantial vesting........ $120tial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in the• The fair market value at the time of trans-Minus: Amount paid for stock . . . $50property transferred depend on performing (orfer (ignoring restrictions except those thatMinus: Compensation previouslynot performing) substantial services, or on awill never lapse) of each property forincluded in income from sale tocondition related to the transfer, and the possi-which you are making the choice. spouse.................. 1 0 −60bility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition is Additional income $60• Any amount that you paid for the property.not satisfied.
• A statement that you have provided copiesInherited property not substantially vested.Example. The Spin Corporation transfers toto the appropriate persons. If you inherit property not substantially vested atyou as compensation for services 100 shares of
the time of the decedent’s death, any incomeits corporate stock for $100 a share. Under theDividends received on restricted stock. you receive from the property is considered in-terms of the transfer, you must resell the stock toDividends you receive on restricted stock arecome in respect of a decedent and is taxedthe corporation at $100 a share if you leave yourtreated as compensation and not as dividendaccording to the rules for restricted propertyjob for any reason within 3 years from the date ofincome. Your employer should include thesereceived for services. For information about in-transfer. You must perform substantial servicespayments on your Form W–2. If they are alsocome in respect of a decedent, get Publicationover a period of time and you must resell thereported on a Form 1099–DIV, Dividends and 559.stock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard-Distributions, you should list them on Scheduleless of its value) if you do not perform the serv-B (Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),ices, so your rights to the stock are subject to aInterest and Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040Asubstantial risk of forfeiture. Filers, with a statement that you have includedSpecial Rules forthem as wages. Do not include them in the totalChoosing to include in income for year of
dividends received. Certain Employeestransfer.You can choose to include the value
of restricted property at the time of transfer (mi-Stock you chose to include in your in-
This part of the publication deals with specialnus any amount you paid for the property) income. Dividends you receive on restricted
rules for people in certain types of employment:your income for the year it is transferred. If youstock you chose to include in your income in the
members of the clergy, members of religiousmake this choice, the substantial vesting rulesyear transferred are treated the same as any
orders, people working for foreign employers,do not apply and, generally, any later apprecia-other dividends. You should receive a Form
military personnel, and volunteers.tion in value is not included in your compensa-1099–DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-
tion when the property becomes substantiallyclude the dividends in your wages on your re-
vested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss whenturn. Report them as dividends. Clergy
you sell the property is the amount you paid for it
plus the amount you included in income as com-Sale of property not substantially vested.If you are a member of the clergy, you must
pensation. These rules apply to the sale or other disposition include in your income offerings and fees you
Page 11

Page 12 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,Services performed outside the order.If wholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-
masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the you are directed to work outside the order, your ernment.
offering is made to the religious institution, it is services are not an exercise of duties required
Employees of international organizations ornot taxable to you. by the order unless they meet both of the follow-
foreign governments. Your compensationIf you are a member of a religious organiza- ing requirements.
for official services to an international organiza-tion and you give your outside earnings to the
• They are the kind of services that are ordi-tion is exempt from federal income tax if you areorganization, you still must include the earningsnarily the duties of members of the order.not a citizen of the United States or you are ain your income. However, you may be entitled to
citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you area charitable contribution deduction for the• They are part of the duties that you must
a citizen of the United States).amount paid to the organization. Get Publicationexercise for, or on behalf of, the religious
Your compensation for official services to a526, Charitable Contributions. Also, see Mem- order as its agent.
foreign government is exempt from federal in-bers of Religious Orders, later. If you are an employee of a third party, thecome tax if all of the following are true.
services you perform for the third party will notPension. A pension or retirement pay for a
1) You are not a citizen of the United Statesbe considered directed or required of you by themember of the clergy usually is treated as any
or you are a citizen of the Philippinesorder. Amounts you receive for these servicesother pension or annuity. It must be reported on
(whether or not you are a citizen of theare included in your income, even if you havelines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or on lines 12a
United States).taken a vow of poverty.and 12b of Form 1040A.
2) Your work is like the work done by employ-Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of a ees of the United States in foreign coun-religious order and has taken a vow of poverty.Housing tries.He renounces all claims to his earnings and
Special rules for housing apply to members ofturns over his earnings to the order. 3) The foreign government gives an equal ex-
the clergy. Under these rules, you do not include emption to employees of the United StatesMark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed
in your income the rental value of a home (in- in its country.by the superiors of the order to get a job with a
cluding utilities) or a designated housing allow-private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-
ance provided to you as part of your pay. Waiver of alien status.If you are an alienployee of the school, and, at his request, the
However, the exclusion cannot be more than the who works for a foreign government or interna-school made the salary payments directly to the
reasonable pay for your service. If you pay for tional organization and you file a waiver underorder.
the utilities, you can exclude any allowance des- section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-Because Mark is an employee of the school,
ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost. ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salaryhe is performing services for the school rather
The home or allowance must be provided as you receive after the date you file the waiver isthan as an agent of the order. The wages Mark
compensation for your services as an ordained, not exempt under this rule. However, it may beearns working for the school are included in his
licensed, or commissioned minister. However, exempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi-income.
you must include the rental value of the home or cation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more
the housing allowance as earnings from information about treaties.Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of a
self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040),religious order who, as a condition of member-Nonwage income. This exemption appliesSelf-Employment Tax, if you are subject to theship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience.only to employees’ wages, salaries, and fees.self-employment tax. For more information, seeAll claims to his earnings are renounced. GenePensions and other income do not qualify for thisPublication 517, Social Security and Other Infor-received permission from the order to establishexemption.mation for Members of the Clergy and Religiousa private practice as a psychologist and coun-
Workers. sels members of religious orders as well asEmployment abroad. For information on the
nonmembers. Although the order reviews tax treatment of income earned abroad, get
Gene’s budget annually, Gene controls not onlyMembers of Religious Orders Publication 54.
the details of his practice but also the means by
 If you are a member of a religious order who haswhich his work as a psychologist is accom-Militarytaken a vow of poverty, how you treat earningsplished.
that you renounce and turn over to the orderGene’s private practice as a psychologistPayments you receive as a member of a militarydepends on whether your services are per-does not make him an agent of the religiousservice generally are taxed as wages except forformed for the order. order. The psychological services provided byretirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.
Gene are not the type of services that are pro-Allowances generally are not taxed. For moreServices performed for the order.If you arevided by the order. The income Gene earns as ainformation on the tax treatment of military al-performing the services as an agent of the orderpsychologist is earned in his individual capacity.lowances and benefits, get Publication 3, Armedin the exercise of duties required by the order,Gene must include in his income the earningsForces’ Tax Guide.do not include in your income the amountsfrom his private practice.turned over to the order. Military retirement pay.If your retirementIf your order directs you to perform services pay is based on age or length of service, it isForeign Employerfor another agency of the supervising church or taxable and must be included in your income asan associated institution, you are considered toSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreigna pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, orbe performing the services as an agent of theemployer. on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do notorder. Any wages you earn as an agent of an include in your income the amount of any reduc-order that you turn over to the order are notU.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen whotion in retirement or retainer pay to provide aincluded in your income. works in the United States for a foreign govern-survivor annuity for your spouse or children
ment, an international organization, a foreignunder the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec-Example. You are a member of a church embassy, or any foreign employer, you musttion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.order and have taken a vow of poverty. Youinclude your salary in your income. For a more detailed discussion of survivorrenounce any claims to your earnings and turn
annuities, get Publication 575.over to the order any salaries or wages youSocial security and Medicare taxes.You
earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order are exempt from social security and MedicareDisability.If you are retired on disability,
assigns you to work in a hospital that is an employee taxes if you are employed in thesee Military and Government Disability Pen-
associated institution of the church. However, United States by an international organization orsions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.
you remain under the general direction and con- a foreign government. However, you must pay
trol of the order. You are considered to be an self-employment tax on your earnings from serv-Veterans’ benefits.Do not include in your in-
agent of the order and any wages you earn atices performed in the United States, evencome any veterans’ benefits paid under any law,
the hospital that you turn over to your order are though you are not self-employed. This rule also regulation, or administrative practice adminis-
not included in your income. applies if you are an employee of a qualifying tered by the Department of Veterans Affairs
Page 12

Page 13 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
National Senior Service Corps programs. Reporting business income and expenses.(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans or
Do not include in your income amounts you If you are in the business of renting personaltheir families are not taxable.
receive for supportive services or reimburse- property, report your income and expenses on
• Education, training, and subsistence al-ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol- Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
lowances. lowing programs. The form instructions have information on how
to complete them.• Disability compensation and pension pay-• Retired Senior Volunteer Programments for disabilities paid either to veter-(RSVP). Reporting nonbusiness income. If you areans or their families. not in the business of renting personal property,• Foster Grandparent Program.• Grants for homes designed for wheelchair report your rental income on line 21 of Form
• Senior Companion Program.living. 1040. List the type and amount of the income on
the dotted line next to line 21.• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who
Service Corps of Retired Executiveslost their sight or the use of their limbs. Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-rent personal property for profit, include your• Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-ive services or reimbursements for rental expenses in the total amount you enter ondends paid either to veterans or their ben-out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do notline 33 of Form 1040. Also, enter the amounteficiaries, including the proceeds of ainclude these amounts in gross income. and “PPR” on the dotted line next to line 33.veteran’s endowment policy paid before
If you do not rent personal property for profit,death. Volunteer tax counseling.Do not include inyour deductions are limited and you cannot re-your income any reimbursements you receive• Interest on insurance dividends left on de- port a loss to offset other income. See Activityfor transportation, meals, and other expensesposit with the VA. not for profit under Other Income in the discus-you have in training for, or actually providing,sion of Miscellaneous Income, later.volunteer federal income tax counseling for theRehabilitative program payments. VA
elderly (TCE).payments to hospital patients and resident vet- Royaltieserans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-You can deduct as a charitable contribution
tic or rehabilitative programs are not treated asyour unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses inRoyalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,nontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report thesetaking part in the volunteer income tax assis-and mineral properties are taxable as ordinarypayments as income on line 21 of Form 1040.tance (VITA) program. income.
You generally report royalties in Part I of
Volunteers Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income
and Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil,The tax treatment of amounts you receive as a gas, or mineral interest or are in business as aBusiness andvolunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similar self-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., reportagency is covered in the following discussions.Investment Income your income and expenses on Schedule C or
Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
Peace Corps. Living allowances you receiveThis section provides information on the treat-
as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader Copyrights and patents. Royalties fromment of income from certain rents and royalties,
for housing, utilities, household supplies, food, copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,and from interests in partnerships and S corpo-
and clothing are exempt from tax. and similar property, or from patents on inven-rations. For additional information about busi-
tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to useness and investment income, you may want toTaxable allowances. The following al- your work over a specified period of time. Royal-see the following publications.lowances must be included in your income and ties generally are based on the number of unitsreported as wages. • Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Busi-sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a
ness (For Individuals Who Use Scheduleperformance, or machines sold.• Allowances paid to your spouse and minor
C or C–EZ).children while you are a volunteer leader
Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income fromtraining in the United States. • Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amounterty (Including Rental of Vacation Homes).• Living allowances designated by the Di- you receive when natural resources are ex-
rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-• Publication 541, Partnerships. tracted from your property. The royalties are
pensation. These are allowances for based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and• Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-personal items such as domestic help, are paid to you by a person or company whotions of Assets.laundry and clothing maintenance, enter- leases the property from you.
tainment and recreation, transportation,• Publication 550, Investment Income and Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco-and other miscellaneous expenses. Expenses (Including Capital Gains andnomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gasLosses).• Leave allowances. wells, you can recover your investment through
the depletion allowance. For information on this• Readjustment allowances or termination
subject, see chapter 10 of Publication 535.Rents From Personalpayments . These are considered re-
ceived by you when credited to your ac-Property Coal and iron ore.Under certain circum-
count. stances, you can treat amounts you receive
If you rent out personal property, such as equip-from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-
ment or vehicles, how you report your incomements from the sale of a capital asset, ratherExample. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corpsand expenses is generally determined by: than as royalty income. For information aboutvolunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment
gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,allowance during his period of service, to be paid• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-get Publication 544.to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofness, and
duty. Although the allowance is not available to Sale of property interest.If you sell your• Whether or not the rental activity is con-him until the end of his service, Gary must in- complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,ducted for profit.clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is the amount you receive is considered payment
credited to his account. Generally, if your primary purpose is income or for the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty
profit and you are involved in the rental activity income. Under certain circumstances, the sale
Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA).If with continuity and regularity, your rental activity is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on
you are a VISTA volunteer, you must includeis a business. See Publication 535, Business Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information
meal and lodging allowances paid to you in yourExpenses, for details on deducting expenses for on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3
income as wages. both business and not-for-profit activities. of Publication 544.
Page 13

Page 14 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,Generally, Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) Do not report as income any amounts
will tell you where to report each item of paid to reimburse you for medical ex-or a net profit interest in a mineral property for
income on your individual return. penses you incurred after the plan wasthe life of the property, you have made a lease or
TIP TIP
established.a sublease, and any cash you receive for the
assignment of other interests in the property isS Corporation Income Cost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost ofordinary income subject to a depletion allow-
an accident or health plan, do not include anyance. In general, an S corporation does not pay tax onamounts you receive from the plan for personalits income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-Part of future production sold.If you own injury or sickness as income on your tax return.
tions, and credits of the corporation are passedmineral property but sell part of the future pro- If your plan reimbursed you for medical ex-
through to the shareholders based on eachduction, you generally treat the money you re- penses you deducted in an earlier year, you may
shareholder’s pro rata share. You must reportceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a have to include some, or all, of the reimburse-
your share of these items on your return. Gener-loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your ment in your income. See Recoveries under
ally, the items passed through to you will in-income or take depletion based on it. Miscellaneous Income, later.
crease or decrease the basis of your SWhen production begins, you include all the Cafeteria plans.Generally, if you are coveredcorporation stock as appropriate.proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- by an accident or health insurance plan throughtion expenses, and deduct depletion from that a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur-S corporation return.An S corporation mustamount to arrive at your taxable income from the ance premiums was not included in your in-file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Taxproperty. come, you are not considered to have paid theReturn for an S Corporation. This shows the
premiums and you must include any benefitsresults of the corporation’s operations for its taxPartnership Income you receive in your income. If the amount of theyear and the items of income, losses, deduc-
premiums was included in your income, you aretions, or credits that affect the shareholders’A partnership generally is not a taxable entity. considered to have paid the premiums and anyindividual income tax returns.The income, gains, losses, deductions, and benefits you receive are not taxable.credits of a partnership are passed through to Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S). You should
the partners based on each partner’s distributivereceive from the S corporation in which you areDisability Pensionsshare of these items. For more information, seea shareholder a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form
Publication 541, Partnerships. 1120S), Shareholder’s Share of Income, Cred-If you retired on disability, you must include in
its, Deductions, etc., showing your share of in-income any disability pension you receive underPartner’s distributive share.Your distribu-come, losses, deductions, and credits, of the Sa plan that is paid for by your employer. Youtive share of partnership income, gains, losses,corporation for the tax year. Retain Schedulemust report your taxable disability payments asdeductions, or credits is generally based on theK–1 for your records. Do not attach it to yourwages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A
partnership agreement. You must report yourForm 1040. until you reach minimum retirement age. Mini-
distributive share of these items on your return mum retirement age generally is the age at
whether or not they are actually distributed toShareholder’s return.Your distributive sharewhich you can first receive a pension or annuity
you. However, your distributive share of theof the items of income, losses, deductions, orif you are not disabled.
partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba-credits of the S corporation must be shown sep- You may be entitled to a tax credit ifsis of your partnership interest at the end of thearately on your Form 1040. The character of you were permanently and totally dis-partnership year in which the losses took place.these items generally is the same as if you had abled when you retired. For informa-
TIP
realized or incurred them personally.Partnership agreement. The partnership tion on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit for
agreement usually covers the distribution of Generally, Schedule K–1 (Form the Elderly or the Disabled.
profits, losses, and other items. However, if the1120S) will tell you where to reportBeginning on the day after you reach mini-each item of income on your individualagreement does not state how a specific item of
TIP
mum retirement age, payments you receive arereturn.gain or loss will be shared, or the allocation taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the
stated in the agreement does not have substan- payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, orDistributions.Generally, S corporation dis-tial economic effect, your distributive share is on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For moretributions are a nontaxable return of your basisfigured according to your interest in the partner- information on pensions and annuities, get Pub-in the corporation stock. However, in certainship. lication 575.cases, part of the distributions may be taxable
as a dividend, or as a long-term or short-termRetirement and profit-sharing plans.If youPartnership return.Although a partnershipcapital gain, or as both. The corporation’s distri-receive payments from a retirement orgenerally pays no tax, it must file an informationbutions may be in the form of cash or property.profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partner-
bility retirement, do not treat the payments as aship Income. This shows the result of the More information.For more information, seedisability pension. The payments must be re-partnership’s operations for its tax year and thethe instructions for Form 1120S. ported as a pension or annuity.items that must be passed through to the part-
ners. Accrued leave payment.If you retire on disa-
bility, any lump-sum payment you receive forSchedule K–1 (Form 1065). You should
accrued annual leave is a salary payment. Thereceive from each partnership in which you are aSickness and payment is not a disability payment. Include it inmember a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form 1065),
your income in the tax year you receive it.Partner’s Share of Income, Credits, Deductions,Injury Benefits
etc., showing your share of income, deductions,
credits, and tax preference items of the partner-Generally, you must report as income any Military and Governmentship for the tax year. Retain Schedule K–1 foramount you receive for personal injury or sick-Disability Pensionsyour records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040.ness through an accident or health plan that is
paid for by your employer. If both you and yourCertain military and government disability pen-Partner’s return.You generally must reportemployer pay for the plan, only the amount yousions are not taxable.partnership items on your individual return thereceive that is due to your employer’s payments
same way as they are reported on the partner-is reported as income. However, certain pay-Service-connected disability.You may be
ship return. That is, if the partnership had aments may not be taxable to you. For informa-able to exclude from income amounts you re-
capital gain, you report your share on Scheduletion on nontaxable payments, see Military andceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance
D (Form 1040). You report your share of partner-Government Disability Pensions and Other for personal injury or sickness resulting from
ship ordinary income on Schedule E (Form Sickness and Injury Benefits, later in this discus-active service in one of the following govern-
1040). sion. ment services.
Page 14

Page 15 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Terrorist attack or military action.Do not ties of daily living are eating, toileting,• The armed forces of any country. include in your income disability payments you transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-
• The National Oceanic and Atmospheric receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter- nence.
Administration. roristic or military action. • An individual who requires substantial su-
A terroristic action is one that is directed• The Public Health Service. pervision to be protected from threats to
against the United States or any of its allieshealth and safety due to severe cognitive• The Foreign Service. (including a multinational force in which theimpairment.
United States is participating). A military actionConditions for exclusion.Do not include is one that involves the armed forces of theLimit on exclusion.The exclusion for pay-the disability payments in your income if any ofUnited States and is a result of actual orments made on a per diem or other periodicthe following conditions apply. threatened violence or aggression against thebasis under a long-term care insurance contractUnited States or any of its allies, but does notis subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total1) You were entitled to receive a disabilityinclude training exercises. of these payments and any accelerated deathpayment before September 25, 1975.
benefits made on a per diem or other periodic2) You were a member of a listed govern-Long-Term Care basis under a life insurance contract becausement service or its reserve component, or the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa-Insurance Contractswere under a binding written commitment tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In-to become a member, on September 24, Long-term care insurance contracts generallysurance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous1975. are treated as accident and health insuranceIncome, later.)
contracts. Amounts you receive from them3) You receive the disability payments for a Under this limit, the excludable amount for(other than policyholder dividends or premiumcombat-related injury. This is a personal any period is figured by subtracting any reim-refunds) generally are excludable from incomeinjury or sickness that: bursement received (through insurance or oth-as amounts received for personal injury or sick-erwise) for the cost of qualified long-term carea) Results directly from armed conflict,ness. To claim an exclusion for payments madeservices during the period from the larger of theon a per diem or other periodic basis under ab) Takes place while you are engaged in following amounts.long-term care insurance contract, you must fileextra-hazardous service, Form 8853 with your return. • The cost of qualified long-term care serv-c) Takes place under conditions simulat- ices during the period.A long-term care insurance contract is aning war, including training exercisesinsurance contract that only provides coverage• The dollar amount for the period ($220 persuch as maneuvers, or for qualified long-term care services. The con-day for any period in 2003).d) Is caused by an instrumentality of war.tract must:
See Section C of Form 8853 and its instructions
for more information.4) You would be entitled to receive disability• Be guaranteed renewable,
compensation from the Department of Vet-• Not provide for a cash surrender value orerans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica- Workers’ Compensationother money that can be paid, assigned,tion for it. Your exclusion under this pledged, or borrowed,condition is equal to the amount you would Amounts you receive as workers’ compensation
be entitled to receive from the VA. • Provide that refunds, other than refundsfor an occupational sickness or injury are fully
on the death of the insured or completeexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’
surrender or cancellation of the contract,compensation act or a statute in the nature of a
Pension based on years of service.If you and dividends under the contract may be workers’ compensation act. The exemption also
receive a disability pension based on years of used only to reduce future premiums orapplies to your survivors. The exemption, how-
service, you generally must include it in your increase future benefits, and ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits
income. However, if the pension qualifies for the you receive based on your age, length of serv-• Generally not pay or reimburse expensesexclusion for a service-connected disability (dis- ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if youincurred for services or items that wouldcussed earlier), do not include in income the part retired because of an occupational sickness orbe reimbursed under Medicare, exceptof your pension that you would have received if injury.where Medicare is a secondary payer orthe pension had been based on a percentage ofthe contract makes per diem or other peri- If part of your workers’ compensationdisability. You must include the rest of your pen-odic payments without regard to ex- reduces your social security orsion in your income. penses. equivalent railroad retirement benefitsCAUTION
!
Retroactive VA determination.If you retire received, that part is considered social security
from the armed services based on years of serv- (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits andQualified long-term care services.Qualifiedice and are later given a retroactive service-con- may be taxable. For a discussion of the taxabilitylong-term care services are:nected disability rating by the VA, your of these benefits, see Other Income under Mis-
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex- cellaneous Income, later.• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-cluded from income up to the amount of VA peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili-disability benefits you would have been entitledtative services, and maintenance and Return to work. If you return to work afterto receive. You can claim a refund of any taxpersonal care services, and qualifying for workers’ compensation, paymentspaid on the excludable amount (subject to the
you continue to receive while assigned to light• Required by a chronically ill individual andstatute of limitations) by filing an amended re-
duties are taxable. Report these payments asprovided pursuant to a plan of care pre-turn on Form 1040X for each previous year
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, orscribed by a licensed health care practi-during the retroactive period.
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.tioner.If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-
ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-
ity benefits, do not include in your income the Disability pension.If your disability pensionChronically ill individual.A chronically ill in-
portion of the severance payment equal to the is paid under a statute that provides benefitsdividual is one who has been certified by a
VA benefit you would have been entitled to re- only to employees with service-connected disa-licensed health care practitioner within the previ-
ceive in that same year. However, you must bilities, part of it may be workers’ compensation.ous 12 months as one of the following.
include in your income any lump-sum readjust- That part is exempt from tax. The rest of your
ment or other nondisability severance payment
• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is pension, based on years of service, is taxable as
you received on release from active duty, even if unable to perform at least two activities of pension or annuity income. If you die, the part of
you are later given a retroactive disability rating daily living without substantial assistance your survivors’ benefit that is a continuation of
by the VA. due to loss of functional capacity. Activi- the workers’ compensation is exempt from tax.
Page 15

Page 16 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reimbursement for medical care. A reim- painter must include in income the fair marketOther Sickness
bursement for medical care generally is not tax-value of the accounting services you provided.and Injury Benefits able. However, it may reduce your medical
Example 3. You are self-employed and aexpense deduction. If you receive reimburse-In addition to disability pensions and annuities, member of a barter club. The club uses creditment for an expense you deducted in an earlieryou may receive other payments for sickness or units as a means of exchange. It adds credityear, see Recoveries, later.injury. units to your account for goods or services youIf you receive an “advance reimbursement”Railroad sick pay.Payments you receive as provide to members, which you can use toor “loan” for future medical expenses from yoursick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In- purchase goods or services offered by otheremployer without regard to whether you sufferedsurance Act are taxable and you must include members of the barter club. The club subtractsa personal injury or sickness or incurred medicalthem in your income. However, do not include credit units from your account when you receiveexpenses, that amount is included in your in-them in your income if they are for an on-the-job goods or services from other members. Youcome, whether or not you incur uninsured medi-injury. must include in your income the value of thecal expenses during the year.
credit units that are added to your account, evenBlack lung benefit payments. These pay- Reimbursements received under your though you may not actually receive goods orments are similar to workers’ compensation andemployer’s plan for expenses incurred beforeservices from other members until a later taxgenerally are not taxable. the plan was established are included in income.year.Reimbursements received under yourFederal Employees’ Compensation Act
employer’s plan of the amount paid for nonpre-(FECA). Payments received under this Act for Example 4. You own a small apartmentscription medicines and drugs (such as allergypersonal injury or sickness, including payments building. In return for 6 months rent-free use ofmedicine, pain reliever, and cold medicine) areto beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable. an apartment, an artist gives you a work of artnot included in income. However, reimburse-However, you are taxed on amounts you receive she created. You must report as rental incomements of the amount paid for dietary supple-under this Act as continuation of pay for up to on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market valuements (such as vitamins) that are merely45 days while a claim is being decided. Report of the artwork, and the artist must report asbeneficial to your general health are included inthis income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form income on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZincome.1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay (Form 1040) the fair rental value of the apart-
for sick leave while a claim is being processed is ment.
taxable and must be included in your income as
wages. Form 1099–B from barter exchange. If you
Miscellaneous Income exchanged property or services through a barterIf part of the payments you receive
exchange, Form 1099–B, Proceeds from Bro-under FECA reduces your social se-This section discusses various types of income.ker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or acurity or equivalent railroad retirementCAUTION
!
You may have taxable income from certain similar statement from the barter exchangebenefits received, that part is considered socialtransactions even if no money changes hands.should be sent to you by February 2, 2004. Itsecurity (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-For example, you may have taxable income ifshould show the value of cash, property, serv-fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of theyou lend money at a below-market interest rateices, credits, or scrip you received from ex-taxability of these benefits, see Other Income or have a debt you owe cancelled. changes during 2003. The IRS will also receiveunder Miscellaneous Income, later.
a copy of Form 1099–B.You can deduct the amount you spend toBarteringbuy back sick leave for an earlier year to be Backup withholding. The income you re-eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for thatBartering is an exchange of property or services.ceive from bartering generally is not subject toperiod. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject toYou must include in your income, at the timeregular income tax withholding. However,the 2% limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If youreceived, the fair market value of property orbackup withholding will apply in certain circum-buy back sick leave in the same year you used it,services you receive in bartering. If you ex-stances to ensure that income tax is collected onthe amount reduces your taxable sick leave pay.change services with another person and youthis income.Do not deduct it separately. both have agreed ahead of time as to the valueUnder backup withholding, the barter ex-of the services, that value will be accepted asOther compensation. Many other amounts change must withhold, as income tax, 28% offair market value unless the value can be shownyou receive as compensation for sickness or the income if:to be otherwise.injury are not taxable. These include the follow-
• You do not give the barter exchange youring amounts. Generally, you report this income on Sched-
taxpayer identification number (generally aule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040). How-• Compensatory damages you receive for social security number or an employerever, if the barter involves an exchange ofphysical injury or physical sickness, identification number), orsomething other than services, such as in Ex-whether paid in a lump sum or in periodicample 4 below, you may have to use another • The IRS notifies the barter exchange thatpayments. See Court awards and dam- form or schedule instead. you gave it an incorrect identification num-ages under Other Income, later.
ber.• Benefits you receive under an accident orExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-
If you join a barter exchange, you must certifyhealth insurance policy on which eitherney who performs legal services for a client, a
under penalties of perjury that your taxpayeryou paid the premiums or your employersmall corporation. The corporation gives you
identification number is correct and that you arepaid the premiums but you had to includeshares of its stock as payment for your services.
not subject to backup withholding. If you do notthem in your income. You must include the fair market value of the
make this certification, backup withholding mayshares in your income on Schedule C or Sched-• Disability benefits you receive for loss of begin immediately. The barter exchange willule C–EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receiveincome or earning capacity as a result of give you a Form W–9, Request for Taxpayerthem.injuries under a no-fault car insurance Identification Number and Certification, or a sim-policy. ilar form, for you to make this certification. Example 2. You are a self-employed ac-
• Compensation you receive for permanent countant. You and a house painter are membersThe barter exchange will withhold tax only uploss or loss of use of a part or function of of a barter club. Members get in touch with eachto the amount of any cash paid to you or depos-your body, or for your permanent disfig- other directly and bargain for the value of theited in your account and any scrip or crediturement. This compensation must be services to be performed. In return for account-issued to you (and converted to cash).based only on the injury and not on the ing services you provided, the house painter
If tax is withheld from your barter in-period of your absence from work. These painted your home. You must report as your
come, the barter exchange will reportbenefits are not taxable even if your em- income on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ
the amount of tax withheld on Formployer pays for the accident and health (Form 1040) the fair market value of the house
TIP
1099–B, or similar statement.plan that provides these benefits. painting services you received. The house
Page 16

Page 17 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in certain professions for any of a broad class of for property you purchased, you do not haveCanceled Debts
employers. income from the reduction. The reduction of the
You do not have income if your student loan debt is treated as a purchase price adjustmentGenerally, if a debt you owe is canceled or
is canceled after you agreed to this provision and reduces your basis in the property.forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you
and then performed the services required. Tomust include the canceled amount in your in-
Excluded debt. Do not include a canceledqualify, the loan must have been made by:come. You have no income from the canceled
debt in your gross income in the following situa-debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt1) The federal government, a state or localtions.includes any indebtedness for which you are government, or an instrumentality, agency,liable or which attaches to property you hold. • The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy caseor subdivision thereof,If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040. If it is2) A tax-exempt public benefit corporation cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.a business debt, report the amount on Schedulethat has assumed control of a state,
C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) (or on Sched- • The debt is canceled when you are insol-county, or municipal hospital, and whose
ule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, vent. However, you cannot exclude anyemployees are considered public employ-
if the debt is farm debt and you are a farmer). amount of canceled debt that is more thanees under state law, or
the amount by which you are insolvent.3) An educational institution:Form 1099–C. If a federal government See Publication 908.
agency, financial institution, or credit uniona) Under an agreement with an entity de-• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 or scribed in (1) or (2) that provided theceled by a qualified person. See chapter 4more, you will receive a Form 1099–C, Cancel- funds to the institution to make the of Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide.lation of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt loan, oris shown in box 2. • The debt is qualified real property busi-
b) As part of a program of the institutionness debt. See chapter 5 of PublicationInterest included in canceled debt.If any designed to encourage students to 334.interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofserve in occupations or areas with un-canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interest met needs and under which the serv-will also be shown in box 3. Whether or not you Life Insurance Proceedsices provided are for or under themust include the interest portion of the canceleddirection of a governmental unit or adebt in your income depends on whether the Life insurance proceeds paid to you because oftax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-interest would be deductible if you paid it. See the death of the insured person are not taxabletion (defined later).Deductible debt under Exceptions, later. unless the policy was turned over to you for a
If the interest would not be deductible (such price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidA loan to refinance a qualified student loanas interest on a personal loan), include in your under an accident or health insurance policy orwill also qualify if it was made by an educationalincome the amount from box 2 of Form 1099–C. an endowment contract.institution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-If the interest would be deductible (such as on azation under its program designed as describedbusiness loan), include in your income the net Proceeds not received in installments.Ifin (3)(b) above.amount of the canceled debt (the amount shown death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum orAn educational institution is an organizationin box 2 less the interest amount shown in box other than at regular intervals, include in yourwith a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu-3). income only the benefits that are more than thelarly enrolled body of students in attendance atamount payable to you at the time of the insuredthe place where the educational activities areDiscounted mortgage loan. If your financial person’s death. If the benefit payable at death iscarried on.institution offers a discount for the early payment not specified, you include in your income theA section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor-of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis- benefit payments that are more than the presentporation, community chest, fund, or foundationcount is canceled debt. You must include the value of the payments at the time of death.organized and operated exclusively for one orcanceled amount in your income.
more of the following purposes. Proceeds received in installments.If you re-Stockholder debt.If you are a stockholder in ceive life insurance proceeds in installments,• Charitable.a corporation and the corporation cancels or you can exclude part of each installment fromforgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is• Educational. your income.dividend income to you. • Fostering national or international amateurTo determine the excluded part, divide theIf you are a stockholder in a corporation andsports competition (but only if none of theamount held by the insurance company (gener-you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-organization’s activities involve providingally the total lump sum payable at the death oftion, you generally do not realize income. This isathletic facilities or equipment). the insured person) by the number of install-because the canceled debt is considered as a
ments to be paid. Include anything over thiscontribution to the capital of the corporation• Literary.
excluded part in your income as interest.equal to the amount of debt principal that you• Preventing cruelty to children or animals.canceled.
Example. The face amount of the policy is• Religious. $75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re-
• Scientific. ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each.Exceptions
The excluded part of each installment is $625• Testing for public safety.There are several exceptions to the inclusion of ($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an entire year.
canceled debt in income. These are explained The rest of each payment, $375 a month (orException. You do have income if your stu-next. $4,500 for an entire year), is interest income todent loan was made by an educational institu-you.tion and is canceled because of services youNonrecourse debt. If you are not personallyperformed for the institution or other organiza-Installments for life.If, as the beneficiaryliable for the debt (nonrecourse debt), differenttion that provided the funds. under an insurance contract, you are entitled torules apply. You may have a gain or loss if a
receive the proceeds in installments for the restnonrecourse debt is canceled or forgiven in con-Deductible debt. You do not have income of your life without a refund or period-certainjunction with the foreclosure or repossession offrom the cancellation of a debt if your payment ofguarantee, you figure the excluded part of eachproperty to which the debt attaches. See Publi-the debt would be deductible. This exceptioninstallment by dividing the amount held by thecation 544 for more information. applies only if you use the cash method of ac-insurance company by your life expectancy. Ifcounting. For more information, see chapter 5 ofStudent loans. Certain student loans contain there is a refund or period-certain guarantee, thePublication 334.a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to amount held by the insurance company for this
attend the qualified educational institution will bePrice reduced after purchase.Generally, if purpose is reduced by the actuarial value of the
canceled if you work for a certain period of time the seller reduces the amount of debt you owe guarantee.
Page 17

Page 18 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Surviving spouse. If your spouse died vider. A viatical settlement provider is a personState income tax refund.If you received a
before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro- who regularly engages in the business of buying state or local income tax refund (or credit or
ceeds paid to you because of the death of your or taking assignment of life insurance contracts offset) in 2003, you generally must include it in
spouse are received in installments, you can on the lives of insured individuals who are termi- income if you deducted the tax in an earlier year.
exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in- nally or chronically ill and who meets the require- The payer should send Form 1099–G, Certain
cluded in the installments. If you remarry, you ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the InternalGovernment Payments, to you by February 2,
can continue to take the exclusion. Revenue Code. 2004. The IRS also will receive a copy of the
Form 1099–G. Use the worksheet in the 2003Interest option on insurance.If an insuranceExclusion for terminal illness.Accelerated Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure thecompany pays you interest only on proceedsdeath benefits are fully excludable if the insuredamount (if any) to include in your income.from life insurance left on deposit, the interestis a terminally ill individual. This is a person who
you are paid is taxable. Mortgage interest refund.If you received ahas been certified by a physician as having an
If your spouse died before October 23, 1986, refund or credit in 2003 of mortgage interest paidillness or physical condition that can reasonably
and you chose to receive only the interest from in an earlier year, the amount should be shownbe expected to result in death within 24 months
your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interest in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interestfrom the date of the certification.
exclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply. Statement. Do not subtract the refund amount
Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insuredIf you later decide to receive the proceeds from from the interest you paid in 2003. You may
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminallythe policy in installments, you can take the inter- have to include it in your income under the rules
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basisest exclusion from the time you begin to receive explained in the following discussions.
of costs incurred for qualified long-term carethe installments. Interest on recovery.Interest on any of theservices are fully excludable. Accelerated death
Surrender of policy for cash.If you surren- amounts you recover must be reported as inter-benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic
der a life insurance policy for cash, you must est income in the year received. For example,basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit
include in income any proceeds that are more report any interest you received on state or localapplies to the total of the accelerated death
than the cost of the life insurance policy. In income tax refunds on line 8a of Form 1040.benefits and any periodic payments received
general, your cost (or investment in the contract)from long-term care insurance contracts. ForRecovery and expense in same year.If theis the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeinformation on the limit and the definitions ofrefund or other recovery and the expense occurinsurance policy, less any refunded premiums,chronically ill individual, qualified long-term carein the same year, the recovery reduces the de-rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that wereservices, and long-term care insurance con-duction or credit and is not reported as income.not included in your income. tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con-
You should receive a Form 1099–R showingtracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits,Recovery for 2 or more years.If you receive
the total proceeds and the taxable part. Reportearlier. a refund or other recovery that is for amounts
these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Form you paid in 2 or more separate years, you mustException. The exclusion does not apply to1040, or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recoveredany amount paid to a person (other than theamount between the years in which you paid it.For information on when the proceedsinsured) who has an insurable interest in the lifeThis allocation is necessary to determine theare excluded from income, see Accel- of the insured because the insured: amount of recovery from any earlier years and toerated Death Benefits, later.
TIP
determine the amount, if any, of your allowable• Is a director, officer, or employee of the
deduction for this item for the current year.person, orProceeds from an endowment contract.An
endowment contract is a policy under which you• Has a financial interest in the person’sExample. You paid 2002 estimated stateare paid a specified amount of money on a business. income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.certain date unless you die before that date, in You made your fourth payment in January 2003.which case, the money is paid to your desig- You had no state income tax withheld duringForm 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid in 2002. In 2003, you received a $400 tax refundated death benefits made on a per diem or othera lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only if based on your 2002 state income tax return. Youperiodic basis, you must file Form 8853 withthe proceeds are more than the cost of the claimed itemized deductions each year on youryour return. You do not have to file Form 8853 topolicy. To determine your cost, subtract any federal income tax return.exclude accelerated death benefits paid on theamount that you previously received under the You must allocate the $400 refund betweenbasis of actual expenses incurred.contract and excluded from your income from 2002 and 2003, the years in which you paid thethe total premiums (or other consideration) paid tax on which the refund is based. You paid 75%for the contract. Include the part of the lump sumRecoveries ($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2002,payment that is more than your cost in your so 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is forA recovery is a return of an amount you de-income.
amounts you paid in 2002 and is a recoveryducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. TheEndowment proceeds that you choose to
item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item,most common recoveries are refunds, reim-receive in installments instead of a lump-sum
you will include $300 on line 10, Form 1040, forbursements, and rebates of deductions itemizedpayment at the maturity of the policy are taxed
2003, and attach a copy of your computationon Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may haveas an annuity. This is explained in Publication
showing why that amount is less than therecoveries of non-itemized deductions (such as575. For this treatment to apply, you must
amount shown on the Form 1099–G you re-payments on previously deducted bad debts)choose to receive the proceeds in installments
ceived from the state.and recoveries of items for which you previouslybefore receiving any part of the lump sum. This
The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is forclaimed a tax credit.election must be made within 60 days after the
your January 2003 estimated tax payment.lump-sum payment first becomes payable toTax benefit rule.You must include a recoveryWhen you figure your deduction for state andyou. in your income in the year you receive it up to thelocal income taxes paid during 2003, you will
amount by which the deduction or credit youreduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Your
took for the recovered amount reduced your taxdeduction for state and local income taxes paidAccelerated Death Benefits in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-during 2003 will include the January net amount
crease to an amount carried over to the currentof $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimatedCertain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-
year that resulted from the deduction or credit isstate income taxes paid in 2003 for 2003, andefits under a life insurance contract or viatical
considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-any state income tax withheld during 2003.settlement before the insured’s death are ex-
lier year.cluded from income if the insured is terminally or Deductions not itemized.If you did not item-chronically ill. Federal income tax refund.Refunds of fed- ize deductions for the year for which you re-
Viatical settlement.This is the sale or assign- eral income taxes are not included in your in- ceived the recovery of an expense that was
ment of any part of the death benefit under a life come because they are never allowed as a deductible only if you itemized, do not include
insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro- deduction from income. any of the recovery amount in your income.
Page 18

Page 19 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You claimed the standard deduc-justed gross income before applying the rulesWhere to report.Enter your state or local
tion on your 2002 federal income tax return. Inexplained here. See Non-Itemized Deduction income tax refund on line 10 of Form 1040, and
2003 you received a refund of your 2002 state Recoveries, later. the total of all other recoveries as other income
income tax. Do not report any of the refund as on line 21 of Form 1040. You cannot use Form
Total recovery included in income. If youincome because you did not itemize deductions 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
recover any amount that you deducted in anfor 2002.
earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), youExample. For 2002, you filed a joint return.
generally must include the full amount of theYour taxable income was $20,000 and you were
recovery in your income in the year you receiveItemized Deduction Recoveries not entitled to any tax credits. Your standard
it. This rule applies if, for the earlier year, all ofdeduction was $7,850, and you had itemized
The following discussion explains how to deter-the following statements are true. deductions of $9,000. In 2003, you received the
mine the amount to include in your income from following recoveries for amounts deducted on1) Your itemized deductions exceeded thea recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier your 2002 return:standard deduction by at least the amountyear as an itemized deduction. However, you
of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-generally do not need to use this discussion if Medical expenses.............. $200tions did not exceed the standard deduc-the recovery is for state or local income taxes State and local income tax refund.... 4 0 0tion by at least the amount of the recovery,paid in 2002. Instead, use the worksheet in the Refund of mortgage interest........ 3 2 5
see Standard deduction limit, later.)2003 Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure Total recoveries................ $925
the amount (if any) to include in your income.2) You had taxable income. (If you had noNone of the recoveries were more than the de-You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheet taxable income, see Negative taxable in- ductions taken for 2002.and must use this discussion if any of the follow- come, later.) Your total recoveries are less than theing statements is true. amount by which your itemized deductions ex-3) Your deduction for the item recovered
• The recovery is for a tax year other than ceeded the standard deduction ($9,000 −equals or exceeds the amount recovered.
2002. $7,850 = $1,150), so you must include your total(If your deduction was less than the
recoveries in your income for 2003. Report theamount recovered, see Recovery limited to• The recovery is for a deducted item other state and local income tax refund of $400 on linededuction, later.)than state or local income taxes, such as 10 of Form 1040, and the balance of your recov-real property taxes. 4) Your itemized deductions were not subjecteries, $525, on line 21 of Form 1040.
to the limit on itemized deductions. (If your• Your 2002 taxable income was less than Total recovery not included in income.Ifdeductions were limited, see Itemized de-zero. one or more of the six statements listed in theductions limited, later.)
• You made your last payment of 2002 state preceding discussion is not true, you may be
5) You had no unused tax credits. (If you hador local estimated tax in 2003. able to exclude at least part of the recovery from
unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred- your income. If statements (4), (5), and (6) are• You owed alternative minimum tax for its, later.) true (your itemized deductions were not limited,2002. you had no unused tax credits, and you were not6) You were not subject to alternative mini-
• You could not deduct all your tax credits subject to the alternative minimum tax), you canmum tax. (If you were subject to alterna-
for 2002 because their total was more use Worksheet 2 to determine the part of yourtive minimum tax, see Subject to
than the amount of tax shown on line 44 of recovery to include in your income.alternative minimum tax, later.)
your 2002 Form 1040.
If any of the above statements is not true,
• You could be claimed as a dependent bysee Total recovery not included in income, later.
someone else in 2002.
If you also recovered an amount de-
ducted as a non-itemized deduction,
figure the amount of that recovery to
CAUTION
!
include in your income and add it to your ad-
Page 19

Page 20 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in
income on your 2003 Form 1040, see Total recovery not included in income under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If
you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income tax refund from 2002 and a casualty loss
reimbursement from 2001, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use information from Schedule A (Form
1040) for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year
(year of the deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to
zero, see Unused tax credits and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your
recovery was for an itemized deduction that was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized
Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit
1 ....................................... 1 .
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)1 .................................. 2 .
3. Add lines 1 and 2........................................................ 3 .
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year
(for example, line 28 of Schedule A for 2002).................. 4 .
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2).................. 5 .
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4................................ 6 .
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (The standard deduction
amounts for 2002, 2001, and 2000 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4.) 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here.
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable.................................. 8 .
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8........................................... 9 .
10. Taxable income for prior year2 (for example, line 41, Form 1040 for
2002)................................................ 1 0 .
11. Amount to include in income for 2003:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result
(but not less than zero).3 ............................................... 1 1 .
If line 11 equals line 3—
Enter the amount from line 1 on line 10, Form 1040.
Enter the amount from line 2 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero—
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on line 10, Form 1040.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following
worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the
percentage......................................... A .
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A.
Enter the result here and on line 10, Form 1040.............................. B .
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11.
Enter the result here and on line 21, Form 1040.............................. C .
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year.
2 If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. Taxable income will have
to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and
Trusts.
3 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Page 20

Page 21 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is . . .
Your Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,700
7,850
3,925
6,900
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status
is . . .
THEN your
Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,850
7,000
8,750
9,650
10,550
11,450
4,825
5,725
6,625
7,525
8,050
9,200
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box Above
is . . .
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,700
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,925
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,850
● Head of household, enter $6,900
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,150 ($900 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2002.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$750
Table 2. 2002 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
$250
3) Subtract the result in (2) above from the return were not more than your income for that
amount of taxable recoveries. This is the year, include in your income this year the lesserAllocating the included part.If you are not amount you report as other income. of:required to include all of your recoveries in your
income, and you have both a state income tax • Your recoveries, or
refund and other itemized deduction recoveries,Example. In 2003 you recovered $2,500 of• The amount by which your itemized de-you must allocate the taxable recoveries be-your 2002 itemized deductions, but the recov-ductions exceeded the standard deduc-tween the state tax refund you report on line 10eries you must include in your 2003 income aretion.of Form 1040 and the amount you report asonly $1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500other income on line 21 of Form 1040. If you dowas due to your state income tax refund. TheStandard deduction for earlier years.Tonot use Worksheet 2, make the allocation asamount you report as a state tax refund on linedetermine if amounts recovered in 2003 must befollows. 10 of Form 1040 is $300 [($500 ÷ $2,500) × included in your income, you must know the
$1,500]. The balance of the taxable recoveries,standard deduction for your filing status for the1) Divide your state income tax refund by the
$1,200, is reported as other income on line 21 ofyear the deduction was claimed. The standardtotal of all your itemized deduction recov-
Form 1040. deduction tables for 2002, 2001, and 2000 areeries.
shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4. If you need theStandard deduction limit.You generally are2) Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries standard deduction amounts for years beforeallowed to claim the standard deduction if you doby the percentage in (1). This is the 2000, see the copy of your return for that year.not itemize your deductions. Only your itemizedamount you report as a state income taxdeductions that are more than your standardrefund. Example. You filed a joint return for 2002deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-with taxable income of $25,000. Your itemizedless you are required to itemize your deduc-deductions were $8,700. The standard deduc-tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year
Page 21

Page 22 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
If Your Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,550
7,600
3,800
6,650
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
If Your
Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,650
6,750
8,500
9,400
10,300
11,200
4,700
5,600
6,500
7,400
7,750
8,850
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
And the Number
in the Box
Above is:
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,550
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,800
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,600
● Head of household, enter $6,650
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,100 ($900 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2001.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$750
Table 3. 2001 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
$250
tion that you could have claimed was $7,850. In covery that is more than the amount you de- earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)
2003, you recovered $2,400 of your 2002 item- ducted in the earlier year. The amount you was more than a base amount. For example,
ized deductions. None of the recoveries were include in your income is limited to the smaller this amount was:
more than the actual deductions for 2002. In- of:
• For 2002, $137,300 ($68,650 if marriedclude $850 of the recoveries in your 2003 in-• The amount deducted on Schedule A filing separately),come. This is the smaller of your recoveries(Form 1040), or • For 2001, $132,950 ($66,475 if married($2,400) or the amount by which your itemized
• The amount recovered. filing separately), anddeductions were more than the standard deduc-
tion ($8,700 − $7,850 = $850). • For 2000, $128,950 ($64,475 if married
Example. During 2002, you paid $1,700 forNegative taxable income.If your taxable in- filing separately).
medical expenses. From this amount you sub-come was a negative amount, reduce the recov- If the limit applied, your itemized deductionstracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjustedery you must otherwise include in your income were reduced by the smaller of the followinggross income. Your actual medical expense de-by the negative amount. amounts.duction was $200. In 2003, you received a $500
Example. The facts are the same as in thereimbursement from your medical insurance for• 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-
previous example except you had a negativeyour 2002 expenses. The only amount of the ceeded the base amount.
taxable income of $200 in 2002. You must in-$500 reimbursement that must be included in• 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-clude $650 in your 2003 income, rather thanyour income for 2003 is $200—the amount ac- tions other than medical and dental ex-$850. tually deducted. penses, investment interest expense,
Recovery limited to deduction.You do not Itemized deductions limited.You were sub- nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,
include in your income any amount of your re-ject to the limit on itemized deductions in theand gambling losses.
Page 22

Page 23 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
If Your Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,400
7,350
3,675
6,450
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
If Your
Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,500
6,600
8,200
9,050
9,900
10,750
4,525
5,375
6,225
7,075
7,550
8,650
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
And the Number
in the Box
Above is:
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,400
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,675
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,350
● Head of household, enter $6,450
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,100 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2000.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$700
Table 4. 2000 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
$250
If the amount you recovered was deducted in the amount you actually paid reduced and was not entitled to any credit against income
a year in which your itemized deductions were by the recovery amount. tax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000
limited, you must include it in income up to the of state income taxes. However, Eileen de-Note. If you were required to itemize yourdifference between the amount of itemized de- ducted only $10,000 in 2002 because her other-deductions in the earlier year, use step 1(b)ductions actually allowed that year and the wise allowable deductions of $40,000 wereand not step 1(a).amount you would have been allowed (the reduced by $30,000. In 2003, she received a
2) Subtract the amount in step 1 from thegreater of your itemized deductions or your stan- $5,000 refund of her state income taxes for
amount of itemized deductions actually al-dard deduction) if you had figured your deduc- 2002.
lowed in the earlier year after applying thetions using only the net amount of the recovery The following shows how Eileen figured the
limit on itemized deductions.item. $30,000 reduction and other amounts from the
To determine the part of the recovery you Itemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2002The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov-must include in income, follow the two steps Schedule A (Form 1040) instructions. Theseery to include in your income for the year youbelow. amounts are needed to figure the part of thereceive the recovery. If your taxable income for$5,000 refund that Eileen must include in herthe earlier year was a negative amount, reduce1) Figure the greater of: income for 2003.your recovery by the negative amount.
a) The standard deduction for the earlierIf you had unused tax credits in the earlier
AGI for 2002................ $1,137,300
year, or year, see Unused tax credits on page 24. State income taxes paid in 2002 . . . $40,000
For more information on this computation,3% reduction (amount on line 8 ofb) The amount of itemized deductions yousee Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is in2002 Itemized Deductionwould have been allowed for the ear- Worksheet)Cumulative Bulletin 1993-2.lier year (after taking into account the  [($1,137,300 − $137,300) × 3%]. . . $30,000
limit on itemized deductions) if you had 80% reduction not applied (amountExample. Eileen Martin is single. She hadfigured them using only the net amount on line 4 of 2002 Itemizedan AGI of $1,137,300 and itemized her deduc-of the recovery item. The net amount is Deduction Worksheet)tions on her federal income tax return for 2002.($40,000 × 80%) ............. $32,000She was not subject to alternative minimum tax
Page 23

Page 24 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 deduction (amount on line 10 the deduction that reduced your tax in the earlier made to survivors. For additional information,
of 2002 Itemized Deduction year. see Publication 559.
Worksheet)
Lump-sum payments. Lump-sum payments($40,000 − $30,000).......... $10,000
Refund received in 2003 of 2002 you receive from a decedent’s employer as theNon-Itemized Deductionstate income tax............. $5,000 surviving spouse or beneficiary may be accruedRecoveriesNet amount of 2002 state income salary payments; distributions from employeetax ($40,000 − $5,000)......... $35,000 profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or stock bonusThis section discusses recovery of deductions
plans; or other items that should be treated sep-If Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount ofother than those deducted on Schedule A (Form
arately for tax purposes. The tax treatment ofstate income tax to figure her itemized deduc- 1040).
these lump-sum payments depends on the typetions for 2002, the deduction allowed wouldTotal recovery included in income.If you of payment.have been $7,000. This is her otherwise allowa-recover an amount that you deducted in an ear-ble deduction of $35,000 reduced by $28,000 Salary or wages.Salary or wages receivedlier year in figuring your adjusted gross income,($35,000 × 80%). By deducting the full $10,000 after the death of the employee are usually ordi-you must generally include the full amount of thepaid in 2002, she derived a tax benefit of $3,000 nary income to you.recovery in your income in the year received.($10,000 − $7,000). Therefore, only $3,000 of
Qualified employee retirement plans.the $5,000 refund is included in her income forTotal recovery not included in income.If Lump-sum distributions from qualified employee2003. any part of the deduction you took for the recov-retirement plans are subject to special tax treat-ered amount did not reduce your tax, you mayment. For information on these distributions, getUnused tax credits.If you recover an itembe able to exclude at least part of the recoveryPublication 575 (or Publication 721 if you are thededucted in an earlier year in which you hadfrom your income. You must include the recov-survivor of a federal employee or retiree).unused tax credits, you must refigure the earlierery in your income only up to the amount of the
year’s tax to determine if you must include thededuction that reduced your tax in the year ofPublic safety officer killed in the line of duty.
recovery in your income. To do this, add thethe deduction. (See Tax benefit rule, earlier.) If you are a survivor of a public safety officer who
amount of the recovery to your earlier year’s was killed in the line of duty, you may be able toNegative taxable income.If your taxable in-taxable income and refigure the tax and the exclude from income certain amounts you re-come was a negative amount, reduce the recov-credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom- ceive. For this purpose, the term public safetyery by that negative amount. Include thisputed tax, after application of the credits, is more officer includes law enforcement officers,reduced recovery in your income.than the actual tax in the earlier year, include the firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad and
recovery in your income up to the amount of the ambulance crew members. For more informa-Unused tax credits.If you recover an itemdeduction that reduced the tax in the earlier tion, see Publication 559.deducted in an earlier year in which you hadyear. For this purpose, any increase to a creditunused tax credits, you must refigure the earliercarried over to the current year that resultedyear’s tax to determine if you must include theUnemployment Benefitsfrom deducting the recovered credit in the earlierrecovery in your income. To do this, add theyear is considered to have reduced your tax in The tax treatment of unemployment benefits youamount of the recovery to your earlier year’sthe earlier year. If the recovery is for an itemized receive depends on the type of program payingtaxable income and refigure the tax and thededuction claimed in a year in which the deduc- the benefits.credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-tions were limited, see Itemized deductions lim-puted tax, after application of the credits, is moreUnemployment compensation. You must in-ited, earlier. than the actual tax in the earlier year, include theclude in your income all unemployment compen-If your tax, after application of the credits,recovery in your income up to the amount of thesation you receive. You should receive a Formdoes not change, you did not have a tax benefitdeduction that reduced the tax in the earlier1099–G showing the amount paid to you. Gen-from the deduction. Do not include the recoveryyear. For this purpose, any increase to anerally, you enter unemployment compensationin your income. amount carried over to the current year thaton line 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A,resulted from deducting the recovered amountor line 3 of Form 1040EZ.Example. In 2002, Jean Black filed as headin the earlier year is considered to have reduced
of household and itemized her deductions. Her Types of unemployment compensation.your tax in the earlier year.
taxable income was $5,260 and her tax was Unemployment compensation generally in-If your tax, after application of the credits,
$528. She claimed a child care credit of $1,200. cludes any amount received under an unem-does not change, you did not have a tax benefit
The credit reduced her tax to zero and she had ployment compensation law of the United Statesfrom the deduction. Do not include the recovery
an unused tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). In or of a state. It includes the following benefits.in your income.
2003, Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemized • Benefits paid by a state or the District ofdeductions. She reduces her 2002 itemized de- Columbia from the Federal Unemploymentductions by $1,000 and recomputes that year’sAmounts Recovered for Credits Trust Fund.tax on taxable income of $6,260. However, the
 If you received a recovery in 2003 for an item for• State unemployment insurance benefits.child care credit exceeds the recomputed tax of
which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier year,$628. Jean’s tax liability for 2002 is not changed • Railroad unemployment compensationyou must increase your 2003 tax by the amountby reducing her deductions by the recovery. She benefits.of the recovery, up to the amount by which thedid not have a tax benefit from the recovered
credit reduced your tax in the earlier year. You• Disability payments from a governmentdeduction and does not include any of the recov-
had a recovery if there was a downward priceprogram paid as a substitute for unem-ery in her income for 2003.
adjustment or similar adjustment on the item forployment compensation. (Amounts re-
which you claimed a credit.Subject to alternative minimum tax.If you ceived as workers’ compensation for
This rule does not apply to the investmentwere subject to the alternative minimum tax in injuries or illness are not unemployment
credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries ofthe year of the deduction, you will have to re- compensation. See Workers’ Compensa-
these credits are covered by other provisions ofcompute your tax for the earlier year to deter- tion under Sickness and Injury Benefits,
the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax Creditmine if the recovery must be included in your earlier.)
for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture of In-income. This will require a recomputation of your • Trade readjustment allowances under thevestment Credit, for details.regular tax, as shown in the preceding example, Trade Act of 1974.and a recomputation of your alternative mini-
mum tax. If inclusion of the recovery does not • Unemployment assistance under the Dis-Survivor Benefits
change your total tax, you do not include the aster Relief and Emergency Assistance
recovery in your income. However, if your totalGenerally, payments made by or for an em- Act.
tax increases by any amount, you received a taxployer because of an employee’s death must be
benefit from the deduction and you must includeincluded in income. The following discussionsGovernmental program. If you contribute
the recovery in your income up to the amount ofexplain the tax treatment of certain payments to a governmental unemployment compensa-
Page 24

Page 25 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tion program and your contributions are not de-Payments by a union.Benefits paid to you as ments under the Act are taxable unemployment
an unemployed member of a union from regular compensation. See Unemployment compensa-ductible, amounts you receive under the
union dues are included in your income on linetion under Unemployment Benefits, earlier.program are not included as unemployment
21 of Form 1040.compensation until you recover your contribu-
Disaster relief payments.You can excludetions. Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re- from income any amount you receive that is aRepayment of unemployment compensa- ceive from your employer during periods of un-qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-tion. If you repaid in 2003 unemployment employment, under a union agreement that aster relief payment is an amount paid to you: compensation you received in 2003, subtractguarantees you full pay during the year, are
the amount you repaid from the total amount youtaxable as wages. Include them on line 7 of1) To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
received and enter the difference on line 19 ofForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formessary personal, family, living, or funeral
Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of1040EZ. expenses that result from a qualified disas-
Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your ter,State employees. Payments similar to aentry, write “Repaid” and the amount you repaid. 2) To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-state’s unemployment compensation may beIf you repaid unemployment compensation in essary expenses incurred for the repair ormade by the state to its employees who are not2003 that you included in your income in an rehabilitation of your home or repair or re-covered by the state’s unemployment compen-earlier year, you can deduct the amount repaid placement of its contents to the extent it issation law. Although the payments are fully tax-on line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040) if you due to a qualified disaster,able, do not report them as unemploymentitemize deductions. If the amount is more thancompensation. Report these payments on line$3,000, see Repayments, later. 3) By a person engaged in the furnishing or21 of Form 1040. sale of transportation as a common carrierTax withholding.You can choose to have because of the death or personal physicalfederal income tax withheld from your unem-Welfare and Other injuries incurred as a result of a qualifiedployment compensation. To make this choice, disaster, orPublic Assistance Benefitscomplete Form W–4V, Voluntary Withholding
Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax will 4) By a federal, state, or local government, orDo not include in your income benefit paymentsbe withheld at 10% of your payment. agency, or instrumentality in connectionfrom a public welfare fund, such as paymentswith a qualified disaster in order to pro-due to blindness. Payments from a state fund forIf you do not choose to have tax with- mote the general welfare.the victims of crime should not be included in theheld from your unemployment com-
victims’ incomes if they are in the nature ofpensation, you may be liable for You can only exclude this amount to the extentCAUTION
!
welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-estimated tax. For more information on esti- any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-
penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. Youmated tax, get Publication 505, Tax Withholding ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not apply
must include in your income any welfare pay-and Estimated Tax. if you were a participant or conspirator in a
ments obtained fraudulently. terroristic action or his or her representative.
A qualified disaster is:Supplemental unemployment benefits. Alaska residents. Payments the state of
Benefits received from an employer-financedAlaska makes to its citizens who meet certain• A disaster which results from a terroristicfund (to which the employees did not contribute)age and residency tests that are not based onor military action.are not unemployment compensation. They areneed are not welfare benefits. Include them in• A Presidentially-declared disaster.taxable as wages and are subject to withholdingincome on line 21 of Form 1040.
for income tax. They may be subject to social • A disaster which results from an accidentWork-training program. Payments you re-security and Medicare taxes. For more informa- involving a common carrier, or from anyceive from a state welfare agency for taking parttion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefits other event, which is determined to be cat-in a work-training program are not included inin section 5 of Publication 15–A, Employer’s astrophic by the Secretary of the Treasuryyour income, as long as the payments (exclu-Supplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay- or his or her delegate.sive of extra allowances for transportation orments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or
other costs) do not total more than the publicon line 1 of Form 1040EZ. For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster iswelfare benefits you would have received other-qualified if it is determined by an applicableRepayment of benefits.You may have to wise. If the payments are more than the welfarefederal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-repay some of your supplemental unemploy-benefits you would have received, the entiretance from the federal, state, or local govern-ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustmentamount must be included in your income asment, agency, or instrumentality.allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If youwages.
repay supplemental unemployment benefits in Mortgage assistance payments. PaymentsPersons with disabilities.If you have a disa-the same year you receive them, reduce the made under section 235 of the National Housingbility, you must include in income compensationtotal benefits by the amount you repay. If you Act for mortgage assistance are not included inyou receive for services you perform unless therepay the benefits in a later year, you must the homeowner’s income. Interest paid for thecompensation is otherwise excluded. However,include the full amount of the benefits in your homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-you do not include in income the value of goods,income for the year you received them. gram cannot be deducted.services, and cash that you receive, not in returnDeduct the repayment in the later year as anfor your services, but for your training and reha-adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (You Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.bilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In- Payments made by a state to qualified people toble amounts include payments for transportationclude the repayment on line 33 of Form 1040, reduce their cost of winter energy use are notand attendant care, such as interpreter servicesand write “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on the taxable.for the deaf, reader services for the blind, anddotted line next to line 33. If the amount youservices to help mentally retarded persons dorepay in a later year is more than $3,000, you Nutrition Program for the Elderly.Foodtheir work.may be able to take a credit against your tax for benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-
the later year instead of deducting the amount gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-Disaster relief grants. Do not include
repaid. For information on this, see Repay- pare and serve free meals for the program,post-disaster grants received under the Disaster
ments, later. include in your income as wages the cash payRelief and Emergency Assistance Act in your
you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodincome if the grant payments are made to help
benefits.Private unemployment fund. Unemploy- you meet necessary expenses or serious needs
ment benefit payments from a private (nonun-for medical, dental, housing, personal property,
ion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute aretransportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de-Other Income
taxable only if the amounts you receive are moreduct casualty losses or medical expenses that
than your total payments into the fund. Reportare specifically reimbursed by these disaster The following brief discussions are arranged in
the taxable amount on line 21 of Form 1040.relief grants. Unemployment assistance pay- alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-
Page 25

Page 26 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cussed in greater detail in another publicationzations. Excess campaign funds transferred to 3) Punitive damages. It does not matter if
include a reference to that publication. an office account must be included in the they relate to a physical injury or physical
officeholder’s income on line 21 of Form 1040 in sickness.Activity not for profit.You must include on the year transferred. 4) Amounts received in settlement of pensionyour return income from an activity from which
rights (if you did not contribute to the plan).Canceled sales contract.If you sell propertyyou do not expect to make a profit. An example
(such as land or a residence) under a contract,of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you 5) Damages for:but the contract is canceled and you return theoperate mostly for recreation and pleasure.
buyer’s money in the same tax year as theEnter this income on line 21 of Form 1040. a) Patent or copyright infringement,
original sale, you have no income from the sale.Deductions for expenses related to the activity b) Breach of contract, orIf the contract is canceled and you return theare limited. They cannot total more than the
buyer’s money in a later tax year, you mustincome you report, and can be taken only if you c) Interference with business operations.
include your gain in your income for the year ofitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
the sale. When you return the money and takeSee Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publi- 6) Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
back the property in the later year, you treat thecation 535, Business Expenses, for information tress received to satisfy a claim under Title
transaction as a purchase that gives you a newon whether an activity is considered carried on VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
basis in the property equal to the funds youfor a profit. Do not include in your income compensatoryreturn to the buyer. damages for personal physical injury or physicalAlaska Permanent Fund dividend.If you re- Special rules apply to the reacquisition ofsickness (whether received in a lump sum orceived a payment from Alaska’s mineral incomereal property where a secured indebtednessinstallments).fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report(mortgage) to the original seller is involved. Forit as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 offurther information, see Repossession in Publi- Emotional distress.Emotional distress it-Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. Thecation 537, Installment Sales. self is not a physical injury or physical sickness,state of Alaska sends each recipient a document but damages you receive for emotional distressCar pools. Do not include in your incomethat shows the amount of the payment with the due to a physical injury or sickness are treatedamounts you receive from the passengers forcheck. The amount is also reported to the IRS. as received for the physical injury or sickness.driving a car in a car pool to and from work.Do not include them in your income.Alimony. Include in your income on line 11 ofThese amounts are considered reimbursement If the emotional distress is due to a personalForm 1040 any alimony payments you receive.for your expenses. However, this rule does notinjury that is not due to a physical injury orAmounts you receive for child support are notapply if you have developed car pool arrange-sickness (for example, employment discrimina-income to you. For complete information, getments into a profit-making business of transport-tion or injury to reputation), you must include thePublication 504, Divorced or Separated Individ-ing workers for hire. damages in your income, except for any dam-uals.
Cash rebates.  A cash rebate you receive ages you receive for medical care due to that
Below-market loans. A below-market loan isfrom a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy emotional distress. Emotional distress includes
a loan on which no interest is charged or onis not income, but you must reduce your basis by physical symptoms that result from emotional
which the interest is charged at a rate below thethe amount of the rebate. distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and
applicable federal rate. If you make a stomach disorders.
below-market gift or demand loan, you must Example. You buy a new car for $9,000 Pre-existing agreement. If you receiveinclude the forgone interest (at the federal rate)cash and receive a $400 rebate check from thedamages under a written binding agreement,as interest income on your return. These loansmanufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.court decree, or mediation award that was inare considered a transaction in which you, theYour basis in the car is $8,600. This is your basiseffect (or issued on or before) September 13,lender, are treated as having made: on which you figure gain or loss if you sell the1995, do not include in income any of thosecar, and depreciation if you use it for business.• A loan to the borrower in exchange for a damages received on account of personal inju-
note that requires the payment of interestCasualty insurance and other reimburse- ries or sickness.
at the applicable federal rate, and ments. You generally should not report theseCredit card insurance.Generally, if you re-reimbursements on your return. Get Publication• An additional payment to the borrower, ceive benefits under a credit card disability or547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts, for morewhich the borrower transfers back to you unemployment insurance plan, the benefits areinformation.as interest. taxable to you. These plans make the minimum
Charitable gift annuities.If you are the bene-monthly payment on your credit card account ifDepending on the transaction, the additional
ficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must in-you cannot make the payment due to injury,payment to the borrower is treated as a:
clude the yearly annuity or fixed percentageillness, disability, or unemployment. Report on• Gift, payment in your income. line 21 of Form 1040 the amount of benefits you
The payer will report the types of income youreceived during the year that is more than the• Dividend,
received on Form 1099–R. Report the grossamount of the premiums you paid during the• Contribution to capital, distribution from box 1 on Form 1040, line 16a,year.
or on Form 1040A, line 12a, and the part taxed• Payment of compensation, or Energy conservation subsidies. You canas ordinary income (box 2a minus box 3) on
• Another type of payment. exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-Form 1040, line 16b or on Form 1040A, line 12b.
vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-Report the portion taxed as capital gain (box 3)The borrower may have to report this payment ties for the purchase or installation of an energyon Schedule D, line 8.as income, depending on its classification. conservation measure for a dwelling unit.
Child support payments.You should not re-For more information on below-market loans, Energy conservation measure. This in-port these payments on your return. Get Publi-see chapter 1 of Publication 550. cludes installations or modifications that are pri-cation 504 for more information.
marily designed to reduce consumption ofCampaign contributions. These contribu-
Court awards and damages.  To determine ifelectricity or natural gas, or improve the man-tions are not income to a candidate unless they
settlement amounts you receive by compromiseagement of energy demand.are diverted to his or her personal use. To be
or judgment must be included in your income,exempt from tax, the contributions must be Dwelling unit.This includes a house, apart-you must consider the item that the settlementspent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-replaces. Include the following as ordinary in-for use in future campaigns. However, interest lar property. If a building or structure containscome.earned on bank deposits, dividends received on both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustcontributed securities, and net gains realized on be properly allocated.1) Interest on any award.sales of contributed securities are taxable and
must be reported on Form 1120–POL, U.S. 2) Compensation for lost wages or lost profitsEstate and trust income. An estate or trust,
Income Tax Return for Certain Political Organi-in most cases. unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal
Page 26

Page 27 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estateCorporate director. Corporate director • 10 qualified foster individuals under agefees are self-employment income. Report theseor trust, you may be taxed on your share of its 19, orpayments on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZincome distributed or required to be distributed
• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or(Form 1040).to you. However, there is never a double tax.
older.Estates and trusts file their returns on Form Personal representatives. All personal1041,U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates andrepresentatives must include in their gross in-Maintaining space in home.If you are paidTrusts, and your share of the income is reportedcome fees paid to them from an estate. If paid toto maintain space in your home for emergencyto you on Schedule K–1 (Form 1041), a professional executor or administrator,foster care, you must include the payment inBeneficiary’s Share of Income, Deductions,self-employment tax also applies to such fees.your income.Credits, etc. For a nonprofessional executor or administrator
Reporting taxable payments. If you re-(a person serving in such capacity in an isolatedCurrent income required to be distributed.
ceive payments that you must include in yourinstance, such as a friend or relative of theIf you are the beneficiary of an estate or trust
income, you are in business as a foster-caredecedent), self-employment tax only applies if athat must distribute all of its current income, you
provider and you are self-employed. Report thetrade or business is included in the estate’smust report your share of the distributable net
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZassets, the executor actively participates in theincome, whether or not you actually received it.
(Form 1040). Get Publication 587, Business Usebusiness, and the fees are related to operationCurrent income not required to be distrib- of Your Home (Including Use by Daycare Prov-of the business.uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or iders), to help you determine the amount youNotary public.Report payments for thesetrust and the fiduciary has the choice of whether can deduct for the use of your home.
services on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZto distribute all or part of the current income, you
Free tour. If you received a free tour from a(Form 1040). These payments are not subjectmust report:
travel agency for organizing a group of tourists,to self-employment tax. (See the separate in-
• All income that is required to be distributed you must include its value in your income. Re-structions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for de-
to you, whether or not it is actually distrib- port the fair market value of the tour on line 21 oftails.)
uted, plus Form 1040 if you are not in the trade or business
Election precinct official.You should re- of organizing tours. You cannot deduct your• All other amounts actually paid or creditedceive a Form W–2 showing payments for serv-expenses in serving as the voluntary leader ofto you, ices performed as an election official or electionthe group at the group’s request. If you organize
worker. Report these payments on line 7 ofup to the amount of your share of distributable tours as a trade or business, report the tour’s
Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on line 1 of Formnet income. value on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form
1040EZ. 1040).How to report. Treat each item of income
the same way that the estate or trust would treat Gambling winnings. You must include yourFood program payments to daycare provid-
it. For example, if a trust’s dividend income is gambling winnings in your income on line 21 ofers. If you operate a daycare service and re-
distributed to you, you report the distribution as Form 1040. If you itemize your deductions onceive payments under the Child and Adult Care
Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-dividend income on your return. The same ruleFood Program administered by the Department
bling losses you had during the year, but only upapplies to distributions of tax-exempt interestof Agriculture that are not for your services, the
to the amount of your winnings.and capital gains. payments generally are not included in your
income. However, you must include in your in-The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell Lotteries and raffles.Winnings from lotter-come any part of the payments you do not use toyou the type of items making up your share of ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-provide food to individuals eligible for help underthe estate or trust income and any credits you tion to cash winnings, you must include in yourthe program.are allowed on your individual income tax return. income the fair market value of bonds, cars,
houses, and other noncash prizes.Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-Foster-care providers.Payments you re-
ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries. Installment payments. Generally, if youceive from a state, political subdivision, or a
win a state lottery prize payable in installments,qualified foster care placement agency for pro-Grantor trust.Income earned by a grantor
you must include in your gross income the an-viding care to qualified foster individuals in yourtrust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi- nual payments and any amounts you receivehome generally are not included in your income.ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over designated as interest on the unpaid install-However, you must include in your income pay-the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferred ments. If you sell future lottery payments for aments received for the care of more than 5property to the trust.) This rule applies if the lump sum, you must report the amount you re-individuals age 19 or older and certainproperty (or income from the property) put into ceive from the sale as ordinary income (line 21,difficulty-of-care payments.the trust will or may revert (be returned) to the Form 1040) in the year you receive it.A qualified foster individual is a person who:grantor or the grantor’s spouse.
Form W–2G. You may have received aGenerally, a trust is a grantor trust if the1) Is living in a foster family home, andForm W–2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at
showing the amount of your gambling winnings2) Was placed there by:the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the
and any tax taken out of them. Include thevalue of the transferred property. a) An agency of a state or one of its politi-amount from box 1 on line 21 of Form 1040.
cal subdivisions, or Include the amount shown in box 2 on line 61 ofFees for services.Include all fees for your
Form 1040 as federal income tax withheld.b) A qualified foster care placementservices in your income. Examples of these fees
agency.are amounts you receive for services you per- Gifts and inheritances. Generally, property
form as: you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is
not included in your income. However, if prop-Difficulty-of-care payments.These are• A corporate director, erty you receive this way later produces incomeadditional payments that are designated by the
• An executor, administrator, or personal such as interest, dividends, or rents, that incomepayer as compensation for providing the addi-
is taxable to you. If property is given to a trustrepresentative of an estate, tional care that is required for physically, men-
and the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster• A notary public, or tributed to you, that income is also taxable toindividuals. A state must determine that the ad-• An election precinct official. you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is theditional compensation is needed, and the careincome from the property, that income is taxablefor which the payments are made must be pro-to you.vided in your home.If you are not an employee and the fees
You must include in your incomefor your services from the same payer Inherited pension or IRA.If you inherited a
difficulty-of-care payments received for moretotal $600 or more for the year, you pension or an individual retirement arrangement
TIP
may receive a Form 1099–MISC. than: (IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-
Page 27

Page 28 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ited amount in your income. See Survivors and earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is frozenExample. You sell cars and help arrange
Beneficiaries in Publication 575 if you inherited a if, at the end of the calendar year, you cannot car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay
pension. See What If You Inherit an IRA in withdraw any part of the deposit because: back part of their commissions to you for refer-
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange- ring customers to them. You must include the• The financial institution is bankrupt or in-ments (IRAs), if you inherited an IRA. kickbacks in your income.solvent, or
Manufacturer incentive payments. YouExpected inheritance.If you sell an inter-• The state where the institution is locatedmust include as other income on Form 1040, lineest in an expected inheritance from a living per-has placed limits on withdrawals because21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Formson, include the entire amount you receive inother financial institutions in the state are1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay-gross income on line 21 of Form 1040. bankrupt or insolvent. ments from a manufacturer that you receive as aBequest for services.If you receive cash salesperson. This is true whether you receiveExcludable amount. The amount of inter-or other property as a bequest for services you the payment directly from the manufacturer orest you exclude from income for the year is theperformed while the decedent was alive, the through your employer.interest that was credited on the frozen depositvalue is taxable compensation.
for that tax year minus the sum of: Example. You sell cars for an automobileHistoric preservation grants.Do not include
dealership and receive incentive payments fromin your income any payment you receive under1) The net amount withdrawn from the de-
the automobile manufacturer every time you sellthe National Historic Preservation Act to pre-posit during that year, and
a particular model of car. You report the incen-serve a historically significant property.2) The amount that could have been with-tive payments on line 21 of Form 1040.Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are not drawn at the end of that tax year (not re-Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs anddeductible from other income. A hobby is an duced by any penalty for premature Medicare+Choice MSAs).  You generally doactivity from which you do not expect to make awithdrawals of a time deposit). not include in income amounts you withdrawprofit. See Activity not for profit, earlier underThe excluded part of the interest is included infrom your Archer MSA or Medicare+ChoiceOther Income. your income in the tax year it becomes with-MSA if you use the money to pay for qualified
If you collect stamps, coins, or otherdrawable. medical expenses. Generally, qualified medical
items as a hobby for recreation and expenses are those you can deduct on Sched-
Interest on qualified savings bonds.Youpleasure, and you sell any of the items,CAUTION
!
ule A (Form 1040). For more information about
may be able to exclude from income the interestyour gain is taxable as a capital gain. However, if Archer MSAs or Medicare+Choice MSAs, see
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem ifyou sell items from your collection at a loss, you Publication 969, Medical Savings Accounts
you pay qualified higher educational expensescannot deduct the loss. (MSAs).
in the same year. Qualified higher educational
Moving expense reimbursements. You gen-Holocaust victims restitution.Restitution expenses are those you pay for tuition and
erally should not report these benefits on yourpayments you receive as a Holocaust victim (orrequired fees at an eligible educational institu-
return. Get Publication 521 for more information.the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interesttion for you, your spouse, or your dependent. A
earned on the payments, including interestqualified U.S. savings bond is a series EE Prizes and awards.  If you win a prize in aearned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-bond issued after 1989 or a series I bond. Thelucky number drawing, television or radio quizcounts or funds, are not taxable. You also do notbond must have been issued to you when youprogram, beauty contest, or other event, youinclude them in any computations in which youwere 24 years of age or older. For more informa-must include it in your income. For example, ifwould ordinarily add excludable income to yourtion on this exclusion, see Education Savings you win a $50 prize in a photography contest,adjusted gross income, such as the computationBond Program in chapter 1 of Publication 550.you must report this income on line 21 of Formto determine the taxable part of social security 1040. If you refuse to accept a prize, do notbenefits. If the payments are made in property,Interest on state and local government obli-include its value in your income.your basis in the property is its fair market valuegations. This interest is usually exempt fromPrizes and awards in goods or services mustwhen you receive it. federal tax. However, you must show the be included in your income at their fair marketExcludable restitution payments are pay-amount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-value.ments or distributions made by any country oreral income tax return. For more information,
Employee awards or bonuses. Cashany other entity because of persecution of ansee State or Local Government Obligations in
awards or bonuses given to you by your em-individual on the basis of race, religion, physicalchapter 1 of Publication 550.
ployer for good work or suggestions generallyor mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazi
Job interview expenses.If a prospective em-must be included in your income as wages.Germany, any other Axis regime, or any other
ployer asks you to appear for an interview andHowever, certain noncash employee achieve-Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whether
either pays you an allowance or reimburses youment awards can be excluded from income. Seethe payments are made under a law or as a
for your transportation and other travel ex-Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneousresult of a legal action. They include compensa-
penses, the amount you receive generally is notCompensation, earlier.tion or reparation for property losses resulting
taxable. You include in income only the amountfrom Nazi persecution, including proceeds Prize points.If you are a salesperson andyou receive that is more than your actual ex-under insurance policies issued before and dur- receive prize points redeemable for merchan-penses.ing World War II by European insurance compa- dise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu-nies. facturer to employees of dealers, you mustJury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must beinclude their fair market value in your income.Illegal income.Illegal income, such as stolenincluded in your income on line 21 of Form 1040.The prize points are taxable in the year they areor embezzled funds, must be included in yourIf you must give the pay to your employer be-paid or made available to you, rather than in theincome on line 21 of Form 1040, or on Schedulecause your employer continues to pay your sal-year you redeem them for merchandise.C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) if from yourary while you serve on the jury, you can deduct
self-employment activity. the amount turned over to your employer as anPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If you
adjustment to income. Include the amount youwere awarded a prize in recognition of accom-Indian fishing rights.If you are a member of
repay your employer on line 33 of Form 1040.plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights
Write “Jury Pay” and the amount on the dottedtistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, yousecured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of
line next to line 33. generally must include the value of the prize inCongress as of March 17, 1988, do not include
your income. However, you do not include thisin your income amounts you receive from activi-Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks, sideprize in your income if you meet all of the follow-ties related to those fishing rights. The income iscommissions, push money, or similar paymentsing requirements.not subject to income tax, self-employment tax,you receive in your income on line 21 of Formor employment taxes. 1040, or on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ 1) You were selected without any action on
Interest on frozen deposits.In general, you (Form 1040) if from your self-employment activ- your part to enter the contest or proceed-
exclude from your income the amount of interest ity. ing.
Page 28

Page 29 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) You are not required to perform substantial able, and the amount that is taxable, depends on• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that arefuture services as a condition for receiving the amount of the benefits and your other in-more than the social security equivalentthe prize or award. come.benefit.
Social security benefits include any monthly3) The prize or award is transferred by the• Tier 2 benefits. benefit under Title II of the Social Security Actpayer directly to a governmental unit or
and any part of a tier I railroad retirement benefit• Vested dual benefits.tax-exempt charitable organization as des-
treated as a social security benefit. Social secur-ignated by you. The following conditions
ity benefits do not include any supplementalapply to the transfer. Sale of home. You may be able to exclude security income (SSI) payments.from income all or part of any gain from the salea) You cannot use the prize or award
or exchange of a personal residence. Get Publi-Form SSA–1099. If you received social se-before it is transferred.
cation 523. curity benefits during the year, you will receive
b) You should provide the designation Form SSA–1099, Social Security Benefit State-Sale of personal items.If you sold an itembefore the prize or award is presented ment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed withyou owned for personal use, such as a car,to prevent a disqualifying use. The des- your Form SSA–1099. This notice includes arefrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, orignation should contain: worksheet you can use to figure whether any ofsilverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.your benefits are taxable.i) The purpose of the designation byReport it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-
For an explanation of the information foundmaking a reference to section not deduct a loss.
on your Form SSA–1099, get Publication 915.74(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue However, if you sold an item you held for
Code, investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,Form RRB–1099. If you received
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gainequivalent railroad retirement or special guar-ii) A description of the prize or award,
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.anty benefits during the year, you will receiveiii) The name and address of the or- Form RRB–1099, Payments by the RailroadScholarships and fellowships.A candidateganization to receive the prize or Retirement Board.for a degree can exclude amounts received as aaward,
For an explanation of the information foundqualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiediv) Your name, address, and taxpayer on your Form RRB–1099, get Publication 915.scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-identification number, and If you received other railroad retirement ben-ceive that is for:
efits, see Railroad retirement annuities, earlier.v) Your signature and the date signed.• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an
educational institution, or Joint return.If you are married and file ac) In the case of an unexpected presenta- joint return, you and your spouse must combine• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-tion, you must return the prize or award your incomes and your social security andquired for courses at the educational insti-before using it (or spending, depositing, equivalent railroad retirement benefits when fig-tution.investing it, etc., in the case of money) uring whether any of your combined benefits areand then prepare the statement as de-Amounts used for room and board do not qual- taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive anyscribed in (b). ify for the exclusion. Get Publication 970 forbenefits, you must add your spouse’s income to
more information on qualified scholarships andd) After the transfer, you should receive yours when figuring if any of your benefits are
fellowship grants.from the payer a written response stat- taxable.
ing when and to whom the designated Payment for services.Generally, you must Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in theamounts were transferred. include in income the part of any scholarship orForm 1040 or Form 1040A instruction package
fellowship that represents payment for past,to determine the amount of your benefits toThese rules do not apply to scholarship orpresent, or future teaching, research, or otherinclude in your income. Publication 915 also hasfellowship awards. See Scholarships and fellow-services. This applies even if all candidates for aworksheets you can use. However, you mustships, later. degree must perform the services to receive theuse the worksheets in Publication 915 if any ofdegree.Qualified tuition programs (QTP).A quali- the following situations applies.Do not include in income the part of anyfied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro-scholarship or fellowship representing payment• You received a lump-sum benefit paymentgram) is a program set up to allow you to eitherfor teaching, research, or other services if youduring the year that is for one or moreprepay, or contribute to an account establishedreceive the amount under the National Healthearlier years.for paying, a student’s qualified higher educationService Corps Scholarship Program or theexpenses at an eligible educational institution. A • You exclude employer-provided adoptionArmed Forces Health Professions Scholarshipprogram can be established and maintained by benefits or interest from qualified U.S. sav-and Financial Assistance Program.a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, ings bonds.For information about the rules that apply toor an eligible educational institution. a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to• You take the foreign earned income exclu-The part of a distribution representing theemployees and their families by an educationalsion, the foreign housing exclusion or de-amount paid or contributed to a QTP is notinstitution, see Publication 970. duction, the exclusion of income from U.S.included in income. This is a return of the invest-
possessions, or the exclusion of incomeVA payments. Allowances paid by the De-ment in the program.
from Puerto Rico by bona fide residents ofpartment of Veterans Affairs are not included inFor 2003, the beneficiary generally does not Puerto Rico.your income. These allowances are not consid-include in income any earnings distributed from
ered scholarship or fellowship grants.a QTP established and maintained by a state (or Benefits may affect your IRA deduction.an agency or instrumentality of the state) if thePrizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestYou must use the special worksheets in Appen-total distribution is less than or equal to adjustedare not scholarships or fellowships if you do notdix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxablequalified higher education expenses. However,have to use the prizes for educational purposes.benefits and your IRA deduction if all of thethe beneficiary must include in income any earn-You must include these amounts in your incomefollowing conditions apply.ings distributed from a QTP established andon line 21 of Form 1040, whether or not you use
maintained by an eligible educational institution.the amounts for educational purposes. • You receive social security or equivalentSee Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education, railroad retirement benefits.Social security and equivalent railroad re-for more information.
• You have taxable compensation.tirement benefits.  Social security or
Railroad retirement annuities.The following equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if tax-• You contribute to your IRA.types of payments are treated as pension or able, must be included in the income of the
• You or your spouse is covered by a retire-annuity income and are taxable under the rules person who has the legal right to receive the
ment plan at work.explained in Publication 575. benefits. Whether any of your benefits are tax-
Page 29

Page 30 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How to report. If any of your benefits are able to deduct the amount repaid from your 4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for
taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or Formincome for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if2003 figured without the deduction (1).
1040A to report the taxable part. You cannot usethe amount you repaid is more than $3,000, youIf method 1 results in less tax, deduct theForm 1040EZ. Report your net benefits (themay be able to take a credit against your tax foramount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,amount in box 5 of your Forms SSA–1099 andthe year in which you repaid it. Generally, youclaim a credit for the amount repaid on line 67 ofRRB–1099) on line 20a of Form 1040, or linecan claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-Form 1040, and write “I.R.C. 1341” next to line14a of Form 1040A. Report the taxable partment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in67.(from the last line of the worksheet) on line 20byour trade or business or in a for-profit transac-
of Form 1040, or on line 14b of Form 1040A.tion. Example. For 2002 you filed a return andTransporting school children. Do not in- reported your income on the cash method. InType of deduction.The type of deduction youclude in your income a school board mileage 2003 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2002are allowed in the year of repayment dependsallowance for taking children to and from school income under a claim of right. Your filing statusif you are not in the business of taking children to on the type of income you included in the earlier
in 2003 and 2002 is single. Your income and taxschool. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-year. You generally deduct the repayment on
for both years are as follows:ing this transportation. the same form or schedule on which you previ-
ously reported it as income. For example, if youUnion benefits and dues.Amounts deducted 2002reported it as self-employment income, deduct itfrom your pay for union dues, assessments,  With Income  Without Incomeas a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-contributions, or other payments to a union can- Taxableule C–EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Formnot be excluded from your income. Income $15,000 $10,0001040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deductYou may be able to deduct some of these Tax $ 1,954 $ 1,204it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). Ifpayments as a miscellaneous deduction subject
you reported it as wages, unemployment com-to the 2% limit if they are related to your job and 2003pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deductif you itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form
it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction on1040). For more information, get Publication Without Deduction With DeductionSchedule A (Form 1040).529, Miscellaneous Deductions. Taxable
If you repaid social security or equivalentIncome $49,950 $44,950Strike and lockout benefits.Benefits paidrailroad retirement benefits, get Publication 915.to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits, Tax $ 9,304 $ 8,054
including both cash and the fair market value of
Repayment—$3,000 or less. If the amountother property, usually are included in your in- Your tax under method 1 is $8,054. Your tax
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it fromcome as compensation. You can exclude these under method 2 is $8,554, figured as follows:
your income in the year you repaid it. If you mustbenefits from your income only when the facts
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,Tax previously determined for 2002 $1,954clearly show that the union intended them as
enter it on line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040).Less: Tax as refigured.......... − 1,204gifts to you.
Decrease in 2002 tax $ 750Reimbursed union convention expenses. Regular tax liability for 2003....... $9,304Repayment—over $3,000. If the amount youIf you are a delegate of your local union chapter Less: Decrease in 2002 tax....... − 750repaid was more than $3,000, you can deductand you attend the annual convention of the Refigured tax for 2003 $8,554the repayment (as explained earlier under Typeinternational union, do not include in your in-of deduction). However, you can choose insteadcome amounts you receive from the interna- You pay less tax using method 1, so you shouldto take a tax credit for the year of repayment iftional union to reimburse you for expenses of take a deduction for the repayment in 2003.you included the income under a claim of right.traveling away from home to attend the conven-
This means that at the time you included thetion. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex-
income, it appeared that you had an unrestrictedRepayment rules do not apply.This discus-penses, even if you are reimbursed in a later
right to it. If you qualify for this choice, figure yoursion does not apply to:year. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, you
tax under both methods and compare the re-must include that reimbursement in your in- • Deductions for bad debts,sults. Use the method (deduction or credit) thatcome.
results in less tax. • Deductions from sales to customers, suchUtility rebates.If you are a customer of an
as returns and allowances, and similarMethod 1. Figure your tax for 2003 claimingelectric utility company and you participate in the
items, ora deduction for the repaid amount. If you mustutility’s energy conservation program, you may
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,receive on your monthly electric bill either: • Deductions for legal and other expensesenter it on line 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040).of contesting the repayment.• A reduction in the purchase price of elec-
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2003 claimingtricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or
a credit for the repaid amount. Follow theseYear of deduction (or credit).If you use the• A nonrefundable credit against the steps. cash method, you can take the deduction (orpurchase price of the electricity.
credit, if applicable) for the tax year in which you1) Figure your tax for 2003 without deduct-The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund- actually make the repayment. If you use anying the repaid amount.able credit is not included in your income. other accounting method, you can deduct the
2) Refigure your tax from the earlier yearrepayment or claim a credit for it only for the tax
without including in income the amountyear in which it is a proper deduction under your
you repaid in 2003. accounting method. For example, if you use anRepayments
accrual method, you are entitled to the deduc-3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown
tion or credit in the tax year in which the obliga-on your return for the earlier year. This isIf you had to repay an amount that you included
tion for the repayment accrues.the credit.in your income in an earlier year, you may be
Page 30

Page 31 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Figure your withholding allowances using of our telephone services. One method is for a
our Form W-4 calculator. second IRS representative to sometimes listenHow To Get Tax Help
in on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask• Send us comments or request help by some callers to complete a short survey at theYou can get help with unresolved tax issues,e-mail. end of the call.order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-• Sign up to receive local and national taxtions, and get more information from the IRS innews by e-mail.several ways. By selecting the method that is Walk-in. Many products and services
best for you, you will have quick and easy ac- are available on a walk-in basis.• Get information on starting and operating
cess to tax help. a small business.
• Products. You can walk in to many postYou can also reach us using File TransferContacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upProtocol at ftp.irs.gov.have attempted to deal with an IRS problem certain forms, instructions, and publica-unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryFax. You can get over 100 of the mostpayer Advocate. stores, copy centers, city and county gov-requested forms and instructions 24The Taxpayer Advocate independently rep- ernment offices, credit unions, and officehours a day, 7 days a week, by fax.resents your interests and concerns within the supply stores have a collection of productsJust call 703–368–9694  from your fax ma-IRS by protecting your rights and resolving available to print from a CD-ROM or pho-chine. Follow the directions from the prompts.problems that have not been fixed through nor-When you order forms, enter the catalog num-tocopy from reproducible proofs. Also,mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-ber for the form you need. The items you requestsome IRS offices and libraries have thenot change the tax law or make a technical taxwill be faxed to you. Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter-decision, they can clear up problems that re-
nal Revenue Bulletins, and CumulativeFor help with transmission problems, callsulted from previous contacts and ensure that
Bulletins available for research purposes.703–487–4608.your case is given a complete and impartial
review. Long-distance charges may apply. • Services. You can walk in to your local
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate: Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-Phone. Many services are available by ness day to ask tax questions or get help• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at phone. with a tax problem. An employee can ex-1–877–777–4778. plain IRS letters, request adjustments to
• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-your account, or help you set up a pay-
office in your area. tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order ment plan. You can set up an appointment
current-year forms, instructions, and publi-by calling your local Center and, at the• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a
cations and prior-year forms and instruc-prompt, leaving a message requestingTTY/TDD user.
tions. You should receive your order withinEveryday Tax Solutions help. A represen-• Visit the web site at www.irs.gov/advo- 10 days. tative will call you back within 2 businesscate. days to schedule an in-person appoint-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
ment at your convenience. To find theyour tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.For more information, see Publication 1546, number, go to www.irs.gov or look in theThe Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS. • Solving problems. You can get phone book under “United States Govern-face-to-face help solving tax problems ment, Internal Revenue Service.”every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-Free tax services.To find out what services
sistance Centers. An employee can ex-are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free
Mail. You can send your order forplain IRS letters, request adjustments toTax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-
forms, instructions, and publications toyour account, or help you set up a pay-cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-
the Distribution Center nearest to youment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-scribes other free tax information services,
and receive a response within 10 workdays aftertance Center for an appointment. To findincluding tax education and assistance pro-
your request is received. Use the address thatthe number, go to www.irs.gov or look ingrams and a list of TeleTax topics.
applies to your part of the country.the phone book under “United States Gov-Internet. You can access the IRS web ernment, Internal Revenue Service.” • Western part of U.S.:site 24 hours a day, 7 days a week at
Western Area Distribution Center• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesswww.irs.gov to:
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001to TTY/TDD equipment, call• E-file. Access commercial tax preparation 1–800–829–4059  to ask tax or account • Central part of U.S.:and e-file services available for free to eli-questions or to order forms and publica- Central Area Distribution Centergible taxpayers. tions. P.O. Box 8903• Check the amount of advance child tax • TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477  to Bloomington, IL 61702–8903credit payments you received in 2003. listen to pre-recorded messages covering• Eastern part of U.S. and foreignvarious tax topics.• Check the status of your 2003 refund. addresses:Click on “Where’s My Refund” and then on• Refund information. If you would like to Eastern Area Distribution Center“Go Get My Refund Status.” Be sure to check the status of your 2003 refund, callP.O. Box 85074wait at least 6 weeks from the date you 1–800–829–4477  for automated refund Richmond, VA 23261–5074filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-information and follow the recorded in-tronically) and have your 2003 tax returnstructions or call 1–800–829–1954 . Be CD-ROM for tax products. You canavailable because you will need to know sure to wait at least 6 weeks from the date order IRS Publication 1796, Federalyour filing status and the exact whole dol-you filed your return (3 weeks if you filed Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain:lar amount of your refund. electronically) and have your 2003 tax re-
• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-turn available because you will need to• Download forms, instructions, and publica-
lications.know your filing status and the exacttions.
whole dollar amount of your refund. • Prior-year forms and instructions.• Order IRS products on-line.
• Frequently requested tax forms that may• See answers to frequently asked tax ques-Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-be filled in electronically, printed out fortions. ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give submission, and saved for recordkeeping.• Search publications on-line by topic or accurate, courteous, and professional answers,
keyword. we use several methods to evaluate the quality • Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Page 31

Page 32 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In- CD-ROM for small businesses. IRS how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-
formation Service (NTIS) on the Internet at Publication 3207, Small Business Re- ing for your business, and much more. The de-
www.irs.gov/cdorders for $22 (no handling source Guide, is a must for every small sign of the CD makes finding information easy
fee) or call 1–877–233–6767  toll free to buy business owner or any taxpayer about to start a and quick and incorporates file formats and
the CD-ROM for $22 (plus a $5 handling fee). browsers that can be run on virtually anybusiness. This handy, interactive CD contains
The first release is available in early January desktop or laptop computer.all the business tax forms, instructions and pub-
and the final release is available in late Febru- It is available in early April. You can get alications needed to successfully manage a busi-
ary. free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676  or byness. In addition, the CD provides an
visiting the web site at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.abundance of other helpful information, such as
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Disaster: Form:C
Relief grants.......... 2 5 1041 (Schedule K–1).... 2 6457 plans: Cafeteria plans ......... 1 4
1041 ............... 2 6Discounted mortgageCampaign contributions . . . 26Catch-up contributions..... 8
1065 (Schedule K–1).... 1 4loan ................ 1 7Canceled:Deferrals under......... 8 1065 ............... 1 4Discounts, employee...... 4Debts ............... 1 7501(c)(18)(D) 1098 ............... 1 8Dividends, restrictedSales contract......... 2 6contributions.......... 8 1 0 9 9 – B ............. 1 6stock ............... 1 1Car pools ............. 2 6501(c)(3) organization..... 1 7 1 0 9 9 – C ............. 1 7Cash rebate............ 2 683(b) election........... 1 1 1 0 9 9 – D I V............ 1 1Casualty insurance and E 1 0 9 9 – G ...........18, 24other reimbursements . . . 26Educational assistance.... 4 1099–MISC .........9 ,  2 7A Catch-up contributions..... 8 Election precinct official . . . 271 0 9 9 – R .............. 8Accelerated death Charitable gift annuities . . . 26Elective deferrals....... 7 ,  8 1 1 2 0 – P O L ........... 2 6benefits............. 1 8 Child support payments . . . 26Emotional distress....... 2 6 1120S (Schedule K–1) . . . 14Accident or health plan.... 4 Childcare provider........ 2 Employee: 1120S .............. 1 4Accidental death benefits . . . 5Chronic illness......... 1 8 Achievement award ...... 3 2441 ................ 4Accrued leave payment .... 3 Awards or bonus....... 2 8Clergy.............. 11, 12 4255 ............... 2 4Activity not for profit..... 2 6 Compensation .......... 2Coal ................. 1 3 6251 ............... 1 0
Administrator .......... 2 7 Discounts............. 4Comments ............. 2 8839 ................ 4
Of foreign governments . . . 12Adoption assistance...... 4 8853 ............. 15, 18Commissions ........... 3 Of internationalAdvance commissions ..... 3 RRB–1099 ........... 2 9Commuter highway organizations........ 1 2Alaska Permanent Fund SSA–1099 ........... 2 9vehicle............... 6 State ............... 2 5dividend............. 2 6 W – 2 .............. 2 ,  4Compensation, employee . . . 2 Stock purchase plan..... 1 0Alaska residents........ 2 5 W – 2 G .............. 2 7Constructive receipt of Employer, foreign....... 1 2 W – 4 V .............. 2 5Alien status, waiver of.... 1 2 income ............... 2 Employment abroad ...... 1 2 W – 9 ............... 1 6Alimony .............. 2 6 Contributions to retirement Endowment proceeds .... 1 8 Foster parents andAllowances ............. 3 plan ................. 7 Energy: providers............ 2 7Alternative minimum Copyrights ............ 1 3 Conservation subsidies . . . 26Free tax services........ 3 1t a x............... 10, 24 Corporate director....... 2 7 Payments ............ 2 5 Fringe benefits:Annuities: Cost-of-living allowances, Estate and trust income . . . 26Accident or health plan.... 4Charitable gift......... 2 6 government ........... 3 Excess: Accounting period........ 4Railroad retirement...... 2 9 Court awards........... 2 6 Annual additions......... 9 Adoption assistance...... 4Credit card insurance..... 2 6Tax-sheltered........... 8 Contributions........... 9 Athletic facilities......... 4Credits, recoveries for.... 2 4Archer MSA contributions . . 4 Deferrals.............. 8 Commuter highwayAssistance (See Tax help) Executor .............. 2 7 vehicle.............. 6
Athletic facilities......... 4 Expected inheritance..... 2 8 De minimis (minimal)...... 4DAward ...............3 ,  2 8 Dependent care benefits . . . 4Damages .............. 2 6Back pay.............. 3 Employee discounts...... 4FDaycare providers....... 2 7Court ............... 2 6 Faculty lodging.......... 6Faculty lodging.......... 6De minimis benefits....... 4 Financial counseling fees . . . 4Employee ............ 2 8 Federal Employees’Death benefits, Life insurance.......... 5Length-of-service........ 3 Compensation Act ..... 1 6accelerated .......... 1 8 Meals and lodging....... 6Safety achievement...... 3 Federal income taxDebts: Moving expenserefund .............. 1 8Canceled ............ 1 7 reimbursed........... 6Fees for services........ 2 7Nonrecourse .......... 1 7 No-additional-cost service . . 6B Fellowships............ 2 9Deceased employees, Parking............... 7Baby-sitting............. 3 beneficiaries of........ 2 4 Financial counseling fees Provider of benefit....... 4Back pay awards ......... 3 (See also RetirementDependent care benefits.... 4 Recipient of............ 3Bartering: planning services)........ 4Depletion ............. 1 3 Retirement planningBackup withholding...... 1 6 Flights onDirector, corporation..... 2 7 services............. 6
Income from .......... 1 6 employer-provided Taxation of............ 7Disability:
Below-market loans...... 2 6 aircraft............... 7 Transit pass............ 7Pension ............. 1 5
Bequest for services..... 2 8 Food program payments . . 27 Transportation.......... 6Pensions, including military
Black lung benefit Foreign employer ........ 1 2 Tuition reduction......... 7and government ...... 1 4
payments ............ 1 6 Valuation of............ 7Persons with.......... 2 5 Foreign governments,
Bonuses ............... 3 Service-connected...... 1 4 employees of ......... 1 2 Working condition benefit . . . 7
Page 32

Page 33 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Itemized deduction No-additional-cost service . . 6 Railroad:G
recoveries ........... 1 9 Retirement benefits, tierNonrecourse debt ....... 1 7Gambling winnings ...... 2 7
1 ................ 2 9Itemized deduction Nonstatutory stockG a s.................. 1 3
Sick pay............. 1 6recovery worksheet .... 2 0 options .............. 9Gifts................. 2 7
Rebate:Itemized deductions Notary public........... 2 7Gifts from employer....... 4 New car purchase....... 2 6limited.............. 2 2 Note received for services . . 3Grantor trust........... 2 7 Utility............... 3 0Nutrition Program....... 2 5Grants: Recoveries:JDisaster relief.......... 2 5 Credits.............. 2 4Historic preservation..... 2 8 Job interview........... 2 8 Included in income...... 1 8OGroup-term life insurance . . . 5Jury duty pay .......... 2 8 Itemized deductions..... 1 9O i l .................. 1 3
Non-itemized deduction . . . 24Options, stock........... 9H K Reimbursement .......... 3Outplacement ........... 3Help (See Tax help) Kickbacks ............. 2 8 Casualty insurance...... 2 6Overseas employment .... 1 2Historic preservation Medical care.......... 1 6
grants .............. 2 8 Moving Expense.......6 ,  2 8L
Hobby income and Religious orders........ 1 2PLength-of-service award.... 3losses .............. 2 8 Rental of personalParking ................ 7Life insurance:Holiday gifts............ 4 property............. 1 3Parsonage, rental valueAccelerated deathHolocaust victims....... 2 8 Repayments ........... 3 0o f ................. 1 2benefits............ 1 8
Home, sale of .......... 2 9 Reporting:Partnership income...... 1 4Group-term premiums..... 5
Business income andHousing, clergy......... 1 2 Patents ............... 1 3Interest option......... 1 8
expenses ........... 1 3Lump-sum payments ..... 2 4 Payment:
By employer ........... 8Paid before death....... 1 8 Accrued leave........3 ,  1 4I Nonbusiness expenses . . . 13Permanent benefits....... 5 Black lung benefit....... 1 6Incentive stock options . . . 10 Nonbusiness income..... 1 3Proceeds ............ 1 7 By a union............ 2 5Income: Taxable payments...... 2 7Surrender of.......... 1 8 Child support.......... 2 6Business and Restricted property...... 1 0Loan: Difficulty-of-care........ 2 7investment.......... 1 3 Retirement:Below-market.......... 2 6 Disaster relief.......... 2 5Constructively-received.... 2 And profit-sharing plans . . . 14Discounted mortgage.... 1 7 Food program ......... 2 7Estate and trust........ 2 6 Pay, military........... 1 2Student.............. 1 7 Installment........... 2 7Foreign............... 2 Plan contributions........ 7Lockout benefits........ 3 0 Lump-sum ............ 2 4Illegal............... 2 8 Qualified employee plan . . 24Lodging ............... 6 Manufacturer incentive . . . 28Miscellaneous......... 1 6 Railroad annuities....... 2 9Long-term care: Mortgage assistance..... 2 5Nonwage, foreign Social security andCoverage ............. 4 Rehabilitative program.... 1 3employer ........... 1 2 equivalent railroadInsurance contract...... 1 5Other ............... 2 5 Severance............. 3 benefits............ 2 9Services............. 1 5Partnership........... 1 4 Sick ................. 3 Retirement planningPrepaid............... 2 Lottery winnings........ 2 7 To reduce cost of winter services (See alsoS Corporation......... 1 4 energy............. 2 5Lump-sum payments ..... 2 4 Financial counseling fees) . . 6V A................. 2 9Income tax refund:
Royalties.............. 1 3Federal.............. 1 8 Peace Corps ........... 1 3MState ............... 1 8 Pension .............. 1 5Manufacturer incentiveIndian fishing rights...... 2 8 Personal: Spayments ............ 2 8Inheritances........... 2 7 Items, sale of.......... 2 9 S corporation income..... 1 4Meals ................. 6Inherited: Property, rented........ 1 3 Safety achievement award . . 3Medical care,I R A ................ 2 7 Representative......... 2 7reimbursement ........ 1 6 Sale of:Pension ............. 2 7 Prepaid income .......... 2Medical savings accounts Home ............... 2 9Property............. 1 1 Price reduction......... 1 7(MSAs) .............. 2 8 Personal items......... 2 9Injury benefits........ 14, 16 Prize points............ 2 8 Property interest........ 1 3Medicare:Insurance proceeds from Prizes.............. 28, 29 Property not substantiallyPayments by employer.... 3long-term care vested............. 1 1Property:Tax and foreigncontract............. 1 5 Inherited, not substantiallyemployer ........... 1 2 Sales contract, canceled . . . 26Insurance, credit card.... 2 6 vested............. 1 1Military action.......... 1 5 Savings bonds, interest . . . 28Insurance, life: (See Life Rents from personal..... 1 3Military retirement Scholarships........... 2 9insurance) Restricted............ 1 0p a y .............. 12, 14 School children,Interest: Sale of, not substantiallyMinerals .............. 1 3 transport............ 3 0Included in canceled vested............. 1 1Miscellaneous: Section 457 plans........ 8debt .............. 1 7 Substantially vested..... 1 1Compensation .......... 3 Section 83(b) election..... 1 1Mortgage refund........ 1 8 Transferable.......... 1 1Income .............. 1 6 Service Corps of RetiredOn frozen deposits...... 2 8 Public assistanceMore information (See Tax help) Executives ........... 1 3On recovery........... 1 8 payments ............ 2 5Mortgage: Services,On savings bonds....... 2 8 Public safety officers..... 2 4Assistance payments.... 2 5 no-additional-cost....... 6On state and local Publications (See Tax help)Discounted loan........ 1 7 Severance pay ........... 3government
Interest refund......... 1 8obligations.......... 2 8 Sick pay ............... 3
Moving expenseOption on insurance..... 1 8 Sickness and injuryQreimbursement .......6 ,  2 8Interest, not taxable...... 2 8 benefits............. 1 4Qualified tuitionMSAs, Archer .......... 2 8International organizations, Sickness benefits..... 14, 16programs ............ 2 9employees of ......... 1 2 SIMPLE plans ........... 8
Interview expenses...... 2 8 N Social security:
RIRA deduction .......... 2 9 Benefits............. 2 9National Senior Service
Raffles ............... 2 7 Payments by employer.... 3Iron ore............... 1 3 Corps .............. 1 3
Page 33

Page 34 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax and foreign Supplemental Tuition programs, Vehicle,
employer ........... 1 2 unemployment qualified ............. 2 9 employer-provided ...... 7
benefits............. 2 5Standard deduction for Tuition reduction ......... 7 Veterans’ benefits....... 1 2
earlier years.......... 2 1 Survivor benefits........ 2 4 Viatical settlement....... 1 8
State income: (See Recoveries) Volunteer tax counseling . . 13U
Tax refund............ 1 8 Volunteers ............ 1 3T Unemployment
State welfare payments . . . 25 Volunteers in Service toTax benefit rule......... 1 8 compensation ........ 2 4
Stock appreciation rights . . . 3 America ............. 1 3Tax help .............. 3 1 Union:
Stock options: Benefits............. 3 0Tax-exempt interest...... 2 8
Employee stock purchase Dues ............... 3 0Tax-sheltered annuities.... 8 Wplans.............. 1 0 Reimbursed conventionTaxpayer Advocate ...... 3 1 Welfare payments ....... 2 5Nonstatutory........... 9 expenses ........... 3 0Terminal illness......... 1 8 Work-training programs . . . 25Statutory............. 1 0 Unemployment benefits . . . 25Terrorist attack......... 1 5 Workers’Stockholder debt........ 1 7 Utility rebates.......... 3 0 compensation ...... 15, 16Tours, free............ 2 7Strike benefits.......... 3 0
Transit pass............ 7Student loan, canceled.... 1 7 ■VTransportation.........6 ,  3 0Suggestions ............ 2 VA payments ........... 2 9Trust and estate income . . . 26
Valuation of fringeTTY/TDD information..... 3 1
benefits.............. 7
Page 34

Page 35 of 35 of Publication 525 9:22 - 31-DEC-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2004
Highlights of 2003 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service
of the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs)969
Installment Agreement Request9465 14842
Page 35