Contents
Important Changes ............................1
Important Reminders.........................2
Introduction ........................................2
1. Travel Expenses.............................3
Tax Home .......................................3
Temporary Assignment or Job ..4
What Travel Expenses Are
Deductible? ..............................4
Meals .........................................5
Travel in the United States .......6
Travel Outside the United States6
Luxury Water Travel ..................8
Conventions ...............................8
2. Entertainment Expenses...............9
What Entertainment Expenses Are
Deductible? ..............................9
Directly-Related Test .................10
Associated Test .........................11
50% Limit ...................................11
3. Business Gift Expenses................12
4. Local Transportation Expenses... 13
Car Expenses .................................14
Standard Mileage Rate .............14
Actual Car Expenses .................15
Disposition of a Car ...................21
Leasing a Car ............................21
5. Recordkeeping...............................22
How To Prove Expenses ................22
Adequate Records .....................23
How Long To Keep Records and
Receipts ..............................24
6. How To Report...............................25
Where To Report ............................25
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer ............................25
Reimbursements .............................25
Accountable Plans .....................26
Nonaccountable Plans ..............28
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients ......29
Completing Forms 2106 and
2106–EZ ..................................29
Special Rules ............................30
Illustrated Examples ..................31
7. How To Get Tax Help....................36
Appendices .........................................37
Appendix A ....................................38
(Inclusion Amounts for Leased Cars)
Appendix B ....................................47
(Inclusion Amounts for Leased Electric
Cars)
Index ....................................................49
Important Changes
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile-
age rate for the cost of operating your car in
2000 is 32
1/2 cents a mile for all business
miles.
Car expenses and use of the standard
mileage rate are explained in chapter 4.
Department
of the
Treasury
Internal
Revenue
Service
Publication 463
Cat. No. 11081L
Travel,
Entertainment,
Gift, and Car
Expenses
For use in preparing
2000 Returns


Depreciation limits on cars.Generally, the
total section 179 and depreciation deductions
you can claim for a car that you use in your
business and first placed in service in 2000
is $3,060. Depreciation on cars and the sec-
tion 179 deduction are covered in chapter 4.
Exceptions for clean-fuel cars. There
are two exceptions to the depreciation limits
for cars that run on clean fuel. See Exceptions
for clean-fuel cars under Depreciation Limits
in chapter 4.
Meal expenses when subject to “hours of
service” limits.Generally, you can deduct
only 50% of your business-related meal ex-
penses while traveling away from your tax
home for business purposes. You can deduct
a higher percentage if the meals take place
during or incident to any period subject to the
Department of Transportation's “hours of
service” limits. (These limits apply to certain
workers who are under certain federal regu-
lations.) The percentage is 60% for 2000 and
2001 and it gradually increases to 80% by the
year 2008. Business meal expenses are
covered in chapter 1.
Photographs of missing children. The
Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner
with the National Center for Missing and Ex-
ploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear
in this publication on pages that would other-
wise be blank. You can help bring these
children home by looking at the photographs
and calling 1–800–THE–LOST (1–800–843–
5678) if you recognize a child.
Important Reminders
Standard meal allowance. The standard
meal allowance (also referred to as the limit
on meals and incidental expenses (M&IE
rate)) for most small localities in the United
States is $30. However, the standard meal
allowance is higher for most major cities and
many other localities in the continental United
States. See Publication 1542, Per Diem
Rates. These rates (allowances/limits) are
also listed in Appendix A of Chapter 41, Part
301 of the Code of Federal Regulations. If you
have a computer, you can find them on the
Internet at www.policyworks.gov/perdiem.
Click on “Domestic per diem rates.” Use of the
standard meal allowance is explained in
chapter 1.
Days you depart and return. For the
days you depart for and return from a busi-
ness trip, you can claim 
3/4 of the standard
meal allowance amount. For more informa-
tion, see Travel for days you depart and re-
turn under Standard Meal Allowance in
chapter 1.
Limits that apply to employee deductions.
If you are an employee, deduct your work-
related expenses discussed in this publication
as a miscellaneous itemized deduction on
Schedule A (Form 1040). Generally, the
amount of miscellaneous itemized deductions
you can deduct is limited to the amount that
is more than 2% of your adjusted gross in-
come. It may be further limited if your ad-
justed gross income is more than $128,950
($64,475 if you are married filing separately).
How to report your expenses is covered in
chapter 6.
Introduction
You may be able to deduct the ordinary and
necessary business-related expenses you
have for:
 Travel away from home,
 Entertainment,
 Gifts, or
 Local transportation.
An ordinary expense is one that is common
and accepted in your field of trade, business,
or profession. A necessary expense is one
that is helpful and appropriate for your busi-
ness. An expense does not have to be indis-
pensable to be considered necessary.
This publication explains what expenses
are deductible, how to report them on your
return, what records you need to prove your
expenses, and how to treat any expense re-
imbursements you may receive.
Who should use this publication. You
should read this publication if you are an
employee or a sole proprietor who has these
business-related expenses that may be
deductible. Other businesses (such as part-
nerships, corporations, and trusts) and em-
ployers who reimburse their employees for
business expenses should refer to their tax
form instructions and chapter 13 of Publica-
tion 535, Business Expenses, for information
on deducting travel, entertainment, and
transportation expenses.
Who does not need to use this publi-
cation.You will not need to read this publi-
cation if all of the following are true.
1) You fully accounted to your employer for
your work-related expenses.
2) You received full reimbursement for your
expenses.
3) Your employer required you to return any
excess reimbursement and you did so.
4) Box 13 of your Form W–2, Wage and
Tax Statement, shows no amount with
a code L.
If you meet these four conditions, there is no
need to show the expenses or the re-
imbursements on your return. If you would
like more information on reimbursements and
accounting to your employer, see chapter 6.
TIP
If you meet these conditions and your
employer included reimbursements
on your Form W–2 in error, ask your
employer for a corrected Form W–2.
If you do not meet all of these conditions,
you generally must complete Form 2106 or
2106–EZ and itemize your deductions on
Schedule A (Form 1040) to claim your ex-
penses. See chapter 6.
Volunteers. If you perform services as a
volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you
may be able to deduct some of your costs as
a charitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket
Expenses in Giving Services in Publication
526, Charitable Contributions, for information
on the expenses you can deduct.
Users of employer-provided vehicles. If an
employer-provided vehicle was available for
your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gen-
erally, your employer must include the value
of the use or availability in your income as
pay. However, there are exceptions if the use
of the vehicle qualifies as a working condition
fringe benefit (such as the use of a qualified
nonpersonal use vehicle). Employers should
see Publication 15–B, Employer's Tax Guide
to Fringe Benefits, for information on fringe
benefits.
A working condition fringe benefit is
any property or service provided to you by
your employer for which you could deduct the
cost as an employee business expense if you
had paid for it.
A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is
one that is not likely to be used more than
minimally for personal purposes because of
its design.
For information on how to report your car
expenses that your employer did not provide
or reimburse you for (such as when you pay
for gas and maintenance for a car your em-
ployer provides), see Vehicle Provided by
Your Employer in chapter 6.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and
your suggestions for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web
site at www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
You can write to us at the following ad-
dress:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would
include your daytime phone number, includ-
ing the area code, in your correspondence.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554225 Farmer's Tax Guide
/H18554 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
/H18554 535 Business Expenses
/H18554946 How To Depreciate Property
/H185541542 Per Diem Rates
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized De-
ductions
/H18554Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
From Business
/H18554Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit
From Business
/H18554Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
From Farming
/H185542106 Employee Business Expenses
/H185542106–EZ  Unreimbursed Employee Busi-
ness Expenses
/H185544562 Depreciation and Amortization
See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help, for
information about getting these publications
and forms.
Page 2

1.
Travel Expenses
If you temporarily travel away from your
tax home, you can use this chapter to deter-
mine if you have deductible travel expenses.
This chapter defines “tax home,” “temporary
assignment,” and “travel expenses,” including
the “standard meal allowance.” It also dis-
cusses the rules for travel inside and outside
the United States, luxury water travel, and
deductible convention expenses.
Travel expenses defined.For tax purposes,
travel expenses are the ordinary and neces-
sary expenses of traveling away from home
for your business, profession, or job. How-
ever, you cannot deduct expenses that are
lavish or extravagant. See, later, What Travel
Expenses Are Deductible?
You will find examples of deductible travel
expenses in Table 1, later.
Traveling away from home. You are travel-
ing away from home if:
1) Your duties require you to be away from
the general area of your tax home (de-
fined later) substantially longer than an
ordinary day's work, and
2) You need to get sleep or rest to meet the
demands of your work while away from
home.
This rest requirement is not satisfied by
merely napping in your car. You do not have
to be away from your tax home for a whole
day or from dusk to dawn as long as your
relief from duty is long enough to get neces-
sary sleep or rest.
Example 1. You are a railroad conductor.
You leave your home terminal on a regularly
scheduled round-trip run between two cities
and return home 16 hours later. During the
run, you have 6 hours off at your turnaround
point where you eat two meals and rent a
hotel room to get necessary sleep before
starting the return trip. You are considered to
be away from home, and you can deduct
travel expenses.
Example 2. You are a truck driver. You
leave your terminal and return to it later the
same day. You get an hour off at your turn-
around point to eat. Because you are not off
to get necessary sleep and the brief time off
is not an adequate rest period, your trip is not
considered as travel away from home. You
cannot deduct travel expenses.
Tax Home
To deduct travel expenses, you must first
determine the location of your tax home.
Generally, your tax home is your regular
place of business or post of duty, regardless
of where you maintain your family home. It
includes the entire city or general area in
which your business or work is located. If you
have more than one regular place of busi-
ness, your tax home is your main place of
business. See Main place of business or
work, later. If you do not have a regular or a
main place of business because of the nature
of your work, then your tax home may be the
place where you regularly live. See No main
place of business or work, later.
If you do not have a regular place of
business or post of duty and there is no place
where you regularly live, you are considered
a transient (an itinerant) and your tax home
is wherever you work. As a transient, you
cannot claim a travel expense deduction be-
cause you are never considered away from
home.
Main place of business or work. If you have
more than one place of work, consider the
following when determining your main place
of business or work.
1) The total time you ordinarily spend
working in each area.
2) The degree of your business activity in
each area.
3) The relative amount of your income from
each area.
Example. You live in Cincinnati where
you have a seasonal job for 8 months each
year and earn $25,000. You work the other
4 months in Miami, also at a seasonal job,
and earn $9,000. Cincinnati is your main
place of work because you spend most of
your time there and earn most of your income
there.
No main place of business or work.You
may have a tax home even if you do not have
a regular or main place of work. Your tax
home may be the home where you regularly
live.
Factors used to determine tax home.
If you do not have a regular or main place of
business or work, use the following three
factors to see if you have a tax home.
1) You perform part of your business in the
area of your main home and use that
home for lodging while doing business
in the area.
2) You have living expenses at your main
home that you duplicate because your
business requires you to be away from
that home.
3) You have not abandoned the area in
which both your traditional place of
lodging and your main home are located;
you have a member or members of your
family living at your main home; or you
often use that home for lodging.
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax
home is the home where you regularly live,
and you may be able to deduct travel ex-
penses. If you satisfy only two factors, you
may have a tax home depending on all the
facts and circumstances. If you satisfy only
one factor, you are a  transient; your tax
home is wherever you work and you cannot
deduct travel expenses.
Example 1. You are single and live in
Boston in an apartment you rent. You have
worked for your employer in Boston for a
number of years. Your employer enrolls you
in a 12-month executive training program.
You do not expect to return to work in Boston
after you complete your training.
During your training, you do not do any
work in Boston. Instead, you receive class-
room and on-the-job training throughout the
United States. You keep your apartment in
Boston and return to it frequently. You use
your apartment to conduct your personal
business. You also keep up your community
contacts in Boston. When you complete your
training, you are transferred to Los Angeles.
You do not satisfy factor (1) because you
did not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2)
because you had duplicate living expenses.
You also satisfy factor (3) because you did
not abandon your apartment in Boston as
your traditional home, you kept your commu-
nity contacts, and you frequently returned to
live in your apartment. You have a tax home
in Boston for travel expense deduction pur-
poses.
Example 2. You are an outside
salesperson with a sales territory covering
several states. Your employer's main office is
in Newark, but you do not conduct any busi-
ness there. Your work assignments are tem-
porary, and you have no way of knowing
where your future assignments will be lo-
cated. You have a room in your married sis-
ter's house in Dayton. You stay there for one
or two weekends a year, but you do no work
in the area. You do not pay your sister for the
use of the room.
You do not satisfy any of the three factors
listed earlier. You are a transient and have
no tax home. Because you are never away
from home, you cannot deduct the cost of
your meals and lodging as travel expenses.
Living away from your tax home. If you
(and your family) live in an area outside your
tax home (main place of work), you cannot
deduct the cost of traveling between your tax
home and your family home. You also cannot
deduct the cost of meals and lodging while
at your tax home. See Example 1 that follows.
If you are working temporarily in the same
city where you and your family live, you may
be considered as traveling away from home.
See Example 2, below.
Example 1. You are a truck driver and
you and your family live in Tucson. You are
employed by a trucking firm that has its ter-
minal in Phoenix. At the end of your long runs,
you return to your home terminal in Phoenix
and spend one night there before returning
home. You cannot deduct any expenses you
have for meals and lodging in Phoenix or the
cost of traveling from Phoenix to Tucson. This
is because Phoenix is your tax home.
Example 2. Your family home is in
Pittsburgh, where you work 12 weeks a year.
The rest of the year you work for the same
employer in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat
in restaurants and sleep in a rooming house.
Your salary is the same whether you are in
Pittsburgh or Baltimore.
Because you spend most of your working
time and earn most of your salary in
Baltimore, that city is your tax home. You
cannot deduct any expenses you have for
meals and lodging there. However, when you
return to work in Pittsburgh, you are away
from your tax home even though you stay at
your family home. You can deduct the cost
of your round trip between Baltimore and
Pittsburgh. You can also deduct your part of
your family's living expenses for meals and
lodging while you are living and working in
Pittsburgh.
Chapter 1 Travel Expenses Page 3

Temporary
Assignment or Job
You may regularly work within the city or
general area of your tax home and also work
at another location. It may not be practical to
return home from this other location at the
end of each work day.
If your assignment or job away from your
main place of work is temporary, your tax
home does not change. You are considered
to be away from home for the whole period
you are away from your main place of work.
Your travel expenses are deductible. Gener-
ally, a temporary assignment in a single lo-
cation is one that is realistically expected to
last (and does in fact last) for one year or less.
However, if your assignment or job is in-
definite, the location of the assignment or job
becomes your new tax home and you cannot
deduct your travel expenses while there. An
assignment or job in a single location is con-
sidered indefinite if it is realistically expected
to last for more than one year, whether or not
it actually lasts for more than one year.
If your assignment is indefinite, you must
include in your income any amounts you re-
ceive from your employer for living expenses,
even if they are called travel allowances and
you account to your employer for them. You
may be able to deduct the cost of relocating
to your new tax home as a moving expense.
See Publication 521, Moving Expenses, for
more information.
Exception for federal crime investigations
or prosecutions.If you are a federal em-
ployee participating in a federal crime inves-
tigation or prosecution, you are not subject to
the one-year rule for deducting temporary
travel expenses. This means you may be
able to deduct travel expenses even if you
are away from your tax home for more than
one year.
For you to qualify, the Attorney General
must certify that you are traveling:
1) For the federal government,
2) In a temporary duty status, and
3) To investigate or prosecute, or provide
support services for the investigation or
prosecution of, a federal crime.
You can deduct your otherwise allowable
travel expenses throughout the period of cer-
tification.
Determining temporary or indefinite.You
must determine whether your assignment is
temporary or indefinite when you start work.
If you expect employment to last for one year
or less, it is temporary unless there are facts
and circumstances that indicate otherwise.
Employment that is initially temporary may
become indefinite due to changed circum-
stances. A series of assignments to the same
location, all for short periods but that together
cover a long period, may be considered an
indefinite assignment.
The following examples illustrate when
you can and cannot deduct travel expenses
for a temporary assignment.
Example 1. You are a construction
worker. You live and regularly work in Los
Angeles. You are a member of a trade union
in Los Angeles that helps you get work in the
Los Angeles area. Because of a shortage of
work, you took a job on a construction project
in Fresno. Your job was scheduled to end in
eight months, and you planned to return to
Los Angeles at that time. The job actually
lasted 10 months, after which time you re-
turned to Los Angeles. Your family continued
to live in your home in Los Angeles.
While in Fresno, you lived in a trailer you
own. You returned to Los Angeles most
weekends and maintained contact with the
local union to see if you could get work in Los
Angeles. You realistically expected the job in
Fresno to last eight months. The job actually
did last less than one year. Because you ex-
pected to return home when it ended, your tax
home is in Los Angeles for travel expense
deduction purposes.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1, except that you realistically ex-
pected the work in Fresno to last 18 months.
The job actually was completed in 10 months.
Your job in Fresno is indefinite because
you realistically expected the work to last
longer than one year, even though it actually
lasted less than one year. You cannot deduct
any travel expenses you had in Fresno.
Example 3. The facts are the same as in
Example 1, except that you realistically ex-
pected the work in Fresno to last 9 months.
After 8 months, however, you were asked to
remain for 7 more months (for a total actual
stay of 15 months).
Initially, you realistically expected the job
in Fresno to last for only 9 months. However,
due to changed circumstances occurring after
8 months, it was no longer realistic for you to
expect that the job in Fresno would last for
one year or less. You can only deduct your
travel expenses for the first 8 months. You
cannot deduct any travel expenses you had
after that time.
Going home on days off.If you go back to
your tax home from a temporary assignment
on your days off, you are not considered away
from home while you are in your hometown.
You cannot deduct the cost of your meals and
lodging there. However, you can deduct your
travel expenses, including meals and lodging,
while traveling from the area of your tempo-
rary place of work to your hometown and back
to work. You can claim these expenses up to
the amount it would have cost you for meals
and lodging had you stayed at your temporary
place of work.
If you keep your hotel room during your
visit home, you can deduct the cost of your
hotel room. In addition, you can deduct your
expenses of returning home up to the amount
you would have spent for meals had you
stayed at your temporary place of work.
Probationary work period. If you take a job
that requires you to move, with the under-
standing that you will keep the job if your work
is satisfactory during a probationary period,
the job is indefinite. You cannot deduct any
of your expenses for meals and lodging dur-
ing the probationary period.
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are
a member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a
permanent duty assignment overseas, you
are not traveling away from home. You can-
not deduct your expenses for meals and
lodging. You cannot deduct these expenses
even if you have to maintain a home in the
United States for your family members who
are not allowed to accompany you overseas.
If you are transferred from one permanent
duty station to another, you may have
deductible moving expenses, which are ex-
plained in Publication 521.
A naval officer assigned to permanent
duty aboard a ship that has regular eating and
living facilities has a tax home aboard ship for
travel expense purposes.
What Travel Expenses
Are Deductible?
Once you have determined that you are trav-
eling away from your tax home, you can de-
termine what travel expenses are deductible.
Deductible travel expenses include those
ordinary and necessary expenses you have
when you travel away from home on busi-
ness. The type of expense you can deduct
depends on the facts and your circumstances.
Table 1 summarizes travel expenses you
may be able to deduct. You may have other
deductible travel expenses that are not cov-
ered there, depending on the facts and your
circumstances.
RECORDS
When you travel away from home on
business, you should keep records of
all the expenses you have and any
advances you receive from your employer.
You can use a log, diary, notebook, or any
other written record to keep track of your ex-
penses. The types of expenses you need to
record, along with supporting documentation,
are described in Table 4 (see chapter 5).
Travel expenses for another individual. If
a spouse, dependent, or other individual goes
with you (or your employee) on a business trip
or to a business convention, you generally
cannot deduct his or her travel expenses.
Employee. You can deduct the travel
expenses you have for an accompanying in-
dividual if that individual:
1) Is your employee,
2) Has a bona fide business purpose for the
travel, and
3) Would otherwise be allowed to deduct
the travel expenses.
Business associate. If a business as-
sociate travels with you and meets the con-
ditions in (2) and (3) above, you can claim the
deductible travel expenses you have for that
person. A business associate is someone
with whom you could reasonably expect to
actively conduct business. A business asso-
ciate can be a current or prospective (likely
to become) customer, client, supplier, em-
ployee, agent, partner, or professional advi-
sor.
Bona fide business purpose. For a
bona fide business purpose to exist, you must
prove a real business purpose for the indi-
vidual's presence. Incidental services, such
as typing notes or assisting in entertaining
customers, are not enough to warrant a de-
duction.
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on
business and takes his wife, Linda, with him.
Linda is not Jerry's employee. Even if her
presence serves a bona fide business pur-
pose, her expenses are not deductible.
Jerry pays $115 a day for a double room.
A single room costs $90 a day. He can deduct
the total cost of driving his car to and from
Chicago, but only $90 a day for his hotel
Page 4 Chapter 1  Travel Expenses

room. If he uses public transportation, he can
deduct only his fare.
Meals
Unless you meet the rules for business
entertainment, you cannot deduct the cost of
meals if it is not necessary for you to stop for
sleep or rest to properly perform your duties.
These rules are explained in chapter 2.
50% limit on meals.You can use either
the actual cost of your meals or a standard
amount to figure your meals expense. (See
Standard Meal Allowance later in this chap-
ter.) However, you can generally deduct only
50% of the cost of your unreimbursed
business-related meals.
If you are reimbursed for the cost of your
meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends
on whether your employer's reimbursement
plan was accountable or nonaccountable. If
you are not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies
whether the unreimbursed meal expense is
for business travel or business entertainment.
Chapter 2 discusses the 50% limit in more
detail, and chapter 6 discusses accountable
and nonaccountable plans.
Lavish or extravagant. You cannot de-
duct expenses for meals that are lavish or
extravagant. An expense is not considered
lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable based
on the facts and circumstances. Expenses
will not be disallowed merely because they
are more than a fixed dollar amount or take
place at deluxe restaurants, hotels, night-
clubs, or resorts.
Standard Meal Allowance
You generally can deduct a standard amount
for your daily meals and incidental ex-
penses (M&IE)  while you are traveling away
from home on business. In this publication,
“standard meal allowance” refers to the fed-
eral rate for M&IE (which varies based on
where and when you travel).
Incidental expenses. These include, but are
not limited to, your costs for the following
items.
1) Laundry, cleaning and pressing of cloth-
ing.
2) Fees and tips for persons who provide
services, such as porters and baggage
carriers.
Incidental expenses do not include taxicab
fares, lodging taxes, or the costs of telegrams
or telephone calls.
CAUTION
!
Federal employees should refer to the
Federal Travel Regulations at 41 CFR
301 for changes affecting their claims
for reimbursement of these expenses.
The standard meal allowance method is
an alternative to the actual cost method. It
allows you to deduct a set amount, depending
on where and when you travel, instead of
keeping records of your actual costs. If you
use the standard meal allowance, you still
must keep records to prove the time, place,
and business purpose of your travel. See the
recordkeeping rules for travel in chapter 5.
CAUTION
!
There is no optional standard lodging
amount similar to the standard meal
allowance. Your allowable lodging
expense deduction is your actual cost.
Table 1.
IF you have
expenses for:
Transportation
THEN you can deduct the costs of:
Fares for these and other types of transportation that take you to
or from:
Tips
Other
Taxi, commuter
bus, and airport
limousine
Baggage and
shipping
Car
Lodging and meals
Cleaning
Telephone
Sending baggage and sample or display material between your
regular and temporary work locations.
Operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from
home on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the
standard mileage rate, as well as business-related tolls and
parking. If you rent a car while away from home on business, you
can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
Your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform
your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages,
taxes, and related tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits.
Dry cleaning and laundry.
Business calls while on your business trip. This includes business
communication by fax machine or other communication devices.
Tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
Other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
business travel. These expenses might include transportation to or
from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, computer rental
fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer.
Travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are
riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program,
your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel
and Cruise ships (under Conventions) for additional rules and
limits.
Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home
for business purposes.
1) The airport or station and your hotel, and
2) The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients,
your business meeting place, or your temporary work location.
Who can use the standard meal allowance.
You can use the standard meal allowance
whether you are an employee or self-
employed, and whether or not you are reim-
bursed for your traveling expenses. You can-
not use the standard meal allowance if you
are related to your employer as defined next.
Related to employer. You are related to
your employer if:
1) Your employer is your brother or sister,
half brother or half sister, spouse, an-
cestor, or lineal descendant,
2) Your employer is a corporation in which
you own, directly or indirectly, more than
10% in value of the outstanding stock,
or
3) Certain relationships (such as grantor,
fiduciary, or beneficiary) exist between
you, a trust, and your employer.
You may be considered to indirectly own
stock, for purposes of (2), if you have an in-
terest in a corporation, partnership, estate,
or trust that owns the stock or if a member
of your family or your partner owns the stock.
Use of the standard meal allowance for
other travel.You can use the standard meal
allowance to prove meal expenses you have
when you travel in connection with investment
and other income-producing property. You
can also use it to prove meal expenses you
have when you travel for qualifying educa-
tional purposes. You cannot use the standard
meal allowance to prove the amount of your
meals when you travel for medical or chari-
table purposes.
Amount of standard meal allowance.The
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE
rate. For travel in 2000, the rate is $30 a day
for most areas in the United States. Other
locations in the United States are designated
as high-cost areas, qualifying for higher
standard meal allowances. Locations qualify-
ing for rates of $34, $38, $42, or $46 a day
are listed in Publication 1542.
If you travel to more than one location in
one day, use the rate in effect for the area
where you stop for sleep or rest. If you work
in the transportation industry, however, see
Special rate for transportation workers, later.
50% limit may apply.If you are not re-
imbursed or if you are reimbursed under a
nonaccountable plan for meal expenses, you
can generally deduct only 50% of the stand-
ard meal allowance. If you are reimbursed
under an accountable plan and you are de-
ducting amounts that are more than your re-
Chapter 1 Travel Expenses Page 5

imbursements, you can deduct only 50% of
the excess amount. The 50% limit is dis-
cussed in more detail in chapter 2, and ac-
countable and nonaccountable plans are dis-
cussed in chapter 6.
Standard meal allowance for areas
outside the continental United States. The
standard meal allowance rates do not apply
to travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other lo-
cations outside the continental United States.
The federal per diem rates for these locations
are published monthly in the Maximum Travel
Per Diem Allowances for Foreign Areas.
Your employer may have these rates
available, or you can purchase the
publication from the:
Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
P.O. Box 371954
Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954.
You can also order it by calling the
Government Printing Office at
1–202–512–1800 (not a toll-free
number).
Per diem rates are also available on
the Internet. If you have a computer
and a modem, you can access do-
mestic per diem rates at:
www.policyworks.gov/perdiem
You can access foreign per diem rates at:
www.state.gov/www/perdiems
Special rate for transportation workers.
You can use a special standard meal allow-
ance if you work in the transportation industry.
You are in the transportation industry if your
work:
1) Directly involves moving people or goods
by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or
truck, and
2) Regularly requires you to travel away
from home and, during any single trip,
usually involves travel to areas eligible
for different standard meal allowance
rates.
If this applies to you, you can claim a $38 a
day standard meal allowance ($42 for travel
outside the continental United States).
Using the special rate for transportation
workers eliminates the need for you to deter-
mine the standard meal allowance for every
area where you stop for sleep or rest. If you
choose to use the special rate for any trip, you
must use the special rate (and not use the
regular standard meal allowance rates) for all
trips you take that year.
Travel for days you depart and return.For
both the day you depart for and the day you
return from a business trip, you must prorate
the standard meal allowance. You can do so
by one of two methods.
 Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the
standard meal allowance.
 Method 2: You can use any method that
you consistently apply and that is in ac-
cordance with reasonable business
practice.
Example. Jen is employed in New
Orleans as a convention planner. In March,
her employer sent her on a 3-day trip to
Washington, DC, to attend a planning semi-
nar. She left her home in New Orleans at 10
a.m. on Wednesday and arrived in Washing-
ton, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After spending two
nights there, she flew back to New Orleans
on Friday and arrived back home at 8:00 p.m.
Jen's employer gave her a flat amount to
cover her expenses and included it with her
wages.
Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2
1/2 days
of the standard meal allowance for Washing-
ton, DC: 
3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday
and Friday (the days she departed and re-
turned), and the full daily rate for Thursday.
Under Method 2, Jen could also use any
method that she applies consistently and that
is in accordance with reasonable business
practice. For example, she could claim 3 days
of the standard meal allowance even though
a federal employee would be limited to only
2
1 / 2 days.
Travel in the United States
The following discussion applies to travel in
the United States. For this purpose, the
United States includes the 50 states and the
District of Columbia. The treatment of your
travel expenses depends on how much of
your trip was business related and on how
much of your trip occurred within the United
States. See Part of Trip Outside the United
States, later.
Trip Primarily for Business
You can deduct all of your travel expenses if
your trip was entirely business related. If your
trip was primarily for business and, while at
your business destination, you extended your
stay for a vacation, made a nonbusiness side
trip, or had other nonbusiness activities, you
can deduct your business-related travel ex-
penses. These expenses include the travel
costs of getting to and from your business
destination and any business-related ex-
penses at your business destination.
Example. You work in Atlanta and take
a business trip to New Orleans. On your way
home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.
You spend $630 for the 9 days you are away
from home for travel, meals, lodging, and
other travel expenses. If you had not stopped
in Mobile, you would have been gone only 6
days, and your total cost would have been
$580. You can deduct $580 for your trip, in-
cluding the cost of round-trip transportation to
and from New Orleans. The cost of your
meals is subject to the 50% limit on meals
mentioned earlier.
Trip Primarily for
Personal Reasons
If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,
such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip
is a nondeductible personal expense. How-
ever, you can deduct any expenses you have
while at your destination that are directly re-
lated to your business.
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may
be a vacation even if the promoter advertises
that it is primarily for business. The schedul-
ing of incidental business activities during a
trip, such as viewing videotapes or attending
lectures dealing with general subjects, will not
change what is really a vacation into a busi-
ness trip.
Part of Trip Outside
the United States
If part of your trip is outside the United States,
use the rules described later in this chapter
under Travel Outside the United States for
that part of the trip. For the part of your trip
that is inside the United States, use the rules
in this section. Travel outside the United
States does not include travel from one point
in the United States to another point in the
United States. The following discussion can
help you determine whether your trip was
entirely within the United States.
Public transportation.If you travel by public
transportation, any place in the United States
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop
is a point in the United States. Once the ve-
hicle leaves the last scheduled stop in the
United States on its way to a point outside the
United States, you apply the rules under
Travel Outside the United States.
Example. You fly from New York to
Puerto Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami.
You return to New York nonstop. The flight
from New York to Miami is in the United
States, so only the flight from Miami to Puerto
Rico is outside the United States. Because
there are no scheduled stops between Puerto
Rico and New York, all of the return trip is
outside the United States.
Private car. Travel by private car in the
United States is travel between points in the
United States, even though you are on your
way to a destination outside the United
States.
Example. You travel by car from Denver
to Mexico City and return. Your travel from
Denver to the border and from the border
back to Denver is travel in the United States,
and the rules in this section apply. The rules
under Travel Outside the United States apply
to your trip from the border to Mexico City and
back to the border.
Travel Outside
the United States
If any part of your business travel is outside
the United States, some of your deductions
for the cost of getting to and from your desti-
nation may be limited. For this purpose, the
United States includes the 50 states and the
District of Columbia.
How much of your travel expenses you
can deduct depends in part upon how much
of your trip outside the United States was
business related.
Travel Entirely for Business or
Considered Entirely for Business
You can deduct all your travel expenses of
getting to and from your business destination
if your trip is entirely for business or consid-
ered entirely for business.
Travel entirely for business.If you travel
outside the United States and you spend the
entire time on business activities, you can
deduct all of your travel expenses.
Travel considered entirely for business.
Even if you did not spend your entire time on
business activities, your trip is considered
Page 6 Chapter 1  Travel Expenses

entirely for business if you meet at least one
of the following four exceptions.
Exception 1 – No substantial control.
Your trip is considered entirely for business
if you did not have substantial control over
arranging the trip. You are not considered to
have substantial control merely because you
have control over the timing of your trip.
You are considered not to have substan-
tial control over your trip if you:
1) Are an employee who was reimbursed
or paid a travel expense allowance,
2) Are not related to your employer, and
3) Are not a managing executive.
“Related to your employer” was defined
earlier in this chapter under Standard Meal
Allowance. 
A “managing executive” is an employee
who has the authority and responsibility,
without being subject to the veto of another,
to decide on the need for the business travel.
A self-employed person generally has
substantial control over arranging business
trips.
Exception 2 – Outside United States no
more than a week. Your trip is considered
entirely for business if you were outside the
United States for a week or less, combining
business and nonbusiness activities. One
week means seven consecutive days. In
counting the days, do not count the day you
leave the United States, but do count the day
you return to the United States.
Example. You traveled to Brussels pri-
marily for business. You left Denver on
Tuesday and flew to New York. On Wednes-
day, you flew from New York to Brussels, ar-
riving the next morning. On Thursday and
Friday, you had business discussions, and
from Saturday until Tuesday, you were
sightseeing. You flew back to New York, ar-
riving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday,
you flew back to Denver. Although you were
away from your home in Denver for more than
a week, you were not outside the United
States for more than a week. This is because
the day you depart does not count as a day
outside the United States. You can deduct
your cost of the round-trip flight between
Denver and Brussels. You can also deduct
the cost of your stay in Brussels for Thursday
and Friday while you conducted business.
However, you cannot deduct the cost of your
stay in Brussels from Saturday through
Tuesday because those days were spent on
nonbusiness activities.
Exception 3 – Less than 25% of time
on personal activities.Your trip is consid-
ered entirely for business if you were outside
the United States for more than a week, but
you spent less than 25% of the total time you
were outside the United States on nonbusi-
ness activities. For this purpose, count both
the day your trip began and the day it ended.
Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo,
where you spent 14 days on business and 5
days on personal matters. You then flew back
to Seattle. You spent one day flying in each
direction. Because only 
5/21 (less than 25%)
of your total time abroad was for nonbusiness
activities, you can deduct as travel expenses
what it would have cost you to make the trip
if you had not engaged in any nonbusiness
activity. The amount you can deduct is the
cost of the round-trip plane fare and 16 days
of meals (subject to the 50% limit), lodging,
and other related expenses.
Exception 4 – Vacation not a major
consideration.Your trip is considered en-
tirely for business if you can establish that a
personal vacation was not a major consider-
ation, even if you have substantial control
over arranging the trip.
Travel not entirely for business.If you do
not meet any of the above exceptions, you
may still be able to deduct some of your ex-
penses. See Travel Primarily for Business,
next.
Travel Primarily for Business
If you travel outside the United States prima-
rily for business but spend some of your time
on nonbusiness activities, you generally can-
not deduct all of your travel expenses. You
can only deduct the business portion of your
cost of getting to and from your destination.
You must allocate the costs between your
business and nonbusiness activities to deter-
mine your deductible amount. See Travel al-
location rules, below.
TIP
You do not have to allocate your
travel expenses if you meet one of the
four exceptions listed earlier under
Travel considered entirely for business. In
those cases, you can deduct the total cost of
getting to and from your destination.
Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside
the United States was primarily for business,
you must allocate your travel time on a day-
to-day basis between business days and
nonbusiness days. The days you depart from
and return to the United States are both
counted as days outside the United States.
To figure the deductible amount of your
round-trip travel expenses, use the following
fraction. The numerator (top number) is the
total number of business days outside the
United States. The denominator (bottom
number) is the total number of travel days
outside the United States.
Counting business days. Your business
days include transportation days, days your
presence was required, days you spent on
business, and certain weekends and holi-
days.
Transportation day.Count as a busi-
ness day any day you spend traveling to or
from a business destination. However, if be-
cause of a nonbusiness activity you do not
travel by a direct route, your business days
are the days it would take you to travel a
reasonably direct route to your business
destination. Extra days for side trips or non-
business activities cannot be counted as
business days.
Presence required.Count as a business
day any day your presence is required at a
particular place for a specific business pur-
pose. Count it as a business day even if you
spend most of the day on nonbusiness activ-
ities.
Day spent on business.If your principal
activity during working hours is pursuit of your
trade or business, count the day as a busi-
ness day. Also, count as a business day any
day you are prevented from working because
of circumstances beyond your control.
Certain weekends and holidays.Count
weekends, holidays, and other necessary
standby days as business days if they fall
between business days. But if they follow
your business meetings or activity and you
remain at your business destination for non-
business or personal reasons, do not count
them as business days.
Example 1. Your tax home is New York
City. You travel to Quebec where you have
a business appointment on Friday. You have
another appointment on the following Mon-
day. Because your presence was required on
both Friday and Monday, they are business
days. Because the weekend is between
business days, Saturday and Sunday are
counted as business days. This is true even
though you use the weekend for sightseeing,
visiting friends, or other nonbusiness activity.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you had no
business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed
until Monday before starting home, Saturday
and Sunday would be nonbusiness days.
Nonbusiness activity on the way to or
from your business destination. If you
stopped for a vacation or other nonbusiness
activity either on the way from the United
States to your business destination, or on the
way back to the United States from your
business destination, you must allocate part
of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness
activity. The part you must allocate is the
amount it would have cost you to travel be-
tween the point where travel outside the
United States begins and your nonbusiness
destination and a return to the point where
travel outside the United States ends. You
determine the nonbusiness portion of that
expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The
numerator of the fraction is the number of
nonbusiness days during your travel outside
the United States and the denominator is the
total number of days you spend outside the
United States.
Example. You live in New York. On May
4 you flew to Paris to attend a business con-
ference that began on May 5. The conference
ended at noon on May 14. That evening you
flew to Dublin where you visited with friends
until the afternoon of May 21, when you flew
directly home to New York. The primary pur-
pose for the trip was to attend the conference.
If you had not stopped in Dublin, you
would have arrived home the evening of May
14. You did not meet any of the exceptions
that would allow you to consider your travel
entirely for business. May 4 through May 14
(11 days) are business days and May 15
through May 21 (7 days) are nonbusiness
days.
You can deduct the cost of your meals
(subject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other
business-related travel expenses while in
Paris.
You cannot deduct your expenses while
in Dublin. You also cannot deduct 
7/18 of what
it would have cost you to travel round-trip
between New York and Dublin.
You paid $450 to fly from New York to
Paris, $200 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and
$500 to fly from Dublin back to New York.
Roundtrip airfare from New York to Dublin
would have been $850.
You figure the deductible part of your air
travel expenses by subtracting 
7/18 of the
round-trip fare and other expenses you would
have had in traveling directly between New
York and Dublin (850 × 
7/18 = $331) from your
total expenses in traveling from New York to
Paris to Dublin and back to New York ($450
+ $200 + $500 = $1,150).
Chapter 1 Travel Expenses Page 7

Your deductible air travel expense is $819
($1,150 − $331).
Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond
business destination.If you had a vacation
or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or be-
yond your business destination, you must al-
locate part of your travel expenses to the
nonbusiness activity. The part you must al-
locate is the amount it would have cost you
to travel between the point where travel out-
side the United States begins and your busi-
ness destination and a return to the point
where travel outside the United States ends.
You determine the nonbusiness portion of
that expense by multiplying it by a fraction.
The numerator of the fraction is the number
of nonbusiness days during your travel out-
side the United States and the denominator
is the total number of days you spend outside
the United States. None of your travel ex-
penses for nonbusiness activities at, near, or
beyond your business destination are
deductible.
Example. Assume that the dates are the
same as in the previous example but that in-
stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you
fly to Venice, Italy, for a vacation. You cannot
deduct any part of the cost of your trip from
Paris to Venice and return to Paris. In addi-
tion, you cannot deduct 
7/18 of the airfare and
other expenses from New York to Paris and
back to New York. You can deduct 
11/18 of the
round-trip plane fare and other travel ex-
penses from New York to Paris, plus your
meals, lodging, and any other business ex-
penses you had in Paris. (Assume these
expenses total $900). If the round-trip plane
fare and other travel-related expenses (such
as food during the trip) are $800 from New
York to Paris, you can deduct travel costs of
$489 (
11 / 18 × $800), plus the full $900 for the
expenses you had in Paris.
Other methods. You can use another
method of counting business days if you es-
tablish that it more clearly reflects the time
spent on nonbusiness activities outside the
United States.
Travel Primarily for Vacation
If you travel outside the United States prima-
rily for vacation or for investment purposes,
the entire cost of the trip is a nondeductible
personal expense. This is true even if you
spend some time attending brief professional
seminars or a continuing education program.
You can, however, deduct your registration
fees and any other expenses you have that
are directly related to your business.
Example. The university from which you
graduated has a continuing education pro-
gram for members of its alumni association.
This program consists of trips to various for-
eign countries where academic exercises and
conferences are set up to acquaint individuals
in most occupations with selected facilities in
several regions of the world. However, none
of the conferences are directed toward spe-
cific occupations or professions. It is up to
each participant to seek out specialists and
organizational settings appropriate to his or
her occupational interests.
Three-hour sessions are held each day
over a 5-day period at each of the selected
overseas facilities where participants can
meet with individual practitioners. These ses-
sions are composed of a variety of activities
including workshops, mini-lectures, role play-
ing, skill development, and exercises. Pro-
fessional conference directors schedule and
conduct the sessions. Participants can
choose those sessions they wish to attend.
You can participate in this program since
you are a member of the alumni association.
You and your family take one of the trips. You
spend about 2 hours at each of the planned
sessions. The rest of the time you go touring
and sightseeing with your family. The trip
lasts less than 1 week.
Your travel expenses for the trip are not
deductible since the trip was primarily a va-
cation. However, registration fees and any
other incidental expenses you have for the
five planned sessions you attended that are
directly related and beneficial to your busi-
ness are deductible business expenses.
These expenses should be specifically stated
in your records to ensure proper allocation of
your deductible business expenses.
Luxury Water Travel
If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or
other form of luxury water transportation for
business purposes, there is a daily limit on the
amount you can deduct. The limit is twice the
highest federal per diem rate allowable at the
time of your travel. (Generally, the federal per
diem is the amount paid to federal govern-
ment employees for daily living expenses
when they travel away from home, but in the
United States, for business purposes.)
Daily limit on luxury water travel.The
highest federal per diem rate allowed and the
daily limit for luxury water travel in 2000 is
shown in the following table.
Example. Caroline, a travel agent, trav-
eled by ocean liner from New York to London,
England, on business in May. Her expense
for the 6-day cruise was $3,000. Caroline's
deduction for the cruise cannot exceed
$2,928 (6 days × $488 daily limit).
Meals and entertainment.If your expenses
for luxury water travel include separately
stated amounts for meals or entertainment,
those amounts are subject to the 50% limit
on meals and entertainment before you apply
the daily limit. For a discussion of the 50%
limit, see chapter 2.
Example. In the previous example,
Caroline's luxury water travel had a total cost
of $3,000. Of that amount, $1,600 was sepa-
rately stated as meals and entertainment.
Caroline, who is self-employed, is not reim-
bursed for any of her travel expenses.
Caroline computes her deductible travel ex-
penses as follows.
Caroline's deduction for her cruise is limited
to $2,200, even though the limit on luxury
water travel is higher.
Not separately stated.If your meal or
entertainment charges are not separately
stated or are not clearly identifiable, you do
not have to allocate any portion of the total
charge to meals or entertainment.
Exceptions
The per diem rule does not apply to expenses
you have to attend a convention, seminar, or
meeting on board a cruise ship. See Cruise
ships, under Conventions Held Outside the
North American Area.
Conventions
You can deduct your travel expenses when
you attend a convention if you can show that
your attendance benefits your trade or busi-
ness. You cannot deduct the travel expenses
for your family. If the convention is for in-
vestment, political, social, or other purposes
unrelated to your trade or business, you can-
not deduct the expenses. You cannot deduct
nonbusiness expenses.
CAUTION
!
Your appointment or election as a
delegate does not, in itself, determine
whether you can deduct travel ex-
penses. You can deduct your travel ex-
penses only if your attendance is connected
to your own trade or business.
Convention agenda. The convention
agenda or program generally shows the pur-
pose of the convention. You can show your
attendance at the convention benefits your
trade or business by comparing the agenda
with the official duties and responsibilities of
your position. The agenda does not have to
deal specifically with your official duties and
responsibilities; it will be enough if the agenda
is so related to your position that it shows
your attendance was for business purposes.
Conventions Held Outside
the North American Area
You cannot deduct expenses for attending a
convention, seminar, or similar meeting held
outside the North American area unless the
meeting is directly related to your trade or
business. Also, it must be as reasonable to
hold the meeting outside the North American
area as in it. If the meeting meets these re-
quirements, you also must satisfy the rules for
deducting expenses for business trips in
general, discussed earlier under Travel Out-
side the United States.
North American area. The North American
area includes the following locations.
Highest Daily Limit
2000 Federal on Luxury
Dates
Per Diem Water Travel
Jan. 1–Jun. 14 $ 244 $ 488
Jun. 15–Sep 15 253 506
Sep. 16–Dec. 31 244 448
American Samoa Kingman Reef
Baker Island Marshall Islands
Barbados Mexico
Bermuda Micronesia
Canada Midway Islands
Costa Rica Northern Mariana
Dominica IslandsMeals and entertainment ............ $1,600
Dominican Republic Palau50% limit ......................................× .50
Grenada PalmyraAllowable meals & entertainment $ 800
Guam Puerto RicoOther travel expenses ................. + 1,400
Guyana Saint LuciaAllowable cost before the daily limit .......... $2,200
Honduras Trinidad and TobagoDaily limit for May 2000 .............. $488 Howland Island USATimes number of days ................× 6 Jamaica U.S. Virgin IslandsMaximum luxury water travel deduction .... $2,928Jarvis Island Wake Island
 Amount of allowable deduction ............ $2,200Johnston Island
Page 8 Chapter 1  Travel Expenses

Reasonableness test.The following factors
are taken into account to determine if it was
reasonable to hold the meeting outside the
North American area.
1) The purpose of the meeting and the ac-
tivities taking place at the meeting.
2) The purposes and activities of the spon-
soring organizations or groups.
3) The homes of the active members of the
sponsoring organizations and the places
at which other meetings of the sponsor-
ing organizations or groups have been
or will be held.
4) Other relevant factors you may present.
Cruise ships. You can deduct up to $2,000
per year of your expenses of attending con-
ventions, seminars, or similar meetings held
on cruise ships. You must, however, establish
that the meeting is directly related to your
trade or business. All ships that sail are con-
sidered cruise ships.
You can deduct these expenses if all of
the following requirements are met.
1) The cruise ship is a vessel registered in
the United States.
2) All of the cruise ship's ports of call are
in the United States or in possessions
of the United States.
3) You attach to your return a written
statement signed by you that includes
information about:
a) The total days of the trip, excluding
the days of transportation to and
from the cruise ship port,
b) The number of hours each day that
you devoted to scheduled business
activities, and
c) A program of the scheduled busi-
ness activities of the meeting.
4) You attach to your return a written
statement signed by an officer of the or-
ganization or group sponsoring the
meeting that includes:
a) A schedule of the business activ-
ities of each day of the meeting, and
b) The number of hours you attended
the scheduled business activities.
2.
Entertainment
Expenses
You may be able to deduct business-
related entertainment expenses you have for
entertaining a client, customer, or employee.
The rules and definitions are summarized in
Table 2.
You can deduct entertainment expenses
only if they are both ordinary and necessary
and meet one of the following two tests.
 1) Directly-related test.
 2) Associated test.
CAUTION
!
The amount you can deduct for
entertainment expenses may be lim-
ited. Generally, you can deduct only
50% of your unreimbursed entertainment ex-
penses. This limit is discussed later under
50% Limit.
Club dues and membership fees.  You
cannot deduct dues (including initiation fees)
for membership in any club organized for
business, pleasure, recreation, or other social
purpose. This rule applies to any membership
organization if one of its principal purposes is
to conduct entertainment activities for mem-
bers or their guests, or to provide members
or their guests with access to entertainment
facilities, discussed later.
The purposes and activities of a club, not
its name, will determine whether or not you
can deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues
paid to country clubs, golf and athletic clubs,
airline clubs, hotel clubs, and clubs operated
to provide meals under circumstances gen-
erally considered to be conducive to business
discussions.
Entertainment facilities. Generally, you
cannot deduct any expenses for the cost of
using an entertainment facility. This includes
expenses for depreciation and operating
costs such as rent, utilities, maintenance and
protection.
An entertainment facility is any property
you own, rent, or use for entertainment. Ex-
amples include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing
camp, swimming pool, tennis court, bowling
alley, car, airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or
home in a vacation resort.
Out-of-pocket expenses.You can de-
duct out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food
and beverages, catering, gas, and fishing
bait, that you provided during entertainment
at a facility. These are not expenses for the
use of an entertainment facility. However,
these expenses are subject to the directly-
related and associated tests and to the 50%
limit, all discussed later.
What Entertainment
Expenses
Are Deductible?
This section explains different types of enter-
tainment expenses that you may be able to
deduct.
Entertainment. Entertainment includes any
activity generally considered to provide
entertainment, amusement, or recreation.
Examples include entertaining guests at
nightclubs; at social, athletic, and sporting
clubs; at theaters; at sporting events; on
yachts; or on hunting, fishing, vacation, and
similar trips.
Entertainment also may include meeting
personal, living, or family needs of individuals,
such as providing meals, a hotel suite, or a
car to customers or their families.
A meal as a form of entertainment.
Entertainment includes the cost of a meal you
provide to a customer or client, whether the
meal is a part of other entertainment or by
itself. A meal expense includes the cost of
food, beverages, taxes, and tips for the meal.
To deduct an entertainment-related meal, you
or your employee must be present when the
food or beverages are provided.
CAUTION
!
You cannot claim the cost of your
meal both as an entertainment ex-
pense and as a travel expense.
TIP
Meals sold in the normal course of
your business are not considered
entertainment.
Deduction may depend on your type
of business. Your kind of business may
determine if a particular activity is considered
entertainment. For example, if you are a
dress designer and have a fashion show to
introduce your new designs to store buyers,
the show generally is not considered enter-
tainment. This is because fashion shows are
typical in your business. But, if you are an
appliance distributor and hold a fashion show
for the spouses of your retailers, the show
generally is considered entertainment.
Taking turns paying for meals or enter-
tainment. Expenses are not deductible
when a group of business acquaintances take
turns picking up each others' meal or enter-
tainment checks without regard to whether
any business purposes are served.
Lavish or extravagant expenses. You can-
not deduct expenses for entertainment that
are lavish or extravagant. An expense is not
considered lavish or extravagant if it is rea-
sonable considering the facts and circum-
stances. Expenses will not be disallowed just
because they are more than a fixed dollar
amount or take place at deluxe restaurants,
hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.
Allocating between business and non-
business. If you entertain business and
nonbusiness individuals at the same event,
you must divide your entertainment expenses
between business and nonbusiness. You can
deduct only the business part. If you cannot
establish the part of the expense for each
person participating, allocate the expense to
each participant on a pro rata basis.
Example. You entertain a group of indi-
viduals that includes yourself, three business
prospects, and seven social guests. Only 
4/11
of the expense qualifies as a business enter-
tainment expense. You cannot deduct the
expenses for the seven social guests be-
cause those costs are nonbusiness ex-
penses.
Trade association meetings. You can de-
duct entertainment expenses that are directly
related to and necessary for attending busi-
ness meetings or conventions of certain ex-
empt organizations. These organizations in-
clude business leagues, chambers of
commerce, real estate boards, trade associ-
ations, and professional associations. The
expenses of your attendance must be related
to your active trade or business. These ex-
penses are subject to the 50% limit on enter-
tainment expenses.
Entertainment tickets. Generally, you can-
not deduct more than the face value of an
entertainment ticket, even if you paid a higher
price. For example, you cannot deduct ser-
vice fees you pay to ticket agencies or bro-
kers or any amount over the face value of the
tickets you pay to scalpers.
Exception for events that benefit char-
itable organizations. Different rules apply
when the cost of a ticket to a sports event
benefits a charitable organization. You can
Chapter 2 Entertainment Expenses Page 9

take into account the full cost you pay for the
ticket, even if it is more than the face value,
if all of the following conditions apply.
1) The event's main purpose is to benefit
a qualified charitable organization.
2) The entire net proceeds go to the charity.
3) The event uses volunteers to perform
substantially all the event's work.
TIP
The 50% limit on entertainment does
not apply to any expense for a pack-
age deal that includes a ticket to such
a charitable sports event.
Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golf
tournament organized by the local volunteer
fire company. All net proceeds will be used
to buy new fire equipment. The volunteers
will run the tournament. You can deduct the
entire cost of the tickets as a business ex-
pense if they otherwise qualify as an enter-
tainment expense.
Example 2. You purchase tickets to a
college football game through a ticket broker.
After having a business discussion, you take
a client to the game. Net proceeds from the
game go to colleges that qualify as charitable
organizations. However, since the colleges
also pay individuals to perform services, such
as coaching and recruiting, you can only use
the face value of the tickets in determining
your business deduction. Also, your de-
duction is subject to the 50% limit.
Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes.
If you rent a skybox or other private luxury
box for more than one event at the same
sports arena, you generally cannot deduct
more than the price of a nonluxury box seat
ticket.
To determine whether a skybox has been
rented for more than one event, count each
game or other performance as one event.
For example, renting a skybox for a series of
playoff games is considered renting it for
more than one event. All skyboxes you rent
in the same arena, along with any rentals by
related parties, are considered in making this
determination. 
Related parties include:
1) Family members (spouses, ancestors,
and lineal descendants),
2) Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-
rangement involving the sharing of
skyboxes,
 3) Related corporations,
4) A partnership and its principal partners,
and
5) A corporation and a partnership with
common ownership.
Example. You pay $3,000 to rent a
10-seat skybox at Team Stadium for three
baseball games. The cost of regular nonlux-
ury box seats at each event is $20 a seat.
You can deduct (subject to the 50% limit)
$600 [(10 seats × $20 each) × 3 events].
Food and beverages in skybox seats.
If expenses for food and beverages are sep-
arately stated, you can deduct these ex-
penses in addition to the amounts allowable
for the skybox, subject to the requirements
and limits that apply. The amounts separately
stated for food and beverages must be rea-
Table 2. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
Definitions
Tests to be met
Other rules
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a
client, customer, or employee if the expenses meet the
directly-related test or the associated test.
● Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to
provide entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes
meals provided to a customer or client.
● An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your
field of business, trade, or profession.
● A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate,
although not necessarily indispensable, for your business.
Directly-related test
● Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
● Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of
business, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or
some other specific business benefit.
Associated test
● Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
● Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
● You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment
expense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
● You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under
the circumstances.
● You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed
entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
You did engage in business with the person during the
entertainment period, and
sonable. You cannot inflate the charges for
food and beverages to avoid the limited de-
duction for skybox rentals.
Directly-Related Test
To meet the directly-related test for enter-
tainment expenses (including entertain-
ment-related meals), you must show that:
1) The main purpose of the combined
business and entertainment was the ac-
tive conduct of business,
2) You did engage in business with the
person during the entertainment period,
and
3) You had more than a general expecta-
tion of getting income or some other
specific business benefit at some future
time.
Business is generally not considered to
be the main purpose when business and
entertainment are combined on hunting or
fishing trips, or on yachts or other pleasure
boats. Even if you show that business was
the main purpose, you generally cannot de-
duct the expenses for the use of an enter-
tainment facility. See Entertainment facilities
earlier in this chapter.
You must consider all the facts, including
the nature of the business transacted and the
reasons for conducting business during the
entertainment. It is not necessary to devote
more time to business than to entertainment.
However, if the business discussion is only
incidental to the entertainment, the enter-
tainment expenses do not meet the directly-
related test.
TIP
You do not have to show that busi-
ness income or other business benefit
actually resulted from each enter-
tainment expense.
Clear business setting.If the entertainment
takes place in a clear business setting and is
for your business or work, the expenses are
considered directly related to your business
or work. The following situations are exam-
ples of entertainment in a clear business set-
ting.
1) Entertainment in a hospitality room at a
convention where business goodwill is
created through the display or discussion
of business products.
2) Entertainment that is mainly a price re-
bate on the sale of your products (such
as a restaurant owner providing an oc-
casional free meal to a loyal customer).
3) Entertainment of a clear business nature
occurring under circumstances where
there is no meaningful personal or social
relationship between you and the per-
sons entertained. An example is enter-
tainment of business and civic leaders
at the opening of a new hotel or play
when the purpose is to get business
publicity rather than to create or maintain
the goodwill of the persons entertained.
Page 10 Chapter 2  Entertainment Expenses

Expenses not considered directly related.
Entertainment expenses generally are not
considered directly related if you are not there
or in situations where there are substantial
distractions that generally prevent you from
actively conducting business. The following
are examples of situations where there are
substantial distractions.
1) A meeting or discussion at a nightclub,
theater, or sporting event.
2) A meeting or discussion during what is
essentially a social gathering, such as a
cocktail party.
3) A meeting with a group that includes
persons who are not business associ-
ates at places such as cocktail lounges,
country clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs,
or vacation resorts.
Associated Test
Even if your expenses do not meet the
directly-related test, they may meet the as-
sociated test.
To meet the associated test for enter-
tainment expenses (including entertain-
ment-related meals), you must show that the
entertainment:
1) Is associated with your trade or busi-
ness, and
2) Directly precedes or follows a substantial
business discussion (defined later).
Generally, any ordinary and necessary
expense is associated with the active conduct
of your trade or business if you can show that
you had a clear business purpose for having
the expense. The purpose may be to get new
business or to encourage the continuation of
an existing business relationship.
Substantial business discussion.Whether
a business discussion is substantial depends
on the facts of each case. A business dis-
cussion will not be considered substantial
unless you can show that you actively en-
gaged in the discussion, meeting, negotiation,
or other business transaction to get income
or some other specific business benefit.
The meeting does not have to be for any
specified length of time, but you must show
that the business discussion was substantial
in relation to the meal or entertainment. It is
not necessary that you devote more time to
business than to entertainment. You do not
have to discuss business during the meal or
entertainment.
Meetings at conventions. You are con-
sidered to have a substantial business dis-
cussion if you attend meetings at a conven-
tion or similar event, or at a trade or business
meeting sponsored and conducted by a
business or professional organization. How-
ever, your reason for attending the convention
or meeting must be to further your trade or
business. The organization that sponsors the
convention or meeting must schedule a pro-
gram of business activities that is the main
activity of the convention or meeting.
Directly before or after business dis-
cussion. If the entertainment is held on the
same day as the business discussion, it is
considered to be held directly before or after
the business discussion.
If the entertainment and the business dis-
cussion are not held on the same day, you
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
must consider the facts of each case to see
if the associated test is met. Among the facts
to consider are the place, date, and duration
of the business discussion. If you or your
business associates are from out of town, you
must also consider the dates of arrival and
departure, and the reasons the entertainment
and the discussion did not take place on the
same day.
Example. A group of business associates
comes from out of town to your place of
business to hold a substantial business dis-
cussion. If you entertain those business
guests on the evening before the business
discussion, or on the evening of the day fol-
lowing the business discussion, the enter-
tainment generally is considered to be held
directly before or after the discussion. The
expense meets the associated test.
Expenses for spouses. You generally can-
not deduct the cost of entertainment for your
spouse or for the spouse of a customer.
However, you can deduct these costs if you
can show that you had a clear business pur-
pose, rather than a personal or social pur-
pose, for providing the entertainment.
Example. You entertain a customer. The
cost is an ordinary and necessary business
expense and is allowed under the enter-
tainment rules. The customer's spouse joins
you because it is impractical to entertain the
customer without the spouse. You can deduct
the cost of entertaining the customer's spouse
as an ordinary and necessary business ex-
pense. If your spouse joins the party because
the customer's spouse is present, the cost of
the entertainment for your spouse is also an
ordinary and necessary business expense.
50% Limit
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your
business-related meal and entertainment ex-
penses. (If you are subject to the Department
of Transportation's “hours of service” limits,
you can deduct a higher percentage. See In-
dividuals subject to “hours of service” limits,
later.) The 50% limit applies to employees or
their employers, and to self-employed per-
sons (including independent contractors) or
their clients, depending on whether the ex-
penses are reimbursed. Figure A summarizes
the general rules explained in this section.
The 50% limit applies to business meals
or entertainment expenses you have while:
1) Traveling away from home (whether
eating alone or with others) on business,
2) Entertaining customers at your place of
business, a restaurant, or other location,
or
3) Attending a business convention or re-
ception, business meeting, or business
luncheon at a club.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Expenses Page 11

Covered expenses. Taxes and tips relating
to a business meal or entertainment activity
are included in the amount that is subject to
the 50% limit. Expenses such as cover
charges for admission to a nightclub, rent
paid for a room in which you hold a dinner
or cocktail party, or the amount paid for
parking at a sports arena are subject to the
50% limit. However, the cost of transportation
to and from a business meal or a business-
related entertainment activity is not subject to
the 50% limit.
Separating costs. If you have an ex-
pense for goods and services consisting of
meals, entertainment, and other services
(such as lodging or transportation), you must
allocate that expense between the cost of
meals and entertainment and the cost of the
other services. You must have a reasonable
basis for making this allocation. For example,
you must allocate your expenses if a hotel
includes one or more meals in its room
charge, or if you are provided with one per
diem amount to cover both your lodging and
meal expenses.
Application of 50% limit.The 50% limit on
meal and entertainment expenses applies if
the expense is otherwise deductible and is
not covered by one of the exceptions dis-
cussed later.
The 50% limit also applies to activities that
are not a trade or business. It applies to meal
and entertainment expenses you have for the
production of income, including rental or roy-
alty income. It also applies to the cost of
meals included in deductible educational ex-
penses.
When to apply the 50% limit.You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You
first have to determine the amount of meal
and entertainment expenses that would be
deductible under the other rules discussed in
this publication.
Example 1. You spend $100 for a
business-related meal. If $40 of that amount
is not allowable because it is lavish and ex-
travagant, the remaining $60 is subject to the
50% limit. Your deduction cannot be more
than $30 (.50 × $60).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to
a concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent.
You paid $150 for the two tickets, which had
a face value of $60 each ($120 total). Your
deduction cannot be more than $60 (.50 ×
$120).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and enter-
tainment expenses are subject to the 50%
limit. Figure A can help you determine if the
50% limit applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit.Your
meal or entertainment expense is not subject
to the 50% limit if the expense meets one of
the following exceptions.
1 – Employee's reimbursed expenses.
If you are an employee, you are not subject
to the 50% limit on expenses for which your
employer reimburses you under an account-
able plan. Accountable plans are discussed
in chapter 6.
2 – Self-employed. If you are self-
employed, your deductible meal and enter-
tainment expenses are not subject to the 50%
limit if all three of the following requirements
are met.
1) You have these expenses as an inde-
pendent contractor.
2) Your customer or client reimburses you
or gives you an allowance for these ex-
penses in connection with services you
perform.
3) You provide adequate records of these
expenses to your customer or client.
(See chapter 5.)
In this case, your client or customer is
subject to the 50% limit on the expenses.
Example. You are a self-employed attor-
ney who adequately accounts for meal and
entertainment expenses to a client who reim-
burses you for these expenses. You are not
subject to the directly-related or associated
test, nor are you subject to the 50% limit. If
the client can deduct the expenses, the client
is subject to the 50% limit.
If you (the contractor) have expenses for
meals and entertainment related to providing
services for a client but do not adequately
account for and seek reimbursement from the
client for those expenses, you are subject to
the directly-related or associated test and to
the 50% limit.
3 – Advertising expenses. You are not
subject to the 50% limit if you provide meals,
entertainment, or recreational facilities to the
general public as a means of advertising or
promoting goodwill in the community. For ex-
ample, the expense of sponsoring a television
or radio show is deductible, as is the expense
of distributing free food and beverages to the
general public.
4 – Sale of meals or entertainment.You
are not subject to the 50% limit if you actually
sell meals, entertainment, goods and ser-
vices, or use of facilities to the public. For
example, if you run a nightclub, your expense
for the entertainment you furnish to your
customers, such as a floor show, is a busi-
ness expense.
5 – Charitable sports event.You are not
subject to the 50% limit if you pay for a
package deal that includes a ticket to a qual-
ified charitable sports event. For the condi-
tions the sports event must meet, see Ex-
ception for events that benefit charitable
organizations under Entertainment tickets,
earlier.
Individuals subject to “hours of service”
limits. You can deduct a higher percentage
of your meal expenses if the meals take place
during or incident to any period subject to the
Department of Transportation's “hours of
service” limits. The percentage is 60% for
2000, and it gradually increases to 80% by
the year 2008.
Individuals subject to the Department of
Transportation's “hours of service” limits in-
clude the following persons.
1) Certain air transportation workers (such
as pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics,
and control tower operators) who are
under Federal Aviation Administration
regulations.
2) Interstate truck operators and bus driv-
ers who are under Department of
Transportation regulations.
3) Certain railroad employees (such as en-
gineers, conductors, train crews, dis-
patchers, and control operations per-
sonnel) who are under Federal Railroad
Administration regulations.
4) Certain merchant mariners who are un-
der Coast Guard regulations.
3.
Business Gift
Expenses
If you give business gifts in the course of
your trade or business, you can deduct all or
part of the cost. This chapter explains the
limits and rules for deducting business gifts.
$25 limit on business gifts. You can deduct
no more than $25 for business gifts you give
directly or indirectly to any one person during
your tax year. A gift to a company that is in-
tended for the eventual personal use or ben-
efit of a particular person or a limited class
of people will be considered an indirect gift to
that particular person or to the individuals
within that class of people who receive the
gift.
If you give a gift to a member of a cus-
tomer's family, the gift is generally considered
to be an indirect gift to the customer. This rule
does not apply if you have a bona fide, inde-
pendent business connection with that family
member and the gift is not intended for the
customer's eventual use. 
If you and your spouse both give gifts,
both of you are treated as one taxpayer. It
does not matter whether you have separate
businesses, are separately employed, or
whether each of you has an independent
connection with the recipient. If a partnership
gives gifts, the partnership and the partners
are treated as one taxpayer.
Example. Bob Jones sells products to
Local Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave
Local Company three cheese packages to
thank them for their business. They paid $80
for each package, or $240 total. Three of Lo-
cal Company's executives took the packages
home for their families' use. Bob and Jan
have no independent business relationship
with any of the executives' other family
members. They can deduct a total of $75 ($25
limit × 3) for the cheese packages.
Incidental costs.Incidental costs, such as
engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,
and mailing, are generally not included in
determining the cost of a gift for purposes of
the $25 limit.
A related cost is incidental only if it does
not add substantial value to the gift. For ex-
ample, the cost of gift wrapping is an inci-
dental cost. However, the purchase of an or-
namental basket for packaging fruit is not an
incidental cost if the value of the basket is
substantial compared to the value of the fruit.
Exceptions. The following items are not
considered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit.
1) An item that costs $4 or less and:
a) Has your name clearly and perma-
nently imprinted on the gift, and
Page 12 Chapter 3  Business Gift Expenses

b) Is one of a number of identical items
you widely distribute.
Examples include pens, desk sets,
and plastic bags and cases.
2) Signs, display racks, or other promo-
tional material to be used on the busi-
ness premises of the recipient.
Gift or entertainment.Any item that might
be considered either a gift or an enter-
tainment expense generally will be consid-
ered an entertainment expense. However, if
you give a customer packaged food or
beverages that you intend the customer to
use at a later date, treat it as a gift expense.
If you give a customer tickets to a theater
performance or sporting event and you do not
go with the customer to the performance or
event, you have a choice. You can treat the
cost of the tickets as either a gift expense or
an entertainment expense, whichever is to
your advantage.
You can change your treatment of the
tickets at a later date, but not after the time
allowed for the assessment of income tax. In
most instances, this assessment period ends
3 years after the due date of your income tax
return.
If you go with the customer to the event,
you must treat the cost of the tickets as an
entertainment expense. You cannot choose,
in this case, to treat the cost of the tickets as
a gift expense.
4.
Local
Transportation
Expenses
This chapter discusses expenses you can
deduct for local business transportation. This
includes the cost of transportation by air, rail,
bus, taxi, etc., and the cost of driving and
maintaining your car.
Local transportation expenses include the
ordinary and necessary costs of all of the
following.
 Getting from one workplace to another in
the course of your business or profession
when you are traveling within the city or
general area that is your tax home. Tax
home is defined in chapter 1.
 Visiting clients or customers.
 Going to a business meeting away from
your regular workplace.
 Getting from your home to a temporary
workplace when you have one or more
regular places of work. These temporary
workplaces can be either within the area
of your tax home or outside that area.
Local business transportation does not in-
clude expenses you have while traveling
away from home overnight. Those expenses
are deductible as travel expenses which are
discussed in chapter 1. However, if you use
your car while traveling away from home
overnight, use the rules in this chapter to fig-
Figure B. When Are Local Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have aregular or main job
at another location
Always deductible
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home. )
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
ure your car expense deduction. See Car
Expenses, later.
Illustration of local transportation.Figure
B illustrates the rules for when you can deduct
local transportation expenses when you have
a regular or main job away from your home.
You may want to refer to it when deciding
whether you can deduct your local business
transportation expenses.
Temporary work location. If you have one
or more regular places of business away from
your home and you commute to a temporary
work location in the same trade or business,
you can deduct the expenses of the daily
round-trip transportation between your home
and the temporary location.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less, the employment is
temporary unless there are facts and circum-
stances that would indicate otherwise. If your
employment at a work location is realistically
expected to last for more than 1 year or if
there is no realistic expectation that the em-
ployment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
but at some later date the employment is re-
alistically expected to last more than 1 year,
that employment will be treated as temporary
(unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise) until your ex-
pectation changes. It will not be treated as
temporary after the date you determine it will
last more than 1 year.
CAUTION
!
Temporary employment was formerly
defined as employment on an irreg-
ular or short-term basis (generally a
matter of days or weeks).
TIP
You can file an amended return on
Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individ-
ual Income Tax Return, for any year
that is affected by this change. However, you
generally must file the amended return within
three years from the time you filed the original
return or within two years from the time you
paid the tax, whichever is later.
Chapter 4 Local Transportation Expenses Page 13

If the temporary work location is beyond
the general area of your regular place of work
and you stay overnight, you are traveling
away from home. You may have deductible
travel expenses as discussed in chapter 1.
No regular place of work.If you have no
regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
metropolitan area where you live, you can
deduct daily transportation costs between
home and a temporary work site outside that
metropolitan area. Generally, a metropolitan
area includes the area within the city limits
and the suburbs that are considered part of
that metropolitan area. You cannot deduct
daily transportation costs between your home
and temporary work sites within your metro-
politan area. These are nondeductible com-
muting costs.
Two places of work. If you work at two
places in one day, whether or not for the
same employer, you can deduct the expense
of getting from one workplace to the other.
However, if for some personal reason you do
not go directly from one location to the other,
you cannot deduct more than the amount it
would have cost you to go directly from the
first location to the second. Transportation
expenses you have in going between home
and a part-time job on a day off from your
main job are commuting expenses. You can-
not deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of an
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place
of business if the meeting is held on a day
on which you work at your regular job. You
can deduct the expense of getting from one
workplace to the other as just discussed un-
der Two places of work.
You usually cannot deduct the expense if
the reserve meeting is held on a day on which
you do not work at your regular job. In this
case, your transportation generally is a non-
deductible commuting cost. However, you
can deduct your transportation expenses if
the location of the meeting is temporary and
you have one or more regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular met-
ropolitan area but not at any specific location
and the reserve meeting is held at a tempo-
rary location outside that metropolitan area,
you can deduct your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to
attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can
deduct your travel expenses. These ex-
penses are discussed in chapter 1.
Commuting expenses.  You cannot deduct
the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or
taxi, or of driving a car between your home
and your main or regular place of work. These
costs are personal commuting expenses. You
cannot deduct commuting expenses no mat-
ter how far your home is from your regular
place of work. You cannot deduct commuting
expenses even if you work during the com-
muting trip.
Example. You had a telephone installed
in your car. You sometimes use that tele-
phone to make business calls while commut-
ing to and from work. Sometimes business
associates ride with you to and from work,
and you have a business discussion in the
car. These activities do not change the trip
from personal to business. You cannot deduct
your commuting expenses.
Parking fees.Fees you pay to park your
car at your place of business are nondeduct-
ible commuting expenses. You can, however,
deduct business-related parking fees when
visiting a customer or client.
Advertising display on car. Putting dis-
play material that advertises your business
on your car does not change the use of your
car from personal use to business use. If you
use this car for commuting or other personal
uses, you still cannot deduct your expenses
for those uses.
Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost
of using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do
not include payments you receive from the
passengers in your income. These payments
are considered reimbursements of your ex-
penses. However, if you operate a car pool
for a profit, you must include payments from
passengers in your income. You can then
deduct your car expenses (using the rules in
this publication).
Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling
tools or instruments in your car while com-
muting to and from work does not make your
car expenses deductible. However, you can
deduct any additional costs you have for
hauling tools or instruments (such as for
renting a trailer you tow with your car).
Union members' trips from a union hall.
If you get your work assignments at a union
hall and then go to your place of work, the
costs of getting from the union hall to your
place of work are nondeductible commuting
expenses. Although you need the union to get
your work assignments, you are employed
where you work, not where the union hall is
located.
Office in the home. If you have an office in
your home that qualifies as a principal place
of business, you can deduct your daily
transportation costs between your home and
another work location in the same trade or
business. (See Publication 587, Business
Use of Your Home, for information on deter-
mining if your home office qualifies as a prin-
cipal place of business.)
If your home office does not qualify as a
principal place of business, follow the general
rules explained earlier in this chapter. Also,
see Example 1 and Example 3, next.
Examples of deductible local transporta-
tion.The following examples show when you
can deduct local transportation expenses
based on the location of your work and your
home.
Example 1. You regularly work in an of-
fice in the city where you live. Your employer
sends you to a one-week training session at
a different office in the same city. You travel
directly from your home to the training lo-
cation and return each day. You can deduct
the cost of your daily round-trip transportation
between your home and the training location.
Example 2. Your principal place of busi-
ness is in your home. You can deduct the cost
of round-trip transportation between your
qualifying home office and your client's or
customer's place of business.
Example 3. You have no regular office,
and you do not have an office in your home.
In this case, the location of your first business
contact is considered your office. Transpor-
tation expenses between your home and this
first contact are nondeductible commuting
expenses. Transportation expenses between
your last business contact and your home are
also nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-
though you cannot deduct the costs of these
trips, you can deduct the costs of going from
one client or customer to another.
Car Expenses
If you use your car for business purposes, you
may be able to deduct car expenses. You
generally can use one of two methods to fig-
ure your expenses: actual expenses or the
standard mileage rate. In this publication,
“car” includes a van, pickup, or panel truck.
For the definition of “car” for depreciation
purposes, see Car defined, under Actual Car
Expenses, later.
TIP
You may be entitled to a tax credit for
an electric vehicle or a deduction from
gross income for a part of the cost of
a clean-fuel vehicle that you place in service
during the year. The vehicle must meet cer-
tain requirements, and you do not have to use
it in your business to qualify for the credit or
the deduction. However, you must reduce
your basis for depreciation of the electric ve-
hicle or clean-fuel vehicle property by the
amount of the credit or deduction you claim.
See Depreciation Deduction, later, under Ac-
tual Car Expenses. For more information on
electric or clean-fuel vehicles, see chapter 12
of Publication 535.
Rural mail carriers.If you are a rural mail
carrier, you may be able to treat the amount
of qualified reimbursement you received as
the amount of your allowable expense. Be-
cause the qualified reimbursement is treated
as paid under an accountable plan, your em-
ployer should not include the amount of re-
imbursement in your income. And, since the
reimbursement equals the expense, you have
no deduction to report on your tax return.
A “qualified reimbursement” is the amount
of reimbursement you receive that meets both
of the following conditions.
1) It is given as an equipment maintenance
allowance (EMA) to employees of the
U.S. Postal Service.
2) It is at the rate contained in the 1991
collective bargaining agreement. Any
later agreement cannot increase the
qualified reimbursement amount by more
than the rate of inflation.
See your employer for information on your
reimbursement.
CAUTION
!
If you are a rural mail carrier and re-
ceived a qualified reimbursement, you
cannot use the standard mileage rate.
Standard Mileage Rate
You may be able to use the standard mileage
rate to figure the deductible costs of operating
your car for business purposes. For 2000, the
standard mileage rate is 32
1/2 cents a mile for
all business miles. This rate is adjusted peri-
odically.
CAUTION
!
If you use the standard mileage rate
for a year, you cannot deduct your
actual car expenses for that year.
These expenses include depreciation or lease
payments, maintenance and repairs, gasoline
(including gasoline taxes), oil, insurance, and
vehicle registration fees. See Choosing the
Page 14 Chapter 4  Local Transportation Expenses

standard mileage rate and Standard mileage
rate not allowed, later.
You generally can use the standard mile-
age rate whether or not you are reimbursed
and whether or not any reimbursement is
more or less than the amount figured using
the standard mileage rate. See chapter 6 for
more information on reimbursements.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.If you
want to use the standard mileage rate for a
car you own, you must choose to use it in the
first year the car is available for use in your
business. Then in later years, you can choose
to use either the standard mileage rate or
actual expenses.
If you want to use the standard mileage
rate for a car you lease, you must use it for
the entire lease period. For leases that began
on or before December 31, 1997, the stand-
ard mileage rate must be used for the entire
portion of the lease period (including re-
newals) that is after that date.
If you choose to use the standard mileage
rate, you are considered to have chosen not
to use the depreciation methods discussed
later. This is because the standard mileage
rate includes an allowance for depreciation
that is not expressed in terms of years. If you
change to the actual expenses method in a
later year, but before your car is fully depre-
ciated, you have to estimate the remaining
useful life of the car and use straight line de-
preciation. For more information about de-
preciation included in the standard mileage
rate, see Exception under Methods of depre-
ciation under Depreciation Deduction, later.
Standard mileage rate not allowed.You
cannot use the standard mileage rate if you:
1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
2) Operate two or more cars at the same
time (as in fleet operations),
3) Claimed a depreciation deduction using
ACRS or MACRS (discussed later) in an
earlier year,
4) Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis-
cussed later) on the car,
5) Claimed actual car expenses after 1997
for a car you leased, or
6) Are a rural mail carrier who received a
qualified reimbursement. (See Rural
mail carriers, earlier.)
Two or more cars. If you own two or
more cars that are used for business at the
same time, you cannot use the standard
mileage rate for the business use of any car.
However, you may be able to deduct your
actual expenses for operating each of the
cars in your business. See Actual Car Ex-
penses for information on how to figure your
deduction.
You are not using two or more cars for
business at the same time if you alternate
using (use at different times) the cars for
business.
The following examples illustrate the rules
for when you can and cannot use the stand-
ard mileage rate for two or more cars.
Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns
a car and a van that she alternates using for
calling on her customers. She can use the
standard mileage rate for the business mile-
age of the car and the van.
Example 2. Tony uses his own pickup
truck in his landscaping business. During the
year, he traded in his old truck for a newer
one. Tony can use the standard mileage rate
for the business mileage of both the old and
the new trucks.
Example 3. Chris owns a repair shop and
an insurance business. He uses his pickup
truck for the repair shop and his car for the
insurance business. No one else uses either
the truck or the car for business purposes.
Chris can use the standard mileage rate for
the business use of the truck and the car.
Example 4. Maureen owns a car and a
van that are both used in her housecleaning
business. Her employees use the van and
she uses the car to travel to the various cus-
tomers. Maureen cannot use the standard
mileage rate for the car or the van. This is
because both vehicles are used in Maureen's
business at the same time. She must use
actual expenses for both vehicles.
Interest.If you are an employee, you cannot
deduct any interest paid on a car loan. This
applies even if you use the car 100% for
business as an employee.
However, if you are self-employed and
use your car in your business, you can deduct
that part of the interest expense that repre-
sents your business use of the car. For ex-
ample, if you use your car 60% for business,
you can deduct 60% of the interest on
Schedule C (Form 1040). You cannot deduct
the rest of the interest expense.
TIP
If you use a home equity loan to pur-
chase your car, you may be able to
deduct the interest. See Publication
936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, for
more information.
Personal property taxes.If you itemize your
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you
can deduct on line 7 state and local personal
property taxes on motor vehicles. You can
take this deduction even if you use the
standard mileage rate or if you do not use the
car for business.
If you are self-employed and use your car
in your business, you can deduct the busi-
ness part of state and local personal property
taxes on motor vehicles on Schedule C,
Schedule C–EZ, or Schedule F (Form 1040).
If you itemize your deductions, you can in-
clude the remainder of your state and local
personal property taxes on the car on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct
any business-related parking fees and tolls.
(Parking fees that you pay to park your car
at your place of work are nondeductible
commuting expenses.)
Sale, trade-in, or other disposition.If you
sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car,
you may have a gain or loss on the trans-
action or an adjustment to the basis of your
new car. See Disposition of a Car, later.
Actual Car Expenses
If you do not choose to use the standard
mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your
actual car expenses.
TIP
If you qualify to use both methods,
before choosing a method, you may
want to figure your deduction both
ways to see which gives you a larger de-
duction.
Actual car expenses include the costs of:
If you have fully depreciated a car that you
still use in your business, you can continue
to claim your other actual car expenses.
Continue to keep records, as explained later
in chapter 5.
Business and personal use. If you use your
car for both business and personal purposes,
you must divide your expenses between
business and personal use. You can divide
based on the miles driven for each purpose.
Example. You are a sales representative
for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000
miles during the year: 12,000 miles for busi-
ness and 8,000 miles for personal use. You
can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the
cost of operating your car as a business ex-
pense.
Employer-provided vehicle.If you use a
vehicle provided by your employer for busi-
ness purposes, you can deduct your actual
unreimbursed car expenses. You cannot use
the standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Pro-
vided by Your Employer in chapter 6.
Interest on car loans.If you are an em-
ployee, you cannot deduct any interest paid
on a car loan. This interest is treated as per-
sonal interest and is not deductible. If you are
self-employed and use your car in that busi-
ness, see Interest, earlier, under Standard
Mileage Rate.
Taxes paid on your car.If you are an em-
ployee, you can deduct personal property
taxes paid on your car if you itemize de-
ductions. Enter the amount paid on line 7 of
Schedule A (Form 1040).
You cannot deduct luxury or sales taxes,
even if you use your car 100% for business.
Luxury and sales taxes are part of your car's
basis and may be recovered through depre-
ciation. See Depreciation Deduction, later.
Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct
fines and collateral you pay for traffic vio-
lations.
Casualty and theft losses.If your car is
damaged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be
able to deduct part of the loss that is not
covered by insurance. See Publication 547,
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts (Business
and Nonbusiness), for information on de-
ducting a loss on your car.
Depreciation and section 179 deductions.
Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax,
luxury tax, and improvements, is a capital
expense. Because the benefits last longer
than one year, you generally cannot deduct
a capital expense. However, you can recover
this cost by claiming a section 179 deduction
(the deduction allowed by section 179 of the
Internal Revenue Code) and/or a depreciation
deduction. By using depreciation, you recover
the cost over more than one year by deduct-
Depreciation Lease
payments
Registration
fees
Licenses Insurance Repairs
Gas Oil Tires
Garage rent Parking fees Tolls
Chapter 4 Local Transportation Expenses Page 15

ing part of it each year. The section 179 de-
duction and the depreciation deduction are
discussed later.
Generally, there are limits on both of these
deductions. Special rules apply if you use
your car 50% or less in your work or business.
You can claim a section 179 deduction
and use a depreciation method other than
straight line only if you do not use the stand-
ard mileage rate to figure your business-
related car expenses in the year you first
place a car in service. If you claim either a
section 179 deduction or depreciation using
a method other than straight line for its esti-
mated useful life in the year you first place a
car in service, you cannot use the standard
mileage rate on that car in any future year.
Car defined. For depreciation purposes,
a car is any four-wheeled vehicle (including
a truck or van) that is made primarily for use
on public streets, roads, and highways. Its
unloaded gross vehicle weight (gross vehicle
weight in the case of a truck or van) must not
be more than 6,000 pounds. A car includes
any part, component, or other item that is
physically attached to it or is usually included
in the purchase price.
A car does not include:
1) An ambulance, hearse, or combination
ambulance-hearse used directly in a
business, or
2) A vehicle used directly in the business
of transporting persons or property for
pay or hire.
See Publication 946 for more information
on how to depreciate your vehicle.
Section 179 Deduction
The section 179 deduction allows you to
choose to treat part or all of the business cost
of a car as a current expense rather than
taking depreciation deductions over a speci-
fied recovery period.
TIP
Even though you may be able to claim
a section 179 deduction, the limit on
total section 179 and depreciation
deductions (discussed later) may reduce or
eliminate any benefit from claiming it.
You can claim the section 179 deduction
only in the year you place the car in service.
For this purpose, a car is placed in service
when it is ready and available for a specific
use, whether in trade or business, the pro-
duction of income, a tax-exempt activity, or a
personal activity. Even if you are not using the
property, it is in service when it is ready and
available for its specific use. A car first used
for personal purposes cannot qualify for the
deduction in a later year when its use
changes to business.
Example. In 1999 you bought a new car
and placed it in service for personal purposes.
This year, you began to use it for business.
Changing its use to business use does not
qualify the cost of your car for a section 179
deduction this year. However, you can claim
a depreciation deduction for the business use
of the car. See Depreciation Deduction, later.
Limits. There are limits on:
1) The total cost of property qualifying for
a section 179 deduction, and
2) The total amount of the section 179 de-
duction plus the depreciation deduction
(discussed later).
Limit on cost of qualifying property.
Generally, you can choose to treat up to
$20,000 of the cost of qualifying property as
a section 179 deduction in 2000. (The
amount increases each year up to 2003.) The
yearly limit, however, depends on the per-
centage of business use, and you must use
the property more than 50% for business to
claim any section 179 deduction.
Example. Peter purchased a car this year
for $14,500 and he used it 60% for business.
The total cost of Peter's car that qualifies for
the section 179 deduction is $8,700 ($14,500
cost × 60% business use). But see Limit on
total section 179 and depreciation deductions,
discussed next.
Limit on total section 179 and depreci-
ation deductions. Generally, the total
amount of section 179 and depreciation de-
ductions that you can claim for a car that you
place in service in 2000 cannot be more than
$3,060. The limit is reduced if your business
use of the car is less than 100%. See De-
preciation Limits, later, for more information.
Example. Peter, in the previous example,
had a car with a qualifying cost of $8,700 for
his section 179 deduction. However, Peter is
limited to a total section 179 deduction plus
depreciation deduction of $1,836 ($3,060 limit
× 60% business use).
Cost of car.For purposes of the section 179
deduction, the cost of the car does not include
any amount figured by reference to any other
property held by you at any time. For exam-
ple, if you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new
car to use in your business, your cost for
purposes of the section 179 deduction does
not include your adjusted basis in the car you
trade in for the new car.
Basis of car. The amount of the section
179 deduction reduces your basis in your car.
If you choose the section 179 deduction, you
must reduce your basis in your car before you
figure your depreciation deduction.
Choosing a section 179 deduction can
give you a larger total deduction (depreciation
plus section 179 deduction) in the first year.
Not choosing it can give you a larger depre-
ciation deduction in later years.
Example. On January 2, 2000, Stella
bought a car for $12,000, including sales tax,
to use exclusively in her delivery business.
She paid $9,000 cash and received $3,000 in
trade for her old car (also used in her busi-
ness). Her adjusted basis in her old car was
$3,000.
Only the $9,000 cash Stella paid qualifies
for the section 179 deduction. If she does not
choose section 179, her basis for depreciation
is $12,000. The total of her section 179 and
depreciation deductions is limited to $3,060,
the first year maximum. If she does not
choose section 179, her depreciation de-
duction, using the MACRS method (dis-
cussed later), is $2,400 [$12,000 basis × 20%
(double declining balance rate)] from Table
3, explained later.
When to choose. If you want to take the
section 179 deduction, you must make the
choice in the tax year you both purchase the
car and place it in service for business or
work. Employees use Form 2106 to make this
choice and report the section 179 deduction.
All others use Form 4562. Make your choice
by taking the deduction on the appropriate
form and file it with your original tax return. If
you timely filed your return for the year with-
out making the election, you can still make the
election by filing an amended return within six
months of the due date of the return (ex-
cluding extensions). You cannot make the
choice on an amended tax return filed after
the due date of your return (including ex-
tensions). If you make the election on an
amended return, attach the appropriate
election form (2106 or 4562) to it and write
“Filed pursuant to section 301.9100–2” on the
election statement. File the amended return
at the same address you filed the original re-
turn. Once made, the choice can be changed
only with the consent of the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS).
Reduction in business use. To be eligible
to claim the section 179 deduction, you must
use your car more than 50% for business or
work in the year you acquired it. If your busi-
ness use of the car is 50% or less in a later
tax year during the recovery period, you have
to include in income in that later year any
excess depreciation. Any section 179 de-
duction claimed on the car is included in cal-
culating the excess depreciation. For infor-
mation on this calculation, see Excess
depreciation later in this chapter under Car
Used 50% or Less for Business.
Dispositions. If you dispose of a car on
which you had claimed the section 179 de-
duction, the amount of that deduction is
treated as a depreciation deduction for re-
capture purposes. You treat any gain on the
disposition of the property as ordinary income
up to the amount of the section 179 deduction
and any depreciation you claimed. For infor-
mation on the disposition of depreciable
property, see chapter 3 of Publication 544,
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets.
Depreciation Deduction
If you use a car you own in your business,
you can claim a depreciation deduction: that
is, you can deduct a certain amount each year
as a recovery of your cost or other basis in
the car. You cannot use the standard mileage
rate if you decide to take a depreciation de-
duction in the year you first place the car in
service.
You generally need to know the following
three things about the car you intend to de-
preciate.
1) Your basis in the car.
2) The date you place the car in service.
3) The method of depreciation, recovery
period, and convention you will use.
Basis. Your basis in the car for figuring de-
preciation is generally its cost. This includes
any amount you borrow or pay in cash, in
other property, or in services. Additional rules
concerning basis are discussed later in this
chapter under Unadjusted basis.
Placed in service.You generally place a car
in service when it is available for use in your
work or business, in the production of income,
or in a personal activity. Depreciation begins
when the car is ready for use in your work or
business or for the production of income.
For purposes of computing depreciation,
if you first start using the car only for personal
use and later convert it to business use, you
place the car in service on the date of con-
Page 16 Chapter 4  Local Transportation Expenses

version. Your basis is the lesser of the fair
market value or your adjusted basis in the car
on the date of conversion.
Car placed in service and disposed of
in the same year.If you place a car in ser-
vice and dispose of it in the same tax year,
you cannot claim any depreciation deduction
for that car.
Methods of depreciation.Generally, one
depreciation system is available for cars: the
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System
(MACRS). MACRS rules for cars are dis-
cussed later in this chapter.
Exception. If you used the standard
mileage rate in the first year of business use
and change to the actual expenses method
in a later year, you cannot depreciate your car
under the MACRS rules. You must use
straight line depreciation over the estimated
remaining useful life of the car.
To figure depreciation under the straight
line method, you must reduce your basis in
the car (but not below zero) by a set rate per
mile for all miles for which you used the
standard mileage rate. The rate per mile
varies depending on the year(s) you used the
standard mileage rate. For the rate(s) to use,
see Depreciation adjustment when you used
the standard mileage rate under Disposition
of a Car, later.
This reduction of basis is in addition to
those basis adjustments described later un-
der Unadjusted basis. You must use your
adjusted basis in your car to figure your de-
preciation deduction. For additional informa-
tion on the straight line method of depreci-
ation, see Publication 534, Depreciating
Property Placed in Service Before 1987.
Percentage of business use. Generally, you
must use your car more than 50% for qualified
business use (defined next) to qualify for the
section 179 deduction and MACRS de-
duction. If your business use is 50% or less,
you must use the straight line method to de-
preciate your car. This is explained later un-
der Car Used 50% or Less for Business. 
Qualified business use.A qualified busi-
ness use is any use in your trade or business.
It does not include use for the production of
income (investment use). However, you do
combine your business and investment use
to compute your depreciation deduction for
the tax year.
Use of your car by another person.Do
not treat any use of your car by another per-
son as use in your trade or business unless
that use meets one of the following three
conditions.
1) It is directly connected with your busi-
ness.
2) It is properly reported by you as income
to the other person (and, if you have to,
you withhold tax on the income).
3) It results in a payment of fair market rent.
This includes any payment to you for the
use of your car.
Business use changes. If you used your
car more than 50% in qualified business use
in the year you placed it in service, but 50%
or less in a later year (including the year of
disposition), you have to change to the
straight line method of depreciation. See
Business use drops to 50% or less in a later
year under Car Used 50% or Less for Busi-
ness, later.
More-than-50%-use test.You meet this test
for any tax year if you use your car more than
50% in qualified business use. You must
meet this test each year of the recovery pe-
riod (6 years under MACRS) for your car.
If you use your car for more than one
purpose during the tax year, you must allo-
cate the use to the various purposes. You
do this on the basis of mileage. Figure the
percentage of qualified business use by di-
viding the number of miles you drive your car
for business purposes during the year by the
total number of miles you drive the car during
the year for any purpose.
TIP
Property does not cease to be used
more than 50% in qualified business
use by reason of a transfer at death.
Change from personal to business use. If
you change the use of a car from 100% per-
sonal use to business use during the tax year,
you may not have mileage records for the
time before the change to business use. In
this case, you figure the percentage of busi-
ness use for the year as follows.
1) Determine the percentage of business
use for the period following the change.
Do this by dividing business miles by
total miles driven during that period.
2) Multiply the percentage in (1) by a frac-
tion. The numerator (top number) is the
number of months the car is used for
business and the denominator (bottom
number) is 12.
Example. You use a car only for personal
purposes during the first 6 months of the year.
During the last 6 months of the year, you drive
the car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000
miles are for business. This gives you a
business use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷
15,000) for that period. Your business use for
the year is 40% (80% × 
6/12).
Limits. The amount you can claim for section
179 and depreciation deductions may be lim-
ited. Maximum limits apply depending on the
year in which you placed your car in service.
You have to adjust the limits if you did not use
the car exclusively for business. See Depre-
ciation Limits, later
Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted
basis to figure your depreciation using the
MACRS depreciation chart explained later
under Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
System (MACRS). Your unadjusted basis for
figuring depreciation is your original basis in-
creased or decreased by certain amounts.
To figure your unadjusted basis, begin
with your original basis in your car, which
generally is its cost. Cost includes sales and
luxury taxes, destination charges, and dealer
preparation. Increase your basis by any sub-
stantial improvements you make to your car,
such as adding air conditioning or a new en-
gine. Decrease your basis by any deductible
casualty loss, section 179 deduction, diesel
fuel tax credit, gas guzzler tax, clean-fuel ve-
hicle deduction, and qualified electric vehicle
credit. See Publication 535 for more informa-
tion on the clean-fuel vehicle deduction, and
the qualified electric vehicle credit.
CAUTION
!
If your business use later falls to 50%
or less, you may have to include in
your income any excess depreciation.
See Car Used 50% or Less for Business,
later, for more information.
If you acquired the car by gift or inher-
itance, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets,
for information on your basis in the car.
Improvements. A major improvement to
a car is treated as a new item of 5-year re-
covery property. It is treated as placed in
service in the year the improvement is made.
It does not matter how old the car is when the
improvement is added. Follow the same steps
for depreciating the improvement as you
would for depreciating the original cost of the
car. However, you must treat the improve-
ment and the car as a whole when applying
the limits on the depreciation deductions.
Your car's depreciation deduction for the year
(plus the depreciation on any improvements)
cannot be more than the depreciation limit
that applies for that year. See Depreciation
Limits, later.
Effect of trade-in on basis.When you
trade an old car for a new one, your original
basis in the new car is generally your adjusted
basis in the old car plus any additional pay-
ment you make.
Traded car used only for business.If
you trade in a car that you used only in your
business for another car that will be used only
in your business, your original basis in the
new car is your adjusted basis in the old car,
plus any additional amount you pay for the
new car.
Example 1. Paul trades in a car that has
an adjusted basis of $3,000 for a new car. In
addition, he pays cash of $7,000 for the new
car. His original basis of the new car is
$10,000 (his $3,000 adjusted basis in the old
car plus the $7,000 cash paid). Paul's unad-
justed basis would be the same unless he
claims the section 179 deduction or has other
increases or decreases to his original basis.
Example 2. In July 1997, Marcia pur-
chased a car for $26,000 and placed it in
service for 100% use in her business. She
did not claim a section 179 deduction.
Marcia's unadjusted basis for the car was
$26,000. For 1997 through 1999, Marcia fig-
ured her depreciation deduction using the
MACRS chart for those years.
In September 2000, Marcia traded that car
in and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be
used 100% in her business. Marcia is allowed
one-half of the regular depreciation amount
for 2000 for her old car. (See Disposition of
a Car, later.)
Marcia figures her original basis in the
new car, $27,792, as follows.
Traded car used partly in business.If
you trade in a car that you used partly in your
business for a new car that you will use in
your business, you must make a “trade-in”
adjustment for the personal use of the old car.
This adjustment has the effect of reducing
your basis in your old car, but not below zero,
for purposes of figuring your depreciation de-
duction for the new car. (This adjustment is
not used, however, when you determine the
gain or loss on the later disposition of the new
car. See Publication 544 for information on
how to report the disposition of your car.)
Cost of old car $26,000
Less: Total depreciation allowed
from 1997 through 2000 − 12,408
Adjusted basis of old car $13,592
Plus: Additional cost for
new car + 14,200
Basis of new car $27,792
Chapter 4 Local Transportation Expenses Page 17

To figure the unadjusted basis of your new
car for depreciation, first add to your adjusted
basis in the old car any additional amount you
pay for the new car. Then subtract from that
total the excess, if any, of:
1) The total of the amounts that would have
been allowable as depreciation during
the tax years before the trade if 100%
of the use of the car had been business
and investment use, over
2) The total of the amounts actually allow-
able as depreciation during those years.
For information about figuring depreciation,
see Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
System (MACRS) , which follows Example 2,
later.
Example 1. In March, Mark traded his
1996 van (placed in service in 1996) for a new
2000 model. He used the old van 75% for
business and he used the new van 75% for
business in 2000. Mark claimed actual ex-
penses (including $8,494 depreciation ex-
pense) for the business use of the old van
since 1996. He did not claim a section 179
deduction for the old or the new van.
Mark paid $12,800 for the 1996 van in
June 1996. He paid an additional $9,800
when he acquired the 2000 van. Mark was
allowed
1 / 2 of the depreciation deduction
amount (which is included in the $8,494 de-
preciation expense total) for his old van for
2000, the year of disposition, as explained
later under Disposition of a Car. 
Mark figures the unadjusted basis for de-
preciating his new van as shown next.
Example 2. Rob paid $15,000 for a new
car that he placed in service in 1997. He used
it partly for business in 1997 (9,000 business
miles of 15,000 total miles), 1998 (12,000
business miles of 16,000 total miles), and
1999 (14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He
used the standard mileage rate in those years
to claim the business use of his car. (See
Depreciation adjustment when you used the
standard mileage rate under Disposition of a
Car, later.)
On January 2, 2000, Rob traded in this car
and paid an additional $6,000 for his new car.
Rob figures the unadjusted basis for his new
car as shown next.
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-
tem (MACRS).  The Modified Accelerated
Cost Recovery System (MACRS) is the name
given to the tax rules for getting back (recov-
ering) through depreciation deductions the
cost of property used in a trade or business
or to produce income.
The maximum amount you can deduct is
limited, depending on the year you placed
your car in service. See Depreciation Limits,
later.
Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars
are classified as 5-year property. You actually
depreciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over
a period of 6 calendar years. This is because
your car is generally treated as placed in
service in the middle of the year and you
claim depreciation for one-half of both the first
year and the sixth year.
Depreciation deduction for certain In-
dian reservation property.Shorter recovery
periods are provided under MACRS for qual-
ified Indian reservation property placed in
service on Indian reservations after 1993 and
before 2004. The recovery period that applies
for a business-use car is 3 years instead of
5 years. However, the depreciation limits,
discussed later, will still apply.
For more information on the qualifications
for this shorter recovery period and the per-
centages to use in figuring the depreciation
deduction, see chapter 3 of Publication 946.
Depreciation methods.You can use one
of the following three methods to depreciate
your car.
1) The 200% declining balance method
(200% DB) over a 5-year recovery period
that switches to the straight line method
when that method provides a greater
deduction.
2) The 150% declining balance method
(150% DB) over a 5-year recovery period
that switches to the straight line method
when that method provides a greater
deduction.
3) The straight line method (SL) over a
5-year recovery period.
TIP
If you use Table 3 (discussed later
under MACRS depreciation chart) to
determine your depreciation rate for
2000, you do not need to determine in what
year your deduction is greater using the
straight line method. This is because the chart
has the switch to the straight line method built
into its rates.
Cost of old car $15,000 Before choosing a method, you may wish
to consider the following facts.
1) Using the straight line method provides
equal yearly deductions throughout the
recovery period.
2) Using the declining balance methods
provides greater deductions during the
earlier recovery years with the de-
ductions generally getting smaller each
year.
MACRS depreciation chart. A 2000 MACRS
Depreciation Chart and instructions are in-
cluded in this chapter as Table 3. Using this
table will make it easy for you to figure the
2000 depreciation deduction for your car. A
similar chart appears in the Instructions for
Form 2106. 
CAUTION
!
You may have to use the tables in
Publication 946 instead of using this
MACRS Depreciation Chart.
You must use the Depreciation Tables in
Publication 946 rather than the 2000 MACRS
Depreciation Chart in this publication if any
one of the following three conditions applies
to you.
1) You file your return on a fiscal year ba-
sis.
2) You file your return for a short tax year
(less than 12 months).
3) During the year, all of the following con-
ditions apply to you.
a) You placed some property in ser-
vice from January through Septem-
ber.
b) You placed some property in ser-
vice from October through Decem-
ber.
c) Your basis in the property you
placed in service from October
through December was more than
40% of your total bases in all prop-
erty you placed in service during the
year.
Depreciation in future years.If you use
the percentages from the chart, you must
continue to use them for the entire recovery
period of your car. However, you cannot
continue to use the chart if your basis in your
car is adjusted because of a casualty. In that
case, for the year of adjustment and the re-
maining recovery period, figure the depreci-
ation without the chart using your adjusted
basis in the car at the end of the year of ad-
justment and over the remaining recovery
period. See How To Figure the Deduction
Without Using the Tables in chapter 3 of
Publication 946.
TIP
In future years, do not use the chart
from this publication. Instead, use the
chart in the publication or the form
instructions for those future years.
Disposition of car during recovery pe-
riod.If you dispose of the car before the end
of the recovery period, you are generally al-
lowed a half year of depreciation in the year
of disposition unless you purchased the car
during the last quarter of a year. See Depre-
ciation deduction for the year of disposition
under Disposition of a Car, later, for informa-
Less: Total depreciation allowed:
1999–14,400 mi. × .12 $1,728
1998–12,000 mi. × .12 1,440
1997– 9,000 mi. × .12 1,080 − 4,248
Adjusted basis of old car $10,752
Plus: Additional cost for new car + 6,000
Basis of new car before trade-in
adjustment $16,752
Trade-in adjustment:
Depreciation at 100% business use:
1999—18,000 mi. × .12 $2,160
1998—16,000 mi. × .12 1,920
1997—15,000 mi. × .12 1,800
Total $5,880
Less: Actual depreciation allowed 4,248
Excess of 100% over actual $1,632
Less: Lesser of Excess amount ($1,632)
or Adjusted basis of old car ($10,752)− 1,632
Unadjusted basis of new car
for depreciation $15,120
Cost of old van $12,800
Less: Total depreciation allowed on the
business cost of old van, $9,600
($12,800 × 75%), from 1996–2000 − 8,494
Adjusted basis of old van $ 4,306
Plus: Add'l cost for new van + 9,800
Basis of new van before trade-in
adjustment $14,106
Trade-in adjustment:
Depreciation at 100% business use:
2000–($12,800 × .1152) ×
1/2 yr $ 737
(Limit: $1,775)
1999–12,800 × .1152 1,475
(Limit: $1,775)
1998–12,800 × .192 2,458
(Limit: $2,950)
1997–12,800 × .32 4,096
(Limit: $4,900)
1996–12,800 × .20 2,560
(Limit: $3,060)
Total $11,326
Less: Actual depreciation allowed− 8,494
Excess of 100% over actual $2,832
Less: Lesser of Excess amount ($2,832)
or Adjusted basis of old van ($4,306)− 2,832
Unadjusted basis of new van
 for depreciation $11,274
Page 18 Chapter 4  Local Transportation Expenses

tion on how to figure the depreciation allowed
in the year of disposition.
How to use the 2000 chart. To figure
your depreciation deduction for 2000, find the
percentage in the column of the chart based
on the date that you first placed the car in
service and the depreciation method that you
are using. Multiply the unadjusted basis of
your car (defined earlier) by that percentage
to determine the amount of your depreciation
deduction. If you prefer to figure your depre-
ciation deduction without the help of the chart,
see Publication 946.
CAUTION
!
Your deduction cannot be more than
the maximum depreciation limit for
cars. See Depreciation Limits, later.
Example. Phil bought a used truck in
February 1999 to use exclusively in his land-
scape business. He paid $6,200 for the truck
with no trade-in. Phil did not claim any section
179 deduction and he chose to use the 200%
DB method to get the largest depreciation
deduction in the early years.
Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart
in 1999 to find his percentage. The unad-
justed basis of his truck equals its cost be-
cause Phil used it exclusively for business.
He multiplied the unadjusted basis of his
truck, $6,200, by the percentage that applied,
20%, to figure his 1999 depreciation de-
duction of $1,240.
In 2000, Phil used the truck for personal
purposes when he repaired his father's cabin.
His records show that the business use of his
truck was 90% in 2000. Phil used Table 3 to
find his percentage. Reading down the first
column for the date placed in service and
across to the 200% DB column, he locates
his percentage, 32%. He multiplies the unad-
justed basis of his truck, $5,580 ($6,200 cost
× 90% business use), by 32% to figure his
2000 depreciation deduction of $1,786.
Depreciation Limits
There are limits on the amount you can de-
duct for depreciation of your car. (The section
179 deduction is treated as depreciation for
purposes of the limits.) The maximum amount
you can deduct each year depends on the
year you place the car in service. These limits
are shown in the following table.
Exceptions for clean-fuel cars. There
are two exceptions to the depreciation limits
for cars. They are effective after August 5,
1997, for cars that run on clean fuel. Clean-
fuel cars are discussed in chapter 12 of Pub-
lication 535. The exceptions follow.
1) Amounts you pay for retrofit parts and
components to modify a car to run on
clean fuel are not subject to the depre-
ciation limit on cars. Only the cost of the
car before modification is subject to the
limit.
2) If you place a car in service after August
5, 1997, that was produced to run on
electricity, your depreciation limit is in-
creased. The amounts are shown in the
following table.
CAUTION
!
The examples throughout this chapter
illustrate gas-fueled cars.
Car used less than full year.The de-
preciation limits are not reduced if you use a
car for less than a full year. This means that
you do not reduce the limit when you either
place a car in service or dispose of a car
during the year. However, the depreciation
limits are reduced if you do not use the car
exclusively for business and investment pur-
poses. See Reduction for personal use, later.
Example. Marie purchased a car in June
2000 for $16,000 to use exclusively in her
business. She does not claim the section 179
deduction and she chooses the 200% DB
method of depreciation.
Marie's depreciation (using the rate from
Table 3) is $3,200 ($16,000 × 20%). How-
ever, the maximum amount she can deduct
for depreciation (from the Maximum Depreci-
ation Limits for Cars table) is $3,060. (See
Deductions in years after the recovery period,
later.)
Reduction for personal use.The depreci-
ation limits are further reduced based on your
percentage of personal use. If you use a car
less than 100% in your business or work, you
must determine the depreciation deduction
limit by multiplying the limit amount by the
percentage of business and investment use
during the tax year.
Example. In June 2000, Karl, an outside
dental supply salesman, purchased a car for
$25,400 to make sales calls in a territory that
extends 200 miles around his home base. He
uses his car 85% for his business. Karl does
not claim the section 179 deduction and he
chooses the 200% DB method to figure his
depreciation deduction.
In 2000, Karl computes his MACRS de-
duction to be $4,318 [($25,400 × 85%) ×
20%]. However, Karl's deduction is limited to
$2,601. This is the depreciation limit ($3,060)
multiplied by the business use percentage
(85%).
Karl continues to use his car 85% for
business. Depreciation in the next four years
continues to be subject to deduction limits.
Karl computes his depreciation limits for those
years as follows.
In 2005, using the rate from Table 3, Karl's
MACRS deduction is $1,244 [($25,400 ×
85%) × 5.76%]. Since that amount is less than
the depreciation limit of $1,509 ($1,775 ×
85%), Karl's depreciation deduction for 2005
is $1,244.
If Karl continues to use his car for busi-
ness after 2005, he can continue to claim a
depreciation deduction for his unrecovered
basis. However, he cannot deduct more than
$1,775 multiplied by his business use per-
centage. See Deductions in years after the
recovery period, later.
Section 179 deduction. The section 179
deduction is treated as a depreciation de-
duction. If you place a car in service in 2000,
use it only for business, and choose the sec-
tion 179 deduction, the combined section 179
and depreciation deduction for that car for
2000 is limited to $3,060.
Example. On September 4, 2000, Jack
bought a used car for $10,000 and placed it
in service. He used it 80% for his business
and he chooses to take a section 179 de-
duction for the car.
Before applying the limit, Jack figures his
maximum section 179 deduction to be
$8,000. This is the cost of his qualifying
property (up to the maximum $20,000
amount) multiplied by his business use
($10,000 × 80%).
Jack then figures that his section 179 de-
duction for 2000 is limited to $2,448 (80% of
$3,060). He then has an unadjusted basis of
$5,552 [($10,000 × 80%) − $2,448] for deter-
mining his depreciation deduction. Since he
has already reached the maximum limit for
2000, Jack will use the unadjusted basis to
figure his depreciation deduction for 2001.
Deductions in years after the recovery
period. If the depreciation limits apply to your
car, you may have unrecovered basis in your
car at the end of the recovery period. If you
continue to use your car for business, you can
deduct that unrecovered basis after the re-
covery period ends.
Unrecovered basis.This is your cost or
other basis in the car reduced by any clean-
fuel vehicle deduction, electric vehicle credit,
and depreciation and section 179 deductions
that would have been allowable if you had
used the car 100% for business and invest-
ment use.
The recovery period.For 5-year prop-
erty, your recovery period is 6 calendar years.
A part year's depreciation is allowed in the
first calendar year, a full year's depreciation
is allowed in each of the next 4 calendar
years, and a part year's depreciation is al-
lowed in the 6th calendar year.
Your recovery period is the same whether
you use MACRS, declining balance, or
straight line depreciation. Under MACRS, you
determine your unrecovered basis in the 7th
year after you placed the car in service.
How to treat unrecovered basis.If you
continue to use your car for business after the
recovery period, you can claim a depreciation
deduction for that business use in each suc-
ceeding tax year until you recover your full
basis in the car. The maximum amount you
can deduct is determined by the date you
placed the car in service and your business-
use percentage. For example, no deduction
is allowed for a year you use your car 100%
for personal purposes.
Example. In May 1994, Bob bought and
placed in service a car that he used exclu-
sively in his business. The car cost $28,600.
Bob did not claim a section 179 deduction for
the car. He continued to use the car 100% in
his business throughout the recovery period
(1994 through 1999). For those years, Bob
used Table 3 and the Maximum Depreciation
Limits for Cars table (as explained earlier) to
Maximum Depreciation Limits For
Electric Cars Placed in Service
After August 5, 1997
Year Placed
In Service
1st
Year
2nd
Year
3rd
Year
4th &
Later
Years
2000 $9,280 $14,800 $8,850 $5,325
1999 9,280 14,900 8,950 5,325
1998 9,380 15,000 8,950 5,425
1997 9,480 15,100 9,050 5,425
Maximum Depreciation Limits for Cars
Year Placed
In Service
1st
Year
2nd
Year
3rd
Year
4th &
Later
Years
2000 $3,060 $4,900 $2,950 $1,775
1999 3,060 5,000 2,950 1,775
1998 3,160 5,000 2,950 1,775
1997 3,160 5,000 3,050 1,775
1995–1996 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775
1994 2,960 4,700 2,850 1,675
Year
Limit x Business UseDepreciation
2001 $ 4,900 × 85% $ 4,165
2002 2,950 × 85% 2,508
2003, 2004 1,775 × 85% 1,509
Chapter 4 Local Transportation Expenses Page 19

Table 3.
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below
to find the depreciation method and percentage to use for your
2000 return. If your car was placed in service before 1987, see
the depreciation chart in the Form 2106 instructions.
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the
car in service. Then select the depreciation method and
percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2000, you must use the same
method you used on last year ’s return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line
method. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business. )
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in
the chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for
2000. (Also see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the
same year, you may have to use the Jan. 1—Sept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1—Dec. 31 percentage for your car.
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of t hat year
and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in  service
after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in service for the entire year, use the percentage for
Jan. 1— Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Conventions in chapter 3 of Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $22,000) in May 2000 and a new van (basis of $14,000) in October 2000, both used 100% in
your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2000, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the
$14,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in
service during the year [40% /H11003($22,000 + 14,000) = $14,400].
Date Placed In Service 200% Declining
Balance (200% DB)
1 
150% Declining
Balancing (150% DB)
1
Straight Line
(SL)
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2000
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2000
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1999
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1999
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1998
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1998
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1997
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1997
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1996
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1996
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1995
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1995
Prior to 1995
2
200 DB 5.0%
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
20.0
38.0
32.0
22.8
19.2
13.68
11.52
10.94
11.52
9.58
5.76
150 DB 3.75%
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
15.0
28.88
25.5
20.21
17.85
16.4
16.66
16.41
16.66
14.35
8.33
SL 2.5%
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
10.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
17.5
10.0
(b)(a) (c)
1
You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
2
If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to c laim depreciation. See
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
2000 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2000.)
compute his depreciation deductions as
shown in the following table.
At the end of 1999, Bob had an unrecovered
basis in the car of $13,093. This was the
$28,600 original basis of his car less the
$15,507 depreciation deductions allowed
during the recovery period.
Bob continued to use the car 100% for
business in 2000. He can claim a depreci-
ation deduction of $1,675 (the maximum al-
lowed for each subsequent year) for the year.
If he continues to use the car 100% for busi-
ness in 2001 and later years, Bob can deduct
the lesser of $1,675 or his remaining unre-
covered basis in each of those years until his
deductions total the $11,418 unrecovered
basis ($13,093 − $1,675 claimed in 2000).
If Bob's business use of the car was less
than 100% during any year, his depreciation
deduction would be less than the maximum
amount allowable for that year. However, in
determining his unrecovered basis in the car,
he would still reduce his original basis by the
maximum amount allowable. Bob's unre-
covered basis at the beginning of 2000 would
be $13,065 ($28,600 – $15,535) in this ex-
ample. This is true even if his actual depreci-
ation deduction for any year was less than the
maximum amount shown.
Car Used 50% or Less
for Business
If you use your car 50% or less in qualified
business use (defined earlier under Depreci-
ation Deduction), the following two special
rules apply. (For this purpose, “car” was de-
fined earlier under Actual Car Expenses.)
1) You cannot take the section 179 de-
duction.
2) You must figure depreciation using the
straight line method over a 5-year re-
covery period. You must continue to use
the straight line method even if your
MACRS MACRS Maximum Deprec.
Year % Amount Limit Allowed
'94 20.00 $5,720 $2,960 $ 2,960
'95 32.00 9,152 4,700 4,700
'96 19.20 5,491 2,850 2,850
'97 11.52 3,295 1,675 1,675
'98 11.52 3,295 1,675 1,675
'99 5.76 1,647 1,675
1,647
Total $15,535 $15,507
Page 20 Chapter 4  Local Transportation Expenses

percentage of business use increases to
more than 50% in a later year.
Instead of making the computation your-
self, you can use column (c) of Table 3 to find
the percentage to use.
Example. On May 22, 2000, Dan bought
a car for $15,000. He used it 40% for his
consulting business. Because he did not use
the car more than 50% for business, Dan
cannot take any section 179 deduction, and
he must use the straight line method over a
5-year recovery period to recover the cost of
his car.
Dan deducts $600 in 2000. This is the
lesser of:
1) $600 [($15,000 cost × 40% business
use) × 10% recovery percentage (from
column (c), Table 3)], or
2) $1,224 ($3,060 maximum limit × 40%
business use).
Business use drops to 50% or less in a
later year.If you use your car more than
50% in qualified business use in the tax year
it is placed in service but the business use
drops to 50% or less in a later year, you can
no longer use an accelerated depreciation
method for that car. For the year the business
use drops to 50% or less and all later years
in the recovery period, you must use the
straight line depreciation method over a
5-year recovery period. In addition, for the
year your business use drops to 50% or less,
you must determine and include in your gross
income any excess depreciation (discussed
later).
Example. In June 1997, you purchased
a car for exclusive use in your business. You
met the more-than-50%-use test for the first
3 years of the recovery period (1997 through
1999) but failed to meet it in the fourth year
(2000). You determine your depreciation for
2000 using 20% (from column (c) of Table
3). You also will have to determine and in-
clude in your gross income any excess de-
preciation, discussed next.
Excess depreciation. You must include
any excess depreciation in your gross income
and add it to your car's adjusted basis for the
first tax year in which you do not use the car
more than 50% in qualified business use. Use
Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,  to
report the excess depreciation in your gross
income.
Excess depreciation is:
1) The amount of the depreciation de-
ductions allowable for the car (including
any section 179 deduction claimed) for
tax years in which you used the car more
than 50% in qualified business use, mi-
nus
2) The amount of the depreciation de-
ductions that would have been allowable
for those years if you had not used the
car more than 50% in qualified business
use for the year you placed it in service.
This means the amount of depreciation
figured using the straight line method.
Example. On June 25, 1997, you bought
a car for $11,000 and placed it in service. You
did not claim the section 179 deduction. You
used the car exclusively in qualified business
use for 1997, 1998, and 1999. For those
years, you used the appropriate MACRS De-
preciation Chart to figure depreciation de-
ductions totaling $7,832 ($2,200 for 1997,
$3,520 for 1998, and $2,112 for 1999) under
the 200% DB method.
During 2000, you used the car 50% for
business and 50% for personal purposes.
Since you did not meet the
more-than-50%-use test, you must include in
gross income for 2000 your excess depreci-
ation determined as follows.
In 2000, you must include $2,332 in your
gross income using Form 4797. Your ad-
justed basis in the car is also increased by
$2,332. Your 2000 depreciation deduction is
$1,100 [$11,000 (unadjusted basis) × 50%
(business use percentage) × 20% (from col-
umn (c) of Table 3 on the line for Jan. 1—
Sept. 30, 1997)].
Disposition of a Car
If you dispose of your car, you may have a
taxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion
of any gain that is due to depreciation (in-
cluding any section 179 or clean-fuel vehicle
deduction) that you claimed on the car will be
treated as ordinary income. However, you
may not have to recognize a gain or loss if
you dispose of the car because of a casualty,
theft, or trade-in. 
This section gives some general informa-
tion about dispositions of cars. For informa-
tion on how to report the disposition of your
car, see Publication 544.
Casualty or theft.For a casualty or theft, a
gain results when you receive insurance or
other reimbursement that is more than your
adjusted basis in your car. If you then spend
all of the proceeds to acquire replacement
property (a new car or repairs to the old car)
within a specified period of time, you do not
recognize any gain. Your basis in the re-
placement property is its cost minus any gain
that is not recognized. See Publication 547 for
more information.
Trade-in.When you trade in an old car for
a new one, the transaction is considered a
like-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss
is recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter
1 of Publication 544.) In a trade-in situation,
your basis in the new property is generally
your adjusted basis in the old property plus
any additional amount you pay. (See Unad-
justed basis, earlier.)
Depreciation adjustment when you used
the standard mileage rate. If you used the
standard mileage rate for the business use
of your car, depreciation was included in that
rate. The rate of depreciation that was al-
lowed in the standard mileage rate is shown
in the chart that follows. You must reduce
your basis in your car (but not below zero)
by the amount of this depreciation.
TIP
These rates do not apply for any year
in which the actual expenses method
was used.
For tax years after 1989, the depreciation
rates apply to all business miles. For tax
years before 1990, the depreciation rates
apply to the first 15,000 miles.
Example. In 1995, you bought a car for
exclusive use in your business. The car cost
$14,000. From 1995 through 2000, you used
the standard mileage rate to figure your car
expense deduction. You drove your car
14,100 miles in 1995, 16,300 miles in 1996,
15,600 miles in 1997, 16,700 miles in 1998,
15,100 miles in 1999, and 14,900 miles in
2000. Your depreciation is figured as follows.
At the end of 2000, your adjusted basis in the
car is $2,578 ($14,000 − $11,422).
Depreciation deduction for the year of
disposition. If you deduct actual car ex-
penses and you dispose of your car before
the end of its recovery period, you are allowed
a reduced depreciation deduction for the year
of disposition.
To figure the reduced depreciation de-
duction for a car disposed of in 2000, first
determine the depreciation deduction for the
full year using Table 3.
If you used a Date Placed in Service line
for Jan. 1— Sept. 30, you can deduct one-half
of the regular depreciation amount for the
year of disposition. Figure your depreciation
deduction for the full year using the rules ex-
plained in this chapter and deduct 50% of that
amount with your other actual car expenses.
If you used a Date Placed in Service line
for Oct. 1— Dec. 31, you can deduct a per-
centage of the regular depreciation amount.
The percentage you use is determined by the
month you disposed of the car. Figure your
depreciation deduction for the full year using
the rules explained in this chapter and multi-
ply the result by the percentage from the fol-
lowing table for the month that you disposed
of the car.
CAUTION
!
Do not use this table if you are a fiscal
year filer. See Dispositions in chapter
3 of Publication 946.
Leasing a Car
If you lease a car that you use in your busi-
ness, you can use the standard mileage rate
or actual expenses to figure your deductible
car expense. This section explains how to
figure actual expenses for a leased car.
Depreciation
Year(s) Rate per Mile
2000 $ .14
1994 – 1999 .12
1992 – 1993 .11
1 / 2
1989 – 1991 .11
1988 .10 1 / 2
1987 .10
1986 .09
1983 – 1985 .08
1982 .07
1 / 2
1980 – 1981 .07
Total depreciation claimed:
(MACRS 200% DB method)
$7,832
Total depreciation allowable:
(Straight line method)
1997—10% of $11,000 ........... $1,100
1998—20% of $11,000 ........... 2,200
1999—20% of $11,000 ........... 2,200
5,500
Excess depreciation $2,332
Year Miles x Rate Depreciation
1995 14,100 × .12 $ 1,692
1996 16,300 × .12 1,956
1997 15,600 × .12 1,872
1998 16,700 × .12 2,004
1999 15,100 × .12 1,812
2000 14,900 × .14 2,086
 Total depreciation $11,422
Month Percentage
Jan., Feb., March ............................. 12.5%
April, May, June ............................... 37.5%
July, Aug., Sept. ............................... 62.5%
Oct., Nov., Dec. ................................ 87.5%
Chapter 4 Local Transportation Expenses Page 21

Deductible payments. You can deduct the
part of each lease payment that is for the use
of the car in your business. You cannot de-
duct any part of a lease payment that is for
personal use of the car, such as commuting.
You must spread any advance payments
over the entire lease period. You cannot de-
duct any payments you make to buy a car,
even if the payments are called lease pay-
ments.
If you lease a car for 30 days or more, you
may have to reduce your lease payment de-
duction by an “inclusion amount.”
Inclusion Amounts
If you lease a car that you use in your busi-
ness for a lease term of 30 days or more, you
may have to include an inclusion amount in
your income for each tax year you lease the
car. To do this, you do not add an amount
to income. Instead, you reduce your de-
duction for your lease payment. (This re-
duction has an effect similar to the limit on the
depreciation deduction you would have on the
car if you owned it.)
The inclusion amount is a percentage of
part of the fair market value of the leased car
multiplied by the percentage of business and
investment use of the car for the tax year. It
is prorated for the number of days of the lease
term in the tax year.
The inclusion amount applies to each tax
year that you lease the car if the fair market
value (defined next) of the car when the lease
began was more than the amounts shown in
the following table.
Fair market value. Fair market value is the
price at which the property would change
hands between a buyer and a seller, neither
having to buy or sell, and both having rea-
sonable knowledge of all the necessary facts.
Sales of similar property around the same
date may be helpful in figuring the fair market
value of the property.
Figure the fair market value on the first
day of the lease term. If the capitalized cost
of a car is specified in the lease agreement,
use that amount as the fair market value.
Figuring the inclusion amount.Inclusion
amounts are listed in Appendix B and, for
electric cars leased after August 5, 1997, in
Appendix C. If the fair market value of the car
is $100,000 or less, use the appropriate ap-
pendix (depending on the year you first
placed the car in service) to determine the
inclusion amount. If the fair market value is
more than $100,000, see the Revenue
Procedure(s) identified in the footnote of the
appendices for the inclusion amount. Reve-
nue Procedures are available at most IRS
offices and many local libraries.
For each tax year during which you lease
the car for business, determine your inclusion
amount by following these three steps.
1) Locate the appendix that applies to you.
To find the inclusion amount, do the fol-
lowing.
a) Find the line that includes the fair
market value of the car on the first
day of the lease term.
b) Go across the line to the column for
the tax year in which the car is used
under the lease to find the dollar
amount. For the last tax year of the
lease, use the dollar amount for the
preceding year.
2) Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) for
the number of days of the lease term
included in the tax year.
3) Multiply the prorated amount from (2) by
the percentage of business and invest-
ment use for the tax year. This is your
inclusion amount.
Example. On January 17, 1998, you
leased a car for 3 years and placed it in ser-
vice for use in your business. The car had a
fair market value of $32,250 on the first day
of the lease term. You use the car 75% for
business and 25% for personal purposes
during each year of the lease. Assuming you
continue to use the car 75% for business, you
use Appendix B–3 to arrive at the following
inclusion amounts for each year of the lease:
For each year of the lease that you deduct
lease payments, you must reduce your de-
duction by the inclusion amount computed for
that year.
Leased car changed from business to
personal use. If you lease a car for business
use and, in a later year, change it to personal
use, follow the rules explained earlier under
Figuring the inclusion amount. For the tax
year in which you stop using the car for
business, use the dollar amount for the pre-
vious tax year. Prorate the dollar amount for
the number of days in the lease term that fall
within the tax year.
Example. On August 16, 1999, Will
leased an electric car with a fair market value
of $58,600 for 3 years. He used the car ex-
clusively in his own data processing business.
On November 5, 2000, Will closed his busi-
ness and went to work for a company where
he is not required to use a car for business.
Using Appendix C –2, Will computed his
inclusion amount for 1999 and 2000 as shown
in the following table and reduced his de-
ductions for lease payments by those
amounts.
Leased car changed from personal to
business use.If you lease a car for personal
use and, in a later year, change it to business
use, you must determine the car's fair market
value on the date of conversion. Then figure
the inclusion amount using the rules ex-
plained earlier under Figuring the inclusion
amount. Use the fair market value on the date
of conversion.
Example. In March 1998, Janice leased
a car for 4 years for personal use. On June
1, 2000, she started working as a self-
employed advertising consultant and started
using the leased car for business purposes.
Her records show that her business use for
June 1 through December 31 was 60%. To
figure her inclusion amount for 2000, Janice
obtained an appraisal from an independent
car leasing company that showed the fair
market value of her 1998 car on June 1, 2000,
was $18,650. Using Appendix B–1, Janice
computed her inclusion amount for 2000 as
shown in the following table.
Reporting inclusion amounts. For infor-
mation on reporting inclusion amounts, em-
ployees should see Car rentals under Com-
pleting Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ in chapter
6. Sole proprietors should see the in-
structions for Schedule C (Form 1040) and
farmers should see the instructions for
Schedule F (Form 1040).
5.
Recordkeeping
If you deduct travel, entertainment, busi-
ness gift, or local transportation expenses,
you must be able to prove (substantiate) cer-
tain elements of expense. This chapter dis-
cusses the records you need to keep to prove
these expenses.
RECORDS
If you keep timely and accurate rec-
ords, you will have support to show
the IRS if your tax return is ever ex-
amined. You will also have proof of expenses
that your employer may require if you are re-
imbursed under an accountable plan. These
plans are discussed in chapter 6 under Re-
imbursements.
How To Prove
Expenses
Table 4 is a summary of records you need to
prove each expense discussed in this publi-
cation. You must be able to prove the ele-
ments listed across the top portion of the
chart. You prove them by having the infor-
mation and receipts (where needed) for the
expenses listed in the first column.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct amounts that you
approximate or estimate.
You should keep adequate records to
prove your expenses or have sufficient evi-
dence that will support your own statement.
You must generally prepare a written record
for it to be considered adequate. This is be-
cause written evidence is more reliable than
oral evidence alone. However, if you prepare
a record in a computer memory device with
the aid of a logging program, it is considered
an adequate record.
Tax
year
Dollar
amount Proration
Business
use
Inclusion
amount
2000 $ 22 214/366 60% $ 8
Tax
year
Dollar
amount Proration
Business
use
Inclusion
amount
1998 $137 349/365 75% $ 98
1999 301 365/365 75% 226
2000 446 366/366 75% 335
2001 536 16/365 75% 18
Year Lease Began
Fair Market Value*
1999–2000 $ 15,500
1997–1998 15,800
1995–1996 15,500
1994 14,600
1993 14,300
1992 13,700
1991 13,400
1987–1990 12,800
*These amounts are higher for electric cars.
Tax
year
Dollar
amount Proration
Business
use
Inclusion
amount
1999 $ 95 138/365 100% $ 36
2000 95 309/366 100% 80
Page 22 Chapter 5  Recordkeeping

Table 4. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have
expenses
for:
Travel
Entertainment
Gifts
Transportation
(Car)
Amount Time
Place or
Description
Business Purpose and
Business Relationship
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements.
Cost of each separate expense
for travel, lodging, and meals.
Incidental expenses may be
totaled in reasonable categories
such as taxis, daily meals for
traveler, etc.
Dates you
left and
returned for
each trip
and number
of days
spent on
business.
Destination or area
of your travel
(name of city, town,
or other
designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
Incidental expenses such as
taxis, telephones, etc., may be
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of
entertainment.
(Also see
Business
Purpose.)
Name and address
or location of place
of entertainment.
Type of
entertainment if not
otherwise apparent.
(Also see Business
Purpose.)
Cost of the gift. Date of the
gift.
Description of the
gift.
Date of the
expense.
For car
expenses,
the date of
the use of
the car.
Your business
destination (name
of city, town, or
other designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
For car expenses, the cost of
the car and any improvements,
the date you started using it for
business, the mileage for each
business use, and the total miles
for the year.
Purpose:
 Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 N/A
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or other
designations) about the recipients that
shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that
you or your employee was present if the
entertainment was a business meal.
For entertainment, the nature of the
business discussion or activity. If the
entertainment was directly before or after a
business discussion: the date, place, nature,
and duration of the business discussion,
and the identities of the persons who took
part in both the business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
Relationship: N/A
Adequate Records
You should keep the proof you need in an
account book, diary, statement of expense,
or similar record. You should also keep doc-
umentary evidence that, together with your
record, will support each element of an ex-
pense.
Documentary evidence.  You generally must
have documentary evidence, such as re-
ceipts, canceled checks, or bills, to support
your expenses.
Exception. Documentary evidence is not
needed if any of the following conditions ap-
ply.
1) You have meals or lodging expenses
while traveling away from home for
which you account to your employer un-
der an accountable plan, and you use a
per diem allowance method that includes
meals and/or lodging. (Accountable
plans and per diem allowances are dis-
cussed in chapter 6.)
2) Your expense, other than lodging, is less
than $75.
3) You have a transportation expense for
which a receipt is not readily available.
Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-
dence ordinarily will be considered adequate
if it shows the amount, date, place, and es-
sential character of the expense.
For example, a hotel receipt is enough to
support expenses for business travel if it has
all of the following information.
1) The name and location of the hotel.
2) The dates you stayed there.
3) Separate amounts for charges such as
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove
an expense for a business meal if it has all
of the following information.
1) The name and location of the restaurant.
2) The number of people served.
3) The date and amount of the expense.
If a charge is made for items other than food
and beverages, the receipt must show that
this is the case.
Canceled check. A canceled check, to-
gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily
establishes the cost. However, a canceled
check by itself does not prove a business
expense without other evidence to show that
it was for a business purpose.
Duplicate information.You do not have to
record information in your account book or
other record that duplicates information
shown on a receipt as long as your records
and receipts complement each other in an
orderly manner.
You do not have to record amounts your
employer pays directly for any ticket or other
travel item. However, if you charge these
items to your employer, through a credit card
or otherwise, you must keep a record of the
amounts you spend.
Timely-kept records.You should record the
elements of an expense or of a business use
at or near the time of the expense or use and
support it with sufficient documentary evi-
dence. A timely-kept record has more value
than a statement prepared later when gener-
ally there is a lack of accurate recall.
You do not need to write down the ele-
ments of every expense on the day of the
expense. If you maintain a log on a weekly
basis that accounts for use during the week,
the log is considered a timely-kept record.
If you give your employer, client, or cus-
tomer an expense account statement, it can
also be considered a timely-kept record. This
is true if you copy it from your account book,
diary, statement of expense, or similar record.
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 23

Proving business purpose.You must gen-
erally provide a written statement of the
business purpose of an expense. However,
the degree of proof varies according to the
circumstances in each case. If the business
purpose of an expense is clear from the sur-
rounding circumstances, then you do not
need to give a written explanation.
Example. If you are a sales represen-
tative who calls on customers on an estab-
lished sales route, you do not have to give a
written explanation of the business purpose
for traveling that route. You can satisfy the
requirements by recording the length of the
delivery route once, the date of each trip at
or near the time of the trips, and the total
miles you drove the car during the tax year.
You could also establish the date of each trip
with a receipt, record of delivery, or other
documentary evidence.
Confidential information.You do not need
to put confidential information relating to an
element of a deductible expense (such as the
place, business purpose, or business re-
lationship) in your account book, diary, or
other record. However, you do have to record
the information elsewhere at or near the time
of the expense and have it available to fully
prove that element of the expense.
Incomplete Records
If you do not have complete records to prove
an element of an expense, then you must
prove the element by:
1) Your own written or oral statement con-
taining specific information about the el-
ement, and 
2) Other supporting evidence that is suffi-
cient to establish the element.
If the element is the description of a gift,
or the cost, time, place, or date of an ex-
pense, the supporting evidence must be ei-
ther direct evidence or documentary evi-
dence. Direct evidence can be written
statements, or the oral testimony of your
guests or other witnesses setting forth de-
tailed information about the element. Docu-
mentary evidence can be receipts, paid bills,
or similar evidence.
If the element is either the business re-
lationship of your guests or the business
purpose of the amount spent, the supporting
evidence can be circumstantial, rather than
direct. For example, the nature of your work,
such as making deliveries, provides
circumstantial evidence of the use of your car
for business purposes. Invoices of deliveries
establish when you used the car for business.
Sampling. You can keep an adequate record
for parts of a tax year and use that record to
prove the amount of business or investment
use for the entire year. You must demonstrate
by other evidence that the periods for which
an adequate record is kept are representative
of the use throughout the tax year.
Example. You use your car for local
business transportation to visit the offices of
clients, meet with suppliers and other sub-
contractors, and pick up and deliver items to
clients. There is no other business use of the
car, but you and your family use the car for
personal purposes. You keep adequate rec-
ords during the first week of each month that
show that 75% of the use of the car is for
business. Invoices and bills show that your
business use continues at the same rate
during the later weeks of each month. Your
weekly records are representative of the use
of the car each month and are sufficient evi-
dence to support the percentage of business
use for the year.
Exceptional circumstances.You can sat-
isfy the substantiation requirements with other
evidence if, because of the nature of the sit-
uation in which an expense is made, you
cannot get a receipt. This applies if all the
following are true.
1) You were unable to obtain evidence for
an element of the expense or use that
completely satisfies the requirements
explained earlier under Adequate Rec-
ords.
2) You are unable to obtain evidence for
an element that completely satisfies the
two rules listed earlier under Incomplete
Records.
3) You have presented other evidence for
the element that is the best proof possi-
ble under the circumstances.
Destroyed records. If you cannot produce
a receipt because of reasons beyond your
control, you can prove a deduction by recon-
structing your records or expenses. Reasons
beyond your control include fire, flood, and
other casualty.
Additional Rules
This section explains when expenses must
be kept separate and when expenses can be
combined.
Separating expenses. Each separate pay-
ment is generally considered a separate ex-
pense. For example, if you entertain a cus-
tomer or client at dinner and then go to the
theater, the dinner expense and the cost of
the theater tickets are two separate ex-
penses. You must record them separately in
your records.
Season or series tickets. If you buy
season or series tickets for business use, you
must treat each ticket in the series as a sep-
arate item. To determine the cost of individ-
ual tickets, divide the total cost (but not more
than face value) by the number of games or
performances in the series. You must keep
records to show whether you use each ticket
as a gift or entertainment. Also, you must be
able to prove the cost of nonluxury box seat
tickets if you rent a skybox or other private
luxury box for more than one event. See
Entertainment tickets in chapter 2.
Combining items. You can make one daily
entry in your record for reasonable categories
of expenses. Examples are taxi fares, tele-
phone calls, or other incidental travel costs.
Meals should be in a separate category. You
can include tips for meal-related services with
the costs of the meals.
Expenses of a similar nature occurring
during the course of a single event are con-
sidered a single expense. For example, if
during entertainment at a cocktail lounge, you
pay separately for each serving of
refreshments, the total expense for the
refreshments is treated as a single expense.
Car expenses. You can account for
several uses of your car that can be consid-
ered part of a single use, such as a round trip
or uninterrupted business use, with a single
record. Minimal personal use, such as a stop
for lunch on the way between two business
stops, is not an interruption of business use.
Example. You make deliveries at several
different locations on a route that begins and
ends at your employer's business premises
and that includes a stop at the business
premises between two deliveries. You can
account for these using a single record of
miles driven.
Gift expenses.You do not always have
to record the name of each recipient of a
business gift. A general listing will be enough
if it is evident that you are not trying to avoid
the $25 annual limit on the amount you can
deduct for gifts to any one person. For ex-
ample, if you buy a large number of tickets to
local high school basketball games and give
one or two tickets to each of many customers,
it is usually enough to record a general de-
scription of the recipients.
Allocating total cost.If you can prove the
total cost of travel or entertainment but you
cannot prove how much it cost for each per-
son who participated in the event, you may
have to allocate the total cost among you and
your guests on a pro rata basis. To do so,
you must establish the number of persons
who participated in the event.
An allocation would be needed, for exam-
ple, if you did not have a business relationship
with all of your guests. See Allocating be-
tween business and nonbusiness in chapter
2.
If your return is examined.If your return is
examined, you may have to provide additional
information to the IRS. This information could
be needed to clarify or to establish the accu-
racy or reliability of information contained in
your records, statements, testimony, or doc-
umentary evidence before a deduction is al-
lowed.
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts 
You must keep records as long as they may
be needed for the administration of any pro-
vision of the Internal Revenue Code. Gener-
ally, this means you must keep records that
support your deduction (or an item of income)
for 3 years from the date you file the income
tax return on which the deduction is claimed.
A return filed early is considered filed on the
due date. For a more complete explanation
of how long to keep records, get Publication
583, Starting a Business and Keeping Rec-
ords.
You must keep records of the business
use of your car for each year of the recovery
period. See More-than-50%-use test in chap-
ter 4 under Depreciation Deduction.
Reimbursed for expenses.Employees who
give their records and documentation to their
employers and are reimbursed for their ex-
penses generally do not have to keep copies
of this information. However, you may have
to prove your expenses if any of the following
conditions apply.
1) You claim deductions for expenses that
are more than reimbursements.
2) Your expenses are reimbursed under a
nonaccountable plan.
Page 24 Chapter 5  Recordkeeping

3) Your employer does not use adequate
accounting procedures to verify expense
accounts.
4) You are related to your employer as de-
fined under Standard Meal Allowance in
chapter 1.
Reimbursements, adequate accounting, and
nonaccountable plans are discussed in
chapter 6.
Examples of Records
Examples of records that show the informa-
tion you need to keep for different types of
expenses are included in this publication as
Table 6 and Table 7. They are part of the
illustrated examples shown at the end of
chapter 6.
6.
How To Report
This chapter explains where and how to
report the expenses discussed in this publi-
cation. It discusses reimbursements and how
to treat them under accountable and nonac-
countable plans. It also explains rules for in-
dependent contractors and clients, fee-basis
officials, certain performing artists, and cer-
tain disabled employees. The chapter ends
with illustrations of how to report travel,
entertainment, gift, and car expenses on
Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ.
Where To Report
This section provides general information on
where to report the expenses discussed in
this publication.
Self-employed.  You must report your in-
come and expenses on Schedule C or C–EZ
(Form 1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or
on Schedule F (Form 1040) if you are a
farmer. You do not use Form 2106 or
2106–EZ.
If you claim car or truck expenses, you
must provide certain information on the use
of your vehicle. You provide this information
on Schedule C, Schedule C–EZ, or  Form
4562. 
If you file Schedule C:
1) Report your travel expenses, except
meals, on line 24a,
2) Report your meals (actual cost or
standard meal allowance) and enter-
tainment on line 24b (The 50% limit is
figured on line 24c.),
3) Report your business gift expenses and
local business transportation expenses,
other than car expenses, on line 27, and
4) Report your business car expenses on
line 10. Complete Part IV of the form
unless you have to file Form 4562 for
depreciation or amortization.
If you file Schedule C–EZ, report the total
of all business expenses on line 2. You can
only include 50% of your business meals and
entertainment in that total. If you include
business car expenses, you must also com-
plete Part III of the form.
If you file Schedule F:
1) Report your business car expenses on
line 12. Attach Form 4562 and provide
information on the use of your car in Part
V of Form 4562.
2) Report all other business expenses dis-
cussed in this publication on line 34. You
can only include 50% of your business
meals and entertainment on that line.
See your forms instructions for more infor-
mation on how to complete your tax return.
Both self-employed and an employee. If
you are both self-employed and an employee,
you must keep separate records for each
business activity. Report your business ex-
penses for self-employment on Schedule C,
C–EZ, or F (Form 1040), as discussed earlier.
Report your business expenses for your work
as an employee on Form 2106 or 2106–EZ,
as discussed next.
Employees. If you are an employee, you
generally must complete Form 2106 to deduct
your travel, transportation, and entertainment
expenses. However, you can use the shorter
Form 2106–EZ instead of Form 2106 if you
meet both of the following conditions.
1) You were not reimbursed by your em-
ployer for your expenses (amounts in-
cluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are
not considered reimbursements).
2) If you claim car expenses, you use the
standard mileage rate.
For more information on how to report
your expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ,
see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ,
later.
Gifts. If you did not receive any re-
imbursements (amounts included in box 1 of
your Form W–2 are not considered re-
imbursements), the only business expense
you are claiming is for business gifts, and the
Special Rules discussed later do not apply to
you, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ.
Instead, claim the amount of your deductible
business gifts directly on line 20 of Schedule
A (Form 1040).
Statutory employees.If you received a
Form W–2 and the “Statutory employee” box
in box 15 was checked, report your income
and expenses related to that income on
Schedule C or C–EZ (Form 1040). Do not
complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ.
Statutory employees include full-time life
insurance salespersons, certain agent or
commission drivers, traveling salespersons,
and certain homeworkers.
CAUTION
!
If you are entitled to a reimbursement
from your employer but you do not
claim it,  you cannot claim a deduction
for the expenses to which that unclaimed
reimbursement applies.
Reimbursement for personal expenses. If
your employer reimburses you for non-
deductible personal expenses, such as for
vacation trips, your employer must report the
reimbursement as wage income in box 1 of
your Form W–2. You cannot deduct personal
expenses.
Income-producing property. If you have
travel or transportation expenses related to
income-producing property, report your
deductible expenses on the form appropriate
for that activity.
For example, if you have rental real estate
income and expenses, report your expenses
on Schedule E, Supplemental Income and
Loss. See Publication 527, Residential Rental
Property, for more information on the rental
of real estate. If you have deductible
investment-related transportation expenses,
report them on line 22 of Schedule A (Form
1040).
Vehicle Provided by
Your Employer
If your employer provides you with a car, you
may be able to deduct the actual expenses
of operating that car for business purposes.
The amount you can deduct depends on the
amount that your employer included in your
income and the business and personal miles
you drove during the year. You cannot use
the standard mileage rate.
Value reported on Form W–2. Your em-
ployer can figure and report either the actual
value of your personal use of the car or the
value of the car as if you used it only for
personal purposes (100% income inclusion).
Your employer must separately state the
amount if 100% of the annual lease value was
included in your income. If you are unsure
of the amount included in your Form W–2, ask
your employer.
Full value included in your income.You
can deduct the value of the business use of
an employer-provided car if your employer
reported 100% of the value of the car in your
income. On your 2000 Form W–2, the amount
of the value will be included in box 1, Wages,
tips, other compensation, and box 12, Bene-
fits included in box 1.
To claim your expenses, complete Part II,
Sections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter your
actual expenses on line 23 of Section C and
include the entire value of the employer-pro-
vided car on line 25. Complete the rest of the
form.
Less than full value included in your in-
come. If less than the full annual lease value
of the car was included on your Form W–2,
this means that your Form W–2 only includes
the value of your personal use of the car.
Do not enter this value on your Form 2106;
it is not deductible.
If you paid any actual costs (that your
employer did not provide or reimburse you
for) to operate the car, you can deduct the
business portion of those costs. Examples of
costs that you may have are gas, oil, and re-
pairs. Complete Part II, Sections A and C, of
Form 2106. Enter your actual costs on line
23 of Section C and leave line 25 blank.
Complete the rest of the form.
Reimbursements
This section explains what to do when you
receive an advance or are reimbursed for any
of the employee business expenses dis-
cussed in this publication.
If you received an advance, allowance, or
reimbursement for your expenses, how you
report this amount and your expenses de-
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 25

pends on whether the reimbursement was
paid to you under an accountable plan or a
nonaccountable plan.
This section explains the two types of
plans, how per diem and car allowances
simplify proving the amount of your expenses,
and the tax treatment of your reimbursements
and expenses. It also covers rules for inde-
pendent contractors.
No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed
or given an allowance for your expenses if
you are paid a salary or commission with the
understanding that you will pay your own ex-
penses. In this situation, you have no re-
imbursement or allowance arrangement, and
you do not have to read this section on re-
imbursements. Instead, see Completing
Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, later, for informa-
tion on completing your tax return.
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A
reimbursement or other expense allowance
arrangement is a system or plan that an em-
ployer uses to pay, substantiate, and recover
the expenses, advances, reimbursements,
and amounts charged to the employer for
employee business expenses. Arrangements
include per diem and car allowances.
A per diem allowance is a fixed amount
of daily reimbursement your employer gives
you for your lodging, meals, and incidental
expenses when you are away from home on
business. (The term “incidental expenses” is
defined in chapter 1 under Standard Meal
Allowance.) A car allowance is an amount
your employer gives you for the business use
of your car.
Your employer should tell you what
method of reimbursement is used and what
records you must provide.
Employers. If you are an employer and you
reimburse employee business expenses, how
you treat this reimbursement on your em-
ployee's Form W–2 depends in part on
whether you have an accountable plan. Re-
imbursements treated as paid under an ac-
countable plan, as explained next, are not
reported as pay. Reimbursements treated as
paid under nonaccountable plans, as ex-
plained later, are reported as pay. See Publi-
cation 15, Circular E, Employer's Tax Guide,
for information on employee pay.
Accountable Plans
To be an accountable plan, your employer's
reimbursement or allowance arrangement
must include all three of the following rules.
1) Your expenses must have a business
connection — that is, you must have
paid or incurred deductible expenses
while performing services as an em-
ployee of your employer.
2) You must adequately account to your
employer for these expenses within a
reasonable period of time.
3) You must return any excess reimburse-
ment or allowance within a reasonable
period of time.
“Adequate accounting” and “returning ex-
cess reimbursements” are discussed later.
An excess reimbursement or allowance
is any amount you are paid that is more than
the business-related expenses that you ade-
quately accounted for to your employer.
The definition of reasonable period of
time depends on the facts and circumstances
of your situation. However, regardless of the
facts and circumstances of your situation,
actions that take place within the times spec-
ified in the following list will be treated as
taking place within a reasonable period of
time.
1) You receive an advance within 30 days
of the time you have an expense.
2) You adequately account for your ex-
penses within 60 days after they were
paid or incurred.
3) You return any excess reimbursement
within 120 days after the expense was
paid or incurred.
4) You are given a periodic statement (at
least quarterly) that asks you to either
return or adequately account for out-
standing advances and you comply
within 120 days of the statement.
Employee meets accountable plan rules.
If you meet the three rules for accountable
plans, your employer should not include any
reimbursements in your income in box 1 of
your Form W–2. If your expenses equal your
reimbursement, you do not complete Form
2106. You have no deduction since your ex-
penses and reimbursement are equal.
TIP
If your employer included reimburse-
ments in box 1 of your Form W–2 and
you meet all three rules for account-
able plans, ask your employer for a corrected
Form W –2.
Accountable plan rules not met. Even
though you are reimbursed under an ac-
countable plan, some of your expenses may
not meet all three rules. Those expenses that
fail to meet all three rules for accountable
plans are treated as having been reimbursed
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed
later).
Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses. You may be reimbursed under your
employer's accountable plan for expenses
related to that employer's business, some of
which are deductible as employee business
expenses and some of which are not
deductible. The reimbursements you receive
for the nondeductible expenses do not meet
rule (1) for accountable plans, and they are
treated as paid under a nonaccountable plan.
Example. Your employer's plan reim-
burses you for travel expenses while away
from home on business and also for meals
when you work late at the office, even though
you are not away from home. The part of the
arrangement that reimburses you for the
nondeductible meals when you work late at
the office is treated as paid under a nonac-
countable plan.
TIP
The employer makes the decision
whether to reimburse employees un-
der an accountable plan or a nonac-
countable plan. If you are an employee who
receives payments under a nonaccountable
plan, you cannot convert these amounts to
payments under an accountable plan by vol-
untarily accounting to your employer for the
expenses and voluntarily returning excess
reimbursements to the employer.
Adequate Accounting
One of the three rules for an accountable plan
is that you must adequately account to your
employer for your expenses. You adequately
account by giving your employer a statement
of expense, an account book, a diary, or a
similar record in which you entered each ex-
pense at or near the time you had it, along
with documentary evidence (such as receipts)
of your travel, mileage, and other employee
business expenses. (See Table 4 in chapter
5 for details you need to enter in your record
and documents you need to prove certain
expenses.)
You must account for all amounts you re-
ceived from your employer during the year
as advances, reimbursements, or allowances.
This includes amounts you charged to your
employer by credit card or other method. You
must give your employer the same type of
records and supporting information that you
would have to give to the IRS if the IRS
questioned a deduction on your return. You
must pay back the amount of any reimburse-
ment or other expense allowance for which
you do not adequately account or that is more
than the amount for which you accounted.
Per Diem and Car Allowances
If your employer reimburses you for your ex-
penses using a per diem or a car allowance,
you can generally use the allowance as proof
for the amount of your expenses. A per diem
or car allowance satisfies the adequate ac-
counting requirements for the amount of your
expenses only if all four of the following con-
ditions apply.
1) Your employer reasonably limits pay-
ments of your expenses to those that are
ordinary and necessary in the conduct
of the trade or business.
2) The allowance is similar in form to and
not more than the federal rate (defined
later).
3) You prove the time (dates), place, and
business purpose of your expenses to
your employer (as explained in Table 4)
within a reasonable period of time.
4) You are not related to your employer (as
defined under Standard Meal Allowance
in chapter 1). If you are related to your
employer, you must be able to prove
your expenses to the IRS even if you
have already adequately accounted to
your employer and returned any excess
reimbursement.
If the IRS finds that an employer's travel al-
lowance practices are not based on reason-
ably accurate estimates of travel costs (in-
cluding recognition of cost differences in
different areas for per diem amounts), you
will not be considered to have accounted to
your employer. In this case, you must be able
to prove your expenses to the IRS.
The federal rate. The federal rate can be
figured using any one of the following meth-
ods.
1) For per diem amounts:
a) The regular federal per diem rate.
b) The standard meal allowance.
c) The high-low rate.
2) For car expenses:
Page 26 Chapter 6  How To Report

a) The standard mileage rate.
b) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
TIP
For per diem amounts, use the rate
in effect for the area where you stop
for sleep or rest.
Regular federal per diem rate. The reg-
ular federal per diem rate is the highest
amount that the federal government will pay
to its employees for lodging, meals, and inci-
dental expenses (or meals and incidental ex-
penses only) while they are traveling away
from home in a particular area. The rates are
different for different locations. Your employer
should have these rates available. (Employ-
ers can get Publication 1542, which gives the
rates in the continental United States for the
current year.)
The standard meal allowance.  The
standard meal allowance (discussed in chap-
ter 1) is the federal rate for meals and inci-
dental expenses (M&IE). The rate for most
small localities in the United States is $30.
Most major cities and many other localities
qualify for higher rates. The rates for all lo-
calities within the continental United States
are listed in Publication 1542.
You receive an allowance only for meals
and incidental expenses when your employer
does one of the following.
1) Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in
kind).
2) Reimburses you, based on your receipts,
for the actual cost of your lodging.
3) Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for
your lodging.
4) Does not have a reasonable belief that
you had (or will have) lodging expenses,
such as when you stay with friends or
relatives or sleep in the cab of your truck.
5) Computes the allowance on a basis
similar to that used in computing your
compensation, such as number of hours
worked or miles traveled.
High-low rate.  This is a simplified
method of computing the federal per diem
rate for travel within the continental United
States. It eliminates the need to keep a cur-
rent list of the per diem rate for each city.
Under the high-low method, the per diem
amount for travel during 2000 is $201 (in-
cluding $42 for M&IE) for certain high-cost
locations. All other areas have a per diem
amount of $124 (including $34 for M&IE).
(Employers can get Publication 1542, which
gives the areas eligible for the $201 per diem
amount under the high-low method for all or
part of the year.)
Prorating the standard meal allowance
on partial days of travel. The standard meal
allowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel.
If you travel for part of a day, such as on the
days you depart and return, you must prorate
the full-day M&IE rate. This rule also applies
if your employer uses the regular federal per
diem rate or the high-low rate.
You can use either of the following meth-
ods to figure the federal M&IE for that day.
 1) Method 1:
a) For the day you depart, add 
3/4 of
the standard meal allowance
amount for that day.
b) For the day you return, add 
3/4 of the
standard meal allowance amount
for the preceding day.
2) Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-
lowance using any method that you
consistently apply and that is in accord-
ance with reasonable business practice.
For example, an employer can treat 2 full
days of per diem (that includes M&IE)
paid for travel away from home from 9
a.m. of one day to 5 p.m. of the next
day as being no more than the federal
rate. This is true even though a federal
employee would be limited to a re-
imbursement of M&IE for only 1
1/2 days
of the federal M&IE rate.
The standard mileage rate.This is a set
rate per mile that you can use to compute
your deductible car expenses. For 2000, the
standard mileage rate is 32
1/2 cents a mile for
all business miles. This rate is adjusted peri-
odically.
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR).This is
an allowance your employer may use to re-
imburse your car expenses. Under this
method, your employer pays an allowance
that includes a combination of payments
covering fixed and variable costs, such as a
cents-per-mile rate to cover your variable op-
erating costs (such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat
amount to cover your fixed costs (such as
depreciation (or lease payments), insurance,
etc.). If your employer chooses to use this
method, your employer will request the nec-
essary records from you.
Reporting your expenses with a per diem
or car allowance. If your reimbursement is
in the form of an allowance received under
an accountable plan, the following two facts
affect your reporting.
1) The federal rate.
2) Whether the allowance or your actual
expenses were more than the federal
rate.
The following discussions explain where to
report your expenses depending upon how
the amount of your allowance compares to
the federal rate.
Allowance LESS than or EQUAL to the
federal rate.If your allowance is less than
or equal to the federal rate, the allowance will
not be included in box 1 of your Form W–2.
You do not need to report the related ex-
penses or the allowance on your return if your
expenses are equal to or less than the al-
lowance.
However, if your actual expenses are
more than your allowance, you can complete
Form 2106 and deduct the excess amount
on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you are using
actual expenses, you must be able to prove
to the IRS the total amount of your expenses
and reimbursements for the entire year. If you
are using the standard meal allowance or the
standard mileage rate, you do not have to
prove that amount.
Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a
2-day business trip to Denver. The federal
rate for Denver is $125 per day. As required
by his employer's accountable plan, he ac-
counts for the time (dates), place, and busi-
ness purpose of the trip. His employer reim-
burses him $125 a day ($250 total) for living
expenses. Jeremy's living expenses in
Denver are not more than $125 a day.
Jeremy's employer does not include any
of the reimbursement on his Form W–2 and
Jeremy does not deduct the expenses on his
return.
Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-day
business trip to Boston. Matt's employer uses
the high-low method to reimburse employees.
Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is
given an advance of $180 a day ($360 total)
for his lodging, meals, and incidental ex-
penses. Matt's actual expenses totaled $490.
Since Matt's $490 of expenses are more
than his $360 advance, he includes the ex-
cess expenses when he itemizes his de-
ductions. Matt completes Form 2106 (show-
ing all of his expenses and reimbursements).
He must also allocate his reimbursement be-
tween his meals and other expenses as dis-
cussed later under Completing Forms 2106
and 2106–EZ.
Example 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a
year for business. Under her employer's ac-
countable plan, she accounts for the time
(dates), place, and business purpose of each
trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allow-
ance of 20 cents a mile.
Since Nicole's $3,250 expenses computed
under the standard mileage rate (10,000
miles × 32
1/2 cents) are more than her $2,000
reimbursement (10,000 miles × 20 cents), she
itemizes her deductions to claim the excess
expenses. Nicole completes Form 2106
(showing all of her expenses and reimburse-
ments) and enters $1,250 ($3,250 − $2,000)
as an itemized deduction.
Allowance MORE than the federal rate.
If your allowance is more than the federal
rate, your employer must include the allow-
ance amount up to the federal rate in box 13
of your Form W–2. This amount is not taxa-
ble. However, the excess allowance will be
included in box 1 of your Form W–2. You
must report this part of your allowance as if
it were wage income.
If your actual expenses are less than or
equal to the federal rate, you do not complete
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on
your return.
However, if your actual expenses are
more than the federal rate, you can complete
Form 2106 and deduct those excess ex-
penses. You must report on Form 2106 your
reimbursements up to the federal rate (as
shown in box 13 of your Form W–2) and all
your expenses. You should be able to prove
these amounts to the IRS.
Example 1. Laura lives and works in
Austin. Her employer sent her to Albuquerque
for 2 days on business. Laura's employer paid
the hotel directly for her lodging and reim-
bursed Laura $40 a day ($80 total) for meals
and incidental expenses. Laura's actual meal
expenses were not more than the federal rate
for Albuquerque, which is $38 per day.
Her employer included the $4 that was
more than the federal rate [($40 − $38) × 2]
in box 1 of Laura's Form W–2. Her employer
shows $76 ($38 a day × 2) in box 13 of her
Form W–2. This amount is not included in
Laura's income. Laura does not have to
complete Form 2106; however, she must in-
clude the $4 in her gross income as wages
(by reporting the total amount shown in box
1 of her Form W–2).
Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and
works for the same employer as Laura. In
May the employer sent Joe to San Diego for
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 27

Table 5.
IF the type of reimbursement (or
other expense allowance)
arrangement is under:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: 
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
THEN the employer
reports on Form W-2:
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
No reimbursement plan:
Either adequate accounting or
return of excess, or both, not
required by plan
No amount.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 13 — it is not
reported in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
All expenses and
reimbursements only if
excess expenses are
claimed. Otherwise,
form is not filed.
All expenses.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106: *
Per diem or mileage allowance
exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the
federal rate only and
 excess not
returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 13 — it is not
reported in box 1.
All expenses (and
reimbursements
reported on Form W-2,
box 13) only if expenses
in excess of the federal
rate are claimed.
Otherwise, form is not
filed.
No amount.
Returning Excess
Reimbursements
Under an accountable plan, you are required
to return any excess reimbursement or other
expense allowances for your business ex-
penses to the person paying the reimburse-
ment or allowance. Excess reimbursement
means any amount for which you did not ad-
equately account within a reasonable period
of time. For example, if you received a travel
advance and you did not spend all the money
on business-related expenses, or you do not
have proof of all your expenses, you have an
excess reimbursement.
“Adequate accounting” and “reasonable
period of time” were discussed earlier in this
chapter.
Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-
vance if your employer provides you with an
expense allowance before you actually have
the expense, and the allowance is reasonably
expected to be no more than your expense.
Under an accountable plan, you are required
to adequately account to your employer for
this advance and to return any excess within
a reasonable period of time.
If you do not adequately account for or do
not return any excess advance within a rea-
sonable period of time, the amount you do
not account for or return will be treated as
having been paid under a nonaccountable
plan (discussed later).
Unproved amounts. If you do not prove
that you actually traveled on each day for
which you received a per diem or car allow-
ance (proving the elements described in Ta-
ble 4), you must return this unproved amount
of the travel advance within a reasonable
period of time. If you do not do this, the un-
proved amount will be considered paid under
a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
Per diem allowance MORE than federal
rate. If your employer's accountable plan
pays you an allowance that is higher than the
federal rate, you do not have to return the
difference between the two rates for the pe-
riod you can prove business-related travel
expenses. However, the difference will be
reported as wages on your Form W–2. This
excess amount is considered paid under a
nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
Example. Your employer sends you on
a 5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives
you a $225 ($45 × 5 days) advance to cover
your meals and incidental expenses. The
federal per diem for meals and incidental ex-
penses for Phoenix is $42. Your trip lasts only
3 days. Under your employer's accountable
plan, you must return the $90 ($45 × 2 days)
advance for the 2 days you did not travel. You
do not have to return the $9 difference be-
tween the allowance you received and the
federal rate for Phoenix [($45 − $42) × 3
days]. However, the $9 will be reported on
your Form W–2 as wages.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement
or expense allowance arrangement that does
not meet one or more of the three rules listed
earlier under Accountable Plans.
In addition, even if your employer has an
accountable plan, the following payments will
be treated as being paid under a nonac-
countable plan:
1) Excess reimbursements you fail to return
to your employer, and
4 days and paid the hotel directly for Joe's
hotel bill. The employer reimbursed Joe $50
a day for his meals and incidental expenses.
The federal rate for San Diego is $46 a day.
Joe can prove that his actual meal ex-
penses totaled $290. His employer's ac-
countable plan will not pay more than $50 a
day for travel to San Diego, so Joe does not
give his employer the records that prove that
he actually spent $290. However, he does
account for the time, place, and business
purpose of the trip. This is Joe's only business
trip this year.
Joe was reimbursed $200 ($50 × 4 days),
which is $16 more than the federal rate of
$184 ($46 × 4 days). The employer includes
the $16 as income on Joe's Form W–2 in box
1. The employer also enters $184 in box 13
of Joe's Form W–2.
Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his
deductible expenses. He enters the total of
his actual expenses for the year ($290) on
Form 2106. He also enters the reimburse-
ments that were not included in his income
($184). His total deductible expense, before
the 50% limit, is $106. After he figures the
50% limit on his unreimbursed meals and
entertainment, he will include the balance,
$53, as an itemized deduction.
Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles
for business. Under her employer's account-
able plan, she gets reimbursed 35 cents a
mile, which is 2
1/2 cents a mile more than the
standard mileage rate.
Debbie's employer must include the re-
imbursement amount up to the standard
mileage rate, $3,250 (10,000 miles × 32
1/2
cents), in box 13 of her Form W–2. That
amount is not taxable. Her employer must
also include $250 (10,000 miles × 2
1/2 cents)
in  box 1 of her Form W–2. This is the re-
imbursement that is more than the standard
mileage rate.
If Debbie's expenses are equal to or less
than the standard mileage rate, she would not
complete Form 2106. If her expenses are
more than the standard mileage rate, she
would complete Form 2106 and report her
total expenses and reimbursement (shown in
box 13 of her Form W–2). She would then
claim the excess expenses as an itemized
deduction.
Page 28 Chapter 6  How To Report

2) Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses related to your employer's busi-
ness. See Reimbursement of non-
deductible expenses, earlier, under
Accountable Plans.
An arrangement that repays you for business
expenses by reducing the amount reported
as your wages, salary, or other pay will be
treated as a nonaccountable plan. This is
because you are entitled to receive the full
amount of your pay whether or not you have
any business expenses.
If you are not sure if the reimbursement
or expense allowance arrangement is an ac-
countable or nonaccountable plan, ask your
employer.
Reporting your expenses under a nonac-
countable plan.Your employer will combine
the amount of any reimbursement or other
expense allowance paid to you under a non-
accountable plan with your wages, salary, or
other pay. Your employer will report the total
in box 1 of your Form W–2.
You must complete Form 2106 or
2106–EZ and itemize your deductions to de-
duct your expenses for travel, transportation,
meals, or entertainment. Your meal and
entertainment expenses will be subject to the
50% limit discussed in chapter 2. Also, your
total expenses will be subject to the 2%-of-
adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to
most miscellaneous itemized deductions.
Example 1. Kim's employer gives her
$500 a month ($6,000 total for the year) for
her business expenses. Kim does not have
to provide any proof of her expenses to her
employer, and Kim can keep any funds that
she does not spend.
Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-
countable plan. Her employer will include the
$6,000 on Kim's Form W–2 as if it were
wages. If Kim wants to deduct her business
expenses, she must complete Form 2106 or
2106–EZ and itemize her deductions.
Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month
by his employer. On days that he travels away
from home on business, his employer desig-
nates $50 a day of his salary as paid to re-
imburse his travel expenses. Because his
employer would pay Kevin his monthly salary
whether or not he was traveling away from
home, the arrangement is a nonaccountable
plan. No part of the $50 a day designated by
his employer is treated as paid under an ac-
countable plan.
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients
This section provides rules for independent
contractors who incur expenses on behalf of
a client or customer. The rules cover the re-
porting and substantiation of certain ex-
penses discussed in this publication, and they
affect both independent contractors and their
clients or customers.
You are considered an independent con-
tractor if you are self-employed and you per-
form services for a customer or client.
Accounting to Your Client
If you received a reimbursement or an allow-
ance for travel, entertainment, or gift ex-
penses that you incurred on behalf of a client,
you should provide an adequate accounting
of these expenses to your client. If you do not
account to your client for these expenses, you
must include any reimbursements or allow-
ances in income. You must keep adequate
records of these expenses whether or not you
account to your client for these expenses.
If you do not separately account for and
seek reimbursement for meals and enter-
tainment in connection with providing services
for a client, you are subject to the 50% limit
on those expenses. See 50% Limit in chapter
2.
Adequate accounting. As a self-employed
person, you adequately account by reporting
your actual expenses. You should follow the
recordkeeping rules in chapter 5.
How to report. For information on how
to report expenses on your tax return, see
Self-employed at the beginning of this chap-
ter.
Required Records for
Clients or Customers
If you are a client or customer, you generally
do not have to keep records to prove the re-
imbursements or allowances you give, in the
course of your business, to an independent
contractor for travel or gift expenses incurred
on your behalf. However, you must keep
records if:
1) You reimburse the contractor for enter-
tainment expenses incurred on your be-
half, and
2) The contractor adequately accounts to
you for these expenses. 
Contractor adequately accounts. If the
contractor adequately accounts to you for
entertainment expenses, you (the client or
customer) must keep records documenting
each element of the expense, as explained in
chapter 5. Use your records as proof for a
deduction on your tax return. If entertainment
expenses are accounted for separately, you
are subject to the 50% limit on entertainment.
If the contractor adequately accounts to you
for reimbursed amounts, you do not have to
report the amounts on an information return.
Contractor does not adequately account.
If the contractor does not adequately account
to you for allowances or reimbursements of
entertainment expenses, you do not have to
keep records of these items. You are not
subject to the 50% limit on entertainment in
this case. You can deduct the reimburse-
ments or allowances as payment for services
if they are ordinary and necessary business
expenses. However, you must file Form
1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income, to report
amounts paid to the independent contractor
if the total of the reimbursements and any
other fees is $600 or more during the calen-
dar year.
Completing Forms
2106 and 2106–EZ
This section briefly describes how employees
complete Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ. Table 5
explains what the employer reports on Form
W–2 and what the employee reports on Form
2106. The instructions for the forms have
more information on completing them.
CAUTION
!
If you are self-employed, do not file
Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. Report your
expenses on Schedule C, C–EZ, or
F (Form 1040). See the instructions for the
form that you must file.
Form 2106–EZ. You may be able to use the
shorter Form 2106–EZ to claim your em-
ployee business expenses. You can use this
form if you meet both of the following condi-
tions.
1) You were not reimbursed for your ex-
penses or, if you were reimbursed, the
reimbursement was included in your in-
come (box 1 of your Form W–2).
2) If you claim car expenses, you use the
standard mileage rate.
Car expenses. If you used a car to perform
your job as an employee, you may be able to
deduct certain car expenses. These are gen-
erally figured in Part II of Form 2106, and then
claimed on line 1, Column A, of Part I of Form
2106. Car expenses using the standard mile-
age rate can also be figured on Form
2106–EZ by completing Part II and line 1 of
Part I.
Information on use of cars.If you claim
any deduction for the business use of a car,
you must answer certain questions and pro-
vide information about the use of the car. The
information relates to the following items.
 Mileage (total, business, commuting, and
other personal mileage).
 Percentage of business use.
 Date placed in service.
 Use of other vehicles.
 After-work use.
 Whether you have evidence to support
the deduction.
 Whether or not the evidence is written.
Employees must complete Section A, Part II,
Form 2106, or Part II, Form 2106–EZ, to
provide this information.
Standard mileage rate. If you claim a
deduction based on the standard mileage rate
instead of your actual expenses, you must
complete Section B, Part II, Form 2106. The
amount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to line
1, Part I, Form 2106. In addition, on line 2,
Part I, Form 2106, you can deduct parking
fees and tolls that apply to the business use
of the car. If you file Form 2106–EZ, complete
line 1, Part I, for the standard mileage rate
and line 2 for parking fees and tolls. See
Standard Mileage Rate in chapter 4 for infor-
mation on using this rate.
Actual expenses.  If you claim a de-
duction based on actual expenses, you can-
not use Form 2106–EZ. You must complete
Section C, Part II, Form 2106. In addition,
unless you lease your car, you must complete
Section D to show your depreciation de-
duction and any section 179 deduction you
can claim.
If you are still using a car that is fully de-
preciated, continue to complete Section C.
Since you have no depreciation deduction,
enter zero on line 28. In this case, do not
complete Section D.
Car rentals. If you claim car rental ex-
penses on line 24a of Form 2106, you may
have to reduce that expense by an inclusion
amount as described in chapter 4. If so, you
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

can show your car expenses and any inclu-
sion amount as follows.
1) Compute the inclusion amount without
taking into account your business use
percentage for the tax year.
2) Report the inclusion amount from (1) on
line 24b, Part II, Form 2106.
3) Report on line 24c the net amount of car
rental expenses [total car rental ex-
penses minus the inclusion amount
computed in (1)].
The net amount of car rental expenses will
be adjusted on line 27, Part II, of Form 2106,
to reflect the percentage of business use for
the tax year.
Local transportation expenses.Show your
local business transportation expenses that
did not involve overnight travel on line 2,
Column A, of Form 2106 or on line 2, Part I,
of Form 2106–EZ. Also include on this line
business expenses you have for parking fees
and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-
ating your car or expenses of commuting be-
tween your home and work.
Employee business expenses other than
meals and entertainment.Show your other
employee business expenses on lines 3 and
4, Column A, of Form 2106 or on lines 3 and
4 of Form 2106–EZ. Do not include expenses
for meals and entertainment on those lines.
Line 4 is for expenses such as business gifts,
educational expenses (tuition and books),
office-in-the-home expenses, and trade and
professional publications.
TIP
If line 4 expenses are the only ones
you are claiming, you received no re-
imbursements (or the reimbursements
were all included in box 1 of your Form W–2),
and the Special Rules discussed later do not
apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or
2106–EZ. Claim these amounts directly on
line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040). List the
type and amount of each expense on the
dotted lines and include the total on line 20.
Meal and entertainment expenses. Show
the full amount of your expenses for
business-related meals and entertainment on
line 5, Column B, of Form 2106. Include
meals while away from your tax home over-
night and other business meals and enter-
tainment. Enter 50% of the line 8, Column B,
meal and entertainment expenses on line 9,
Column B, of Form 2106.
If you file Form 2106–EZ, enter the full
amount of your meals and entertainment on
the line to the left of line 5 and multiply the
total by 50%. Enter the result on line 5.
Hours of service limits.If you are sub-
ject to the Department of Transportation's
“hours of service” limits (as explained earlier
under Individuals subject to “hours of
service” limits in chapter 2), use 60% instead
of 50%.
Reimbursements. Enter on line 7 of Form
2106 (You cannot use Form 2106–EZ.) the
amounts your employer (or third party) reim-
bursed you that were not reported to you in
box 1 of your Form W–2. This includes any
amount reported under code L in box 13 of
Form W–2.
Allocating your reimbursement. If you
were reimbursed under an accountable plan
and want to deduct excess expenses that
were not reimbursed, you may have to allo-
cate your reimbursement. This is necessary
when your employer pays your reimburse-
ment in the following manner:
1) Pays you a single amount that covers
meals and/or entertainment, as well as
other business expenses, and
2) Does not clearly identify how much is for
deductible meals and/or entertainment.
You must allocate that single payment so that
you know how much to enter in Column A and
Column B of line 7 of Form 2106.
Example. Rob's employer paid him an
expense allowance of $5,000 this year under
an accountable plan. The $5,000 payment
consisted of $2,000 for airfare and $3,000 for
entertainment and car expenses. The em-
ployer did not clearly show how much of the
$3,000 was for the cost of deductible enter-
tainment. Rob actually spent $6,500 during
the year ($2,000 for airfare, $2,000 for enter-
tainment, and $2,500 for car expenses).
Since the airfare allowance was clearly
identified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the pay-
ment goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106.
To allocate the remaining $3,000, Rob uses
the worksheet from the instructions for Form
2106. His completed worksheet follows.
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668
($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) in
Column A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in Col-
umn B.
After you complete the form. After you
have completed your Form 2106 or 2106–EZ,
follow the directions on that form to deduct
your expenses on the appropriate line of your
tax return. For most taxpayers, this is line 20
of Schedule A (Form 1040). However, if you
are a government official paid on a fee basis,
a performing artist, or a disabled employee
with impairment-related work expenses, see
Special Rules, later.
Limits on employee business expenses.
Your employee business expenses may be
subject to any of the three limits described
next. They are figured in the following order
on the specified form.
1. Limit on meals and entertainment.
Certain meal and entertainment expenses are
subject to a 50% limit. If you are an em-
ployee, you figure this limit on line 9 of Form
2106 or line 5 of Form 2106–EZ. (See 50%
Limit in chapter 2.)
2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions. If you are an employee, deduct
your employee business expenses (as figured
on Form 2106 or 2106–EZ) on line 20 of
Schedule A (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous
itemized deductions, including employee
business expenses, are subject to a
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. This limit
is figured on line 25 of Schedule A (Form
1040).
3. Limit on total itemized deductions.
If your adjusted gross income (line 34 of Form
1040) is more than $128,950 ($64,475 if you
are married filing separately), the total of
certain itemized deductions, including em-
ployee business expenses, may be limited.
See your form instructions for information on
how to figure this limit.
Special Rules
This section discusses special rules that ap-
ply only to government officials who are paid
on a fee basis, performing artists, and disa-
bled employees with impairment-related work
expenses.
Officials Paid on a Fee Basis
Certain fee-basis officials can claim their em-
ployee business expenses whether or not
they itemize their other deductions on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Fee-basis officials are persons who are
employed by a state or local government and
who are paid in whole or in part on a fee ba-
sis. They can deduct their business expenses
in performing services in that job as an ad-
justment to gross income rather than as a
miscellaneous itemized deduction.
If you are a fee-basis official, include your
employee business expenses from line 10 of
Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in the
total on line 32 of Form 1040. Write “FBO”
and the amount of your employee business
expenses in the space to the left of line 32
of Form 1040.
Expenses of Certain
Performing Artists
If you are a performing artist, you may qualify
to deduct your employee business expenses
as an adjustment to gross income rather than
as a miscellaneous itemized deduction. To
qualify, you must meet all of the following
requirements.
1) During the tax year, you perform ser-
vices in the performing arts for at least
two employers.
2) You receive at least $200 each from any
two of these employers.
3) Your related performing-arts business
expenses are more than 10% of your
gross income from the performance of
those services.
4) Your adjusted gross income is not more
than $16,000 before deducting these
business expenses.
Special rules for married persons.If you
are married, you must file a joint return unless
you lived apart from your spouse at all times
during the tax year. If you file a joint return,
you must figure requirements (1), (2), and (3)
separately for both you and your spouse.
However, requirement (4) applies to your and
your spouse's combined adjusted gross in-
come.
Where to report.If you meet all of the above
requirements, you should first complete Form
2106 or 2106–EZ. Then you include your
performing-arts-related expenses from line 10
1. Enter the total amount of re-
imbursements your employer
gave you that were not reported
to you in box 1 of Form W–2 ... 3,000
2. Enter the total amount of your
expenses for the periods cov-
ered by this reimbursement ...... 4,500
3. Of the amount on line 2, enter
your total expense for meals
and entertainment ..................... 2,000
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the
result as a decimal (rounded to
at least three places) ................  .444 
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter
the result here and in Column
B, line 7 ..................................... 1,332
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter
the result here and in Column
A, line 7 ..................................... 1,668
Page 30 Chapter 6  How To Report

of Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in
the total on line 32 of Form 1040. Write
“QPA” and the amount of your performing-
arts-related expenses in the space to the left
of line 32 of Form 1040.
If you do not meet all of the requirements,
you do not qualify to deduct your expenses
as an adjustment to gross income. Instead,
you must complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ
and deduct your employee business ex-
penses as an itemized deduction on line 20
of Schedule A (Form 1040).
Impairment-Related Work
Expenses of Disabled Employees
If you are an employee with a physical or
mental disability, your impairment-related
work expenses are not subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap-
plies to most other employee business ex-
penses. After you complete Form 2106 or
2106–EZ, enter your impairment-related work
expenses from line 10 of Form 2106 or line
6 of Form 2106–EZ on line 27 of Schedule A
(Form 1040), and identify the type and
amount of this expense on the dotted line next
to line 27. Enter your employee business ex-
penses that are unrelated to your disability
from line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6 of Form
2106–EZ on line 20 of Schedule A (Form
1040).
Impairment-related work expenses are
your allowable expenses for attendant care
at your workplace and other expenses in
connection with your workplace that are nec-
essary for you to be able to work.
You are disabled if you have:
 A physical or mental disability (for exam-
ple, blindness or deafness) that func-
tionally limits your being employed, or
 A physical or mental impairment (for ex-
ample, a sight or hearing impairment) that
substantially limits one or more of your
major life activities, such as performing
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-
ing, learning, or working.
You can deduct impairment-related ex-
penses as business expenses if they are:
 Necessary for you to do your work satis-
factorily,
 For goods and services not required or
used, other than incidentally, in your
personal activities, and
 Not specifically covered under other in-
come tax laws.
Example. You are blind. You must use
a reader to do your work. You use the reader
both during your regular working hours at
your place of work and outside your regular
working hours away from your place of work.
The reader's services are only for your work.
You can deduct your expenses for the reader
as business expenses.
Illustrated Examples
The following examples illustrate the reporting
of travel, entertainment, gift, and transporta-
tion expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ.
Business use of a car is shown using actual
car expenses in Example 1 and the standard
mileage rate in Example 2. Sample records
that prove some of the claimed expenses are
also shown.
Example 1. David Pine purchased a car
for $18,500 (including sales tax) on January
6, 2000. In 2000, he used the car 70% for
business purposes. A sample page from
David's logbook is illustrated in Table 6. He
records his business mileage (but not his
personal miles) and expenses daily.
David uses Form 2106 to claim  actual car
expenses. He completes Part II, Section A,
as shown later on his illustrated form. He
does not claim the section 179 deduction. He
uses the MACRS double declining balance
method (200% DB) to determine his depreci-
ation deduction.
His depreciation deduction normally would
be $2,590 [$18,500 (unadjusted basis) × 70%
(business use) × 20% (from Table 3 )]. How-
ever, it is limited in the first year to $2,142
[$3,060 (from the Maximum Depreciation
Limits for Cars table shown in chapter 4) ×
70%]. He enters these amounts in Part II,
Section D.
His other car expenses included $3,080
for gas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters
this amount in Part II, Section C, and multi-
plies it by the 70% business use. He adds this
amount ($2,156) to the depreciation de-
duction ($2,142) and reports the total ($4,298)
on line 1, Part I.
His other transportation expenses for
parking fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,190. He
enters this amount on line 2, Part I. David's
employer reimbursed him a total of $2,940 for
his car and transportation expenses. This
amount was paid from an accountable plan
and was not shown on David's Form W–2.
However, since he is claiming expenses that
are more than his reimbursements, he must
show the entire reimbursement amount on
line 7, Column A, Part I. Since David had no
meal or entertainment expenses, he enters
his excess deductible expenses ($2,548) on
line 10, Part I. He can deduct these expenses
(subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
limit) on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040)
if he itemizes his deductions.
Example 2. Bill Wilson is an employee
of Fashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In
a typical week, Bill leaves his home on Long
Island on Monday morning and drives to
Albany to exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days
to prospective customers. Then he drives to
Troy to show Fashion's new line of merchan-
dise to Town Department Store, an old cus-
tomer. While in Troy, he talks with Tom
Brown, purchasing agent for Town Depart-
ment Store, to discuss the new line. He later
takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinner
to discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion's new
line of clothing.
Bill purchased his car on January 3, 1997.
He uses the standard mileage rate for car
expense purposes. He records his total mile-
age, business mileage, parking fees, and tolls
for the year. Bill records his expenses and
other pertinent information in his Weekly
Traveling Expense and Entertainment Rec-
ord, shown in Table 7. He obtains receipts for
Table 6. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log
Date
6/7/00
Table 6. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name:  David Pine
Destination
(City, Town, or Area)
Business
Purpose Start Stop
Miles
this trip
Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
Odometer Readings
6/8/00
6/9/00
6/10/00
6/11/00
6/12/00
6/13/00
Local
(St. Louis)
Indianapolis
Louisville
Return to
St. Louis
Local
(St. Louis)
Weekly
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Sales calls
Sales calls
See Bob Smith
(Pot. Client)
Sales calls
8,097
8,211
8,486
8,599
8,914
8,097
8,188
8,486
8,599
8,875
9,005
9,005
91
275
113
276
91
846
6,236
Gas
Parking
Gas/Repair
flat tire
Gas
$ 18.25
2.00
16.50
17.25
$ 62.00
$993.00
8.00
Expenses
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

David Pine 559 00 9559Sales
4,298
1,190
5,488
2,940
2,548
2,548
2,548
OMB No. 1545-0139Employee Business Expenses2106Form
/H17075See separate instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements
Column BColumn A
Step 1 Enter Your Expenses Meals and
Entertainment
Other Than Meals
and Entertainment
1
Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See
instructions.)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging,
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not
include meals and entertainment
4
4
5Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions)5
Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5
6
6
Note: If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8.
Step 2 Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements
reported under code “L” in box 13 of your Form W-2 (see
instructions)
7
7
Step 3 Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040)
8
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if
line 7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as
income on Form 1040, line 7
8
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form
2106 to your return.
9
9
10
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal
expenses by 60% (.60) instead of 50%. For details, see
instructions.)
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. (Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified
performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on
where to enter the total.)
/H1707510
Cat. No. 11700NFor Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Form 2106 (2000)
Part I
(99)
2000
Page 32 Chapter 6  How To Report

/H12011
/H12011
16 0 0
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
3,080
3,080
2,156
2,142
4,298
18,500
12,950
200DB 20%
2,590
2,590
3,060
2,142
2,142
/H12011
Page 2Form 2106 (2000)
Vehicle Expenses
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
//1111 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service
12 milesmiles12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2000
milesmiles1313 Business miles included on line 12
%%1414 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12
milesmiles1515 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance
milesmiles1616 Commuting miles included on line 12
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 milesmiles17
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?18 NoYes
Not applicableNoYesIf your employer provided you with a vehicle, is personal use during off-duty hours permitted?19
NoYes
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?21 NoYes
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?20
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or
Section C.)
22 Multiply line 13 by 32 1⁄2¢ (.325) 22
Section C—Actual Expenses (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle
insurance, etc.
23
23
24a24a Vehicle rentals
24bb Inclusion amount (see instructions)
24cc Subtract line 24b from line 24a
Value of employer-provided
vehicle (applies only if 100% of
annual lease value was included
on Form W-2—see instructions)
25
25
2626 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25
Multiply line 26 by the
percentage on line 14
27
27
28
Depreciation. Enter amount
from line 38 below
28
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total
here and on line 1 29
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C
for the vehicle.)
(a) Vehicle 1 (b) Vehicle 2
Enter cost or other basis (see
instructions)
30
30
Enter amount of section 179
deduction (see instructions)
31
31
Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see
instructions if you elected the
section 179 deduction)
32
32
Enter depreciation method and
percentage (see instructions)
33
33
Multiply line 32 by the percentage
on line 33 (see instructions)
34
34
35Add lines 31 and 3435
Enter the limit from the table in
the line 36 instructions
36
36
Multiply line 36 by the
percentage on line 14
37
37
Enter the smaller of line 35 or
line 37. Also enter this amount
on line 28 above
38
38
Part II
//
Form 2106 (2000)
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Travel and transportation expenses
Table 7. Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
From: August 2, 2000 To: August 8, 2000 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
Travel Expenses:
Airlines
1.
Excess baggage
Bus - Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Hotel and Motel
(Detail in Schedule B)
Entertainment
(Detail in Schedule C)
Other Expenses:
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s)
Trade Shows
2.
3.
4.
Car Expenses: (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
5.
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A - Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B - Lodging
Schedule C - Entertainment
Date
6.
Hotel
or
Motel
Name
City
August 6, 2000 Bar
Dinner
Item Place
John’s Steak House
Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
Troy
Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.15 00
35 00
Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern
Hotel
Albany Albany Albany Troy
57,600
57,445
155
155
57,620
57,600
20
57,650
57,620
57,660
57,650
57,840
57,660
30 10 395
170103020
180
385
40 0
87 25 120 00 117 75 111 50 19 50 456 00
10 0030 0 30 0
20 00 20 00
15 0015 00 30 00
40 00
15 0 10 0 25 0
50 00
22 00
97 5
50 00
18 25
10 00
67 5
50 00
17 50
92 5
60 0 52 5
82 5
45 00
50 00
70 0
85 0
25 00
45 75
195 00
57 75
50 00
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Other reimbursements
TOTAL
N/A
Page 34 Chapter 6  How To Report

Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
6,500
8,975
430
2,251
18,481
139 7
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
4,502
325
OMB No. 1545-1441
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
1
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multipy line 8a by 321⁄2¢
(.325)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and entertainment4 4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ x 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses by 60%
(.60) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
(Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with
disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2000)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting expenses attributable to your job.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2000.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2000, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
General Instructions
Section references are to the Internal
Revenue Code.
Purpose of Form
You may use Form 2106-EZ instead of Form
2106 to claim your unreimbursed employee
business expenses if you meet all the
requirements listed above Part I.
A Change To Note
The standard mileage rate has been
increased to 32
1⁄2 cents for each mile of
business use in 2000.
Recordkeeping
You cannot deduct expenses for travel
(including meals, unless you used the
standard meal allowance), entertainment,
gifts, or use of a car or other listed property,
unless you keep records to prove the time,
place, business purpose, business
relationship (for entertainment and gifts), and
amounts of these expenses. Generally, you
must also have receipts for all lodging
expenses (regardless of the amount) and any
other expense of $75 or more.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2000 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage
rate for the first year you placed the vehicle in service or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the
portion of the lease period after 1997.
Additional Information
For more details about employee business
expenses, see:
Pub. 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Pub. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions
Pub. 587, Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care Providers)
Pub. 946, How To Depreciate Property
2000
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

his expenses for lodging and for any other
expenses of $75 or more.
During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000
miles of which 20,000 miles were for busi-
ness. Following the instructions for Part II of
Form 2106, he answers all the questions and
figures his car expense to be $6,500 (20,000
business miles × 32
1/2 cents standard mileage
rate.
His total employee business expenses are
shown in the following table.
Bill received an allowance of $3,600 ($300
per month) to help offset his expenses. Bill
did not have to account to his employer for
the reimbursement and the $3,600 was in-
cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W–2.
Because Bill's reimbursement was in-
cluded in his income and he is using the
standard mileage rate for his car expenses,
he files Form 2106–EZ with his tax return.
7.
How To Get Tax
Help
You can get help with unresolved tax is-
sues, order free publications and forms, ask
tax questions, and get more information from
the IRS in several ways. By selecting the
method that is best for you, you will have
quick and easy access to tax help.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
payer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your
interests and concerns within the IRS by
protecting your rights and resolving problems
that have not been fixed through normal
channels. While Taxpayer Advocates cannot
change the tax law or make a technical tax
decision, they can clear up problems that re-
sulted from previous contacts and ensure that
your case is given a complete and impartial
review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate
office in your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a
TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see Publication
1546, The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS.
Free tax services.To find out what services
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax
publications and an index of tax topics. It also
describes other free tax information services,
including tax education and assistance pro-
grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
Personal computer. With your per-
sonal computer and modem, you can
access the IRS on the Internet at
www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you
can select:
 Frequently Asked Tax Questions (located
under Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find an-
swers to questions you may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download forms and
publications or search for forms and
publications by topic or keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under Forms &
Pubs) to enter information while the form
is displayed and then print the completed
form.
 Tax Info For You to view Internal Reve-
nue Bulletins published in the last few
years.
 Tax Regs in English to search regulations
and the Internal Revenue Code (under
United States Code (USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS Local News Net
(both located under Tax Info For Busi-
ness) to receive our electronic newslet-
ters on hot tax issues and news.
 Small Business Corner (located under
Tax Info For Business) to get information
on starting and operating a small busi-
ness.
You can also reach us with your computer
using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone
attached to your fax machine, you can
receive forms and instructions by
calling 703–368–9694. Follow the directions
from the prompts. When you order forms,
enter the catalog number for the form you
need. The items you request will be faxed to
you.
Phone. Many services are available
by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. Call  1–800–829–3676 to order
current and prior year forms, instructions,
and publications.
 Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–
4059 to ask tax questions or to order
forms and publications.
 TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to
listen to pre-recorded messages covering
various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone
services. To ensure that IRS representatives
give accurate, courteous, and professional
answers, we evaluate the quality of our tele-
phone services in several ways.
 A second IRS representative sometimes
monitors live telephone calls. That person
only evaluates the IRS assistor and does
not keep a record of any taxpayer's name
or tax identification number.
 We sometimes record telephone calls to
evaluate IRS assistors objectively. We
hold these recordings no longer than one
week and use them only to measure the
quality of assistance.
 We value our customers' opinions.
Throughout this year, we will be survey-
ing our customers for their opinions on
our service.
Walk-in. You can walk in to many
post offices, libraries, and IRS offices
to pick up certain forms, instructions,
and publications. Also, some libraries and IRS
offices have:
 An extensive collection of products avail-
able to print from a CD-ROM or photo-
copy from reproducible proofs.
 The Internal Revenue Code, regulations,
Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-
tive Bulletins available for research pur-
poses.
Mail. You can send your order for
forms, instructions, and publications
to the Distribution Center nearest to
you and receive a response within 10 work-
days after your request is received. Find the
address that applies to your part of the
country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and foreign ad-
dresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publi-
cation 1796, Federal Tax Products on
CD-ROM, and obtain:
 Current tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications.
 Prior-year tax forms, instructions, and
publications.
 Popular tax forms which may be filled in
electronically, printed out for submission,
and saved for recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
The CD-ROM can be purchased from
National Technical Information Service (NTIS)
by calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet
at www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release
is available in mid-December and the final
release is available in late January.
IRS Publication 3207, The Business Re-
source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that
contains information important to small busi-
 Type of Expense Amount
Parking fees and tolls ...................... $ 325
Car expenses .................................. 6,500
Meals ............................................... 2,632
Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning ........ 8,975
Entertainment .................................. 1,870
Gifts, education, etc. ....................... 430
 Total $20,732
Page 36 Chapter 7  How To Get Tax Help

nesses. It is available in mid-February. You
can get one free copy by calling
1–800–829–3676.
Appendices
There are two appendices at the end of this
publication.
Appendices A–1 through A–8 show the
lease inclusion amounts that you may need
to report if you lease a car for 30 days or
more. 
Appendices B–1 through B–4 show the
lease inclusion amounts for electric cars first
leased after August 5, 1997. If any of these
apply to you, use the appendix for the year
you first leased the car. (See chapter 4.)
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 37

Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
23
28
9
17
25
33
42
10
20
30
40
49
12
23
34
45
57
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
49,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
25
29
33
37
41
45
50
54
60
68
77
85
93
102
110
119
127
135
144
152
160
169
177
185
194
202
210
219
227
235
244
252
260
269
277
285
294
302
311
319
327
336
344
352
361
369
381
398
415
432
448
465
482
498
515
532
561
603
644
686
36
45
54
63
72
81
91
100
109
118
132
150
168
187
205
223
241
259
278
296
314
333
351
369
388
406
424
443
461
479
497
516
534
552
571
589
607
626
644
662
680
699
717
735
754
772
790
808
836
873
909
945
982
1,019
1,055
1,092
1,129
1,165
1,229
1,320
1,412
1,504
52
66
79
93
107
121
133
147
160
174
194
222
249
276
303
330
358
385
412
439
467
493
521
548
574
602
629
656
683
710
738
765
792
819
846
873
901
927
954
982
1,009
1,036
1,063
1,090
1,117
1,145
1,172
1,199
1,240
1,294
1,348
1,403
1,457
1,511
1,566
1,620
1,673
1,728
1,823
1,959
2,095
2,230
62
78
95
111
127
143
160
176
193
209
234
266
298
331
364
396
429
461
493
527
558
591
623
656
689
721
754
786
819
852
884
916
949
982
1,014
1,047
1,079
1,112
1,145
1,177
1,210
1,242
1,275
1,308
1,340
1,372
1,405
1,438
1,486
1,551
1,617
1,681
1,747
1,811
1,876
1,942
2,007
2,072
2,186
2,349
72
91
109
128
147
166
185
204
222
241
269
306
345
381
419
457
494
532
570
607
645
683
720
757
795
833
870
908
946
983
1,021
1,058
1,095
1,133
1,171
1,208
1,246
1,284
1,321
1,359
1,396
1,433
1,471
1,508
1,546
1,584
1,621
1,659
1,715
1,790
1,865
1,941
2,016
2,092
2,166
2,241
2,317
2,392
2,523
2,711
2,899
3,087
2,511
2,674
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 I.R.B. 274).
$$ $$$$ $
Page 38

Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
16
19
22
26
29
32
39
47
53
61
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
32
35
39
42
47
53
60
66
73
79
85
92
98
105
111
118
124
131
137
144
150
157
163
170
176
183
189
196
202
208
215
221
228
234
241
247
254
260
267
273
280
286
296
309
322
335
348
361
374
387
399
412
435
467
500
532
68
75
82
89
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
199
214
227
242
256
270
284
299
313
327
341
355
369
384
398
412
426
441
455
469
483
497
512
526
540
554
569
582
597
611
625
646
675
703
732
760
788
817
845
874
902
952
1,023
1,094
1,165 1,729 2,394 2,073
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
$$ $$$$ $
48
59
69
80
90
101
111
122
132
148
169
190
212
233
253
275
296
316
338
359
380
402
423
443
464
486
507
528
549
570
591
612
633
654
675
696
718
739
759
780
802
823
843
865
886
907
928
960
1,002
1,044
1,086
1,128
1,171
1,212
1,255
1,297
1,339
1,413
1,518
1,623
58
71
83
96
108
121
134
146
160
178
204
229
254
279
305
330
355
381
406
431
456
481
506
532
557
582
607
633
658
683
708
734
759
784
810
835
860
885
911
936
961
986
1,012
1,037
1,062
1,087
1,113
1,151
1,201
1,252
1,302
1,353
1,403
1,454
1,504
1,555
1,606
1,694
1,821
1,947
68
82
96
111
126
140
155
169
183
206
235
264
293
322
351
380
410
439
468
497
527
556
585
614
643
672
702
731
760
789
819
848
877
906
935
964
993
1,023
1,052
1,081
1,110
1,140
1,169
1,198
1,227
1,256
1,285
1,329
1,387
1,446
1,504
1,563
1,621
1,679
1,738
1,796
1,854
1,956
2,102
2,248
2
4
6
8
10
13
3
7
11
15
20
25
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
4
10
17
23
29
38
4
13
20
28
35
45
6
14
23
32
41
53
Page 39

Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
1
4
6
9
12
5
10
15
20
28
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
55
63
71
79
88
96
104
112
120
128
137
145
153
161
169
178
186
194
202
210
218
227
235
243
251
259
268
276
284
292
300
308
317
325
333
341
349
358
370
386
403
419
435
452
468
484
501
517
546
587
627
668
37
46
55
64
73
82
91
99
108
122
140
158
176
193
211
229
247
265
283
301
319
337
355
373
391
409
427
445
463
481
498
516
534
552
570
588
606
624
642
660
678
695
713
732
750
768
785
812
848
884
920
956
991
1,027
1,063
1,099
1,135
1,198
1,287
1,377
1,467 2,178 3,018 2,613
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
$$ $$$$ $ 8
16
25
33
43
56
70
83
96
110
123
136
150
163
183
210
236
263
290
317
343
370
396
423
449
476
502
529
556
582
608
635
662
688
715
742
769
795
822
849
875
901
928
955
981
1,008
1,035
1,062
1,087
1,114
1,140
1,168
1,207
1,261
1,313
1,367
1,420
1,474
1,527
1,580
1,633
1,686
1,779
1,913
2,046
12
22
31
41
53
70
85
101
117
133
149
165
181
197
221
252
285
316
348
380
412
444
476
508
540
571
604
635
667
699
731
763
794
827
859
891
922
955
986
1,018
1,050
1,082
1,114
1,145
1,178
1,209
1,241
1,273
1,305
1,337
1,369
1,400
1,449
1,512
1,577
1,640
1,704
1,767
1,832
1,896
1,959
2,023
2,134
2,294
2,453
14
25
36
47
62
80
99
117
136
154
173
191
209
228
255
292
329
366
403
439
477
513
550
587
624
661
697
735
771
808
845
882
919
955
992
1,028
1,066
1,102
1,140
1,176
1,213
1,250
1,286
1,324
1,360
1,398
1,434
1,471
1,508
1,544
1,582
1,619
1,674
1,747
1,821
1,894
1,968
2,042
2,115
2,189
2,263
2,337
2,466
2,649
2,834
Page 40

Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1997
3
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
1
4
6
9
12
5
10
15
20
28
5
13
22
30
40
8
18
27
36
49
10
21
32
44
58
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
55
63
71
79
88
96
104
112
120
128
137
145
153
161
169
178
186
194
202
210
218
227
235
243
251
259
268
276
284
292
300
308
317
325
333
341
349
358
370
386
403
419
435
452
468
484
501
517
546
587
627
668
37
46
55
64
73
82
91
99
108
122
140
158
176
193
211
229
247
265
283
301
319
337
355
373
391
409
427
445
463
481
498
516
534
552
570
588
606
624
642
660
678
695
713
732
750
768
785
812
848
884
920
956
991
1,027
1,063
1,099
1,135
1,198
1,287
1,377
1,467
53
66
80
93
106
120
133
147
160
180
206
233
259
287
313
340
366
393
420
446
472
499
526
552
578
605
632
658
685
712
739
765
792
819
845
871
898
925
951
978
1,004
1,032
1,058
1,084
1,110
1,137
1,164
1,204
1,257
1,310
1,363
1,417
1,470
1,524
1,577
1,630
1,683
1,776
1,909
2,042
2,175
65
82
97
113
129
145
161
177
193
216
249
280
313
344
377
408
441
472
504
536
568
600
631
664
696
727
759
791
823
854
886
919
951
982
1,015
1,047
1,078
1,110
1,142
1,174
1,206
1,237
1,270
1,301
1,334
1,365
1,397
1,445
1,509
1,573
1,637
1,700
1,764
1,827
1,891
1,955
2,019
2,130
2,291
2,450
77
95
114
132
151
169
187
205
224
252
288
326
362
399
435
473
509
546
583
620
657
693
731
767
804
841
878
915
951
989
1,026
1,062
1,098
1,136
1,172
1,209
1,246
1,282
1,320
1,356
1,394
1,430
1,467
1,504
1,540
1,578
1,615
1,670
1,743
1,817
1,890
1,964
2,038
2,112
2,186
2,259
2,333
2,462
2,645
2,830
3,0142,609
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 97-20 (1997-1 CB 647).
$$ $$$$ $
3
If you leased an electric car after August 5, 1997, use Appendix B-1.
Page 41

Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1996
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
7
10
12
6
11
16
21
26
8
16
24
31
39
10
19
27
37
46
10
21
32
42
53
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
15
19
23
27
31
35
38
42
46
50
56
64
71
79
87
95
103
110
118
126
134
141
149
157
165
172
180
188
196
203
211
219
227
235
242
250
258
266
273
281
289
297
304
312
320
328
336
343
355
370
386
402
417
433
448
464
479
495
522
561
600
638
33
42
50
59
67
75
84
93
101
110
122
139
157
174
191
207
224
242
259
276
293
310
327
344
361
378
395
412
429
446
463
480
497
514
531
548
565
582
599
616
633
650
668
684
701
718
735
753
778
812
846
880
914
948
982
1,016
1,050
1,084
1,144
1,229
1,314
1,400
49
61
74
86
99
112
125
137
150
162
182
207
232
257
282
308
333
358
383
408
433
459
484
509
535
560
585
611
636
661
687
712
737
762
788
813
838
863
889
914
939
964
989
1,015
1,040
1,066
1,091
1,115
1,154
1,205
1,255
1,305
1,356
1,406
1,457
1,508
1,558
1,609
1,697
1,823
1,950
2,075
58
73
88
104
119
134
149
164
179
194
217
247
277
308
338
369
399
429
459
490
520
550
581
611
641
672
702
732
762
793
822
853
883
914
944
974
1,005
1,035
1,065
1,096
1,126
1,157
1,186
1,217
1,247
1,277
1,307
1,338
1,383
1,443
1,504
1,565
1,626
1,686
1,747
1,807
1,868
1,928
2,034
2,186
67
84
102
119
136
154
171
189
207
225
250
286
320
355
390
425
460
495
531
565
600
635
670
705
740
775
810
844
880
915
950
985
1,020
1,054
1,089
1,125
1,159
1,195
1,230
1,264
1,299
1,334
1,370
1,404
1,440
1,474
1,509
1,544
1,597
1,667
1,737
1,807
1,876
1,947
2,016
2,086
2,156
2,226
2,349
2,523
2,698
2,873
2,337
2,489
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 96-25 (1996-1 CB 681).
$$ $$$$ $
Page 42

Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1995
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
4
7
10
13
16
8
15
22
28
35
11
21
31
42
52
13
25
37
50
62
14
28
43
56
71
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20
26
31
36
41
46
52
57
62
67
75
86
96
106
117
127
138
148
159
169
179
190
200
211
221
232
242
253
263
273
284
294
305
315
326
336
346
357
367
378
388
399
409
419
430
440
451
461
477
498
519
539
560
581
602
623
644
665
701
753
806
858
45
56
67
79
90
102
113
124
136
147
164
187
210
233
256
279
301
324
347
370
393
416
439
461
484
507
530
552
576
599
621
644
667
690
712
735
759
781
804
827
850
872
895
919
941
964
987
1,010
1,044
1,089
1,135
1,181
1,227
1,272
1,318
1,364
1,409
1,455
1,535
1,650
1,763
1,878
65
82
99
116
133
150
167
184
201
218
244
277
311
345
378
412
447
481
514
548
582
616
650
684
718
751
785
820
853
887
921
955
989
1,022
1,057
1,091
1,124
1,158
1,192
1,226
1,260
1,294
1,328
1,361
1,395
1,429
1,463
1,497
1,548
1,616
1,683
1,751
1,819
1,887
1,955
2,022
2,090
2,158
2,277
2,445
2,616
2,784
78
98
119
139
159
179
200
220
240
261
291
332
373
413
454
495
535
575
616
657
698
738
778
819
860
901
942
982
1,022
1,063
1,104
1,145
1,185
1,226
1,266
1,307
1,347
1,388
1,429
1,469
1,510
1,551
1,591
1,632
1,673
1,714
1,754
1,794
1,855
1,937
2,018
2,100
2,180
2,262
2,343
2,424
2,506
2,586
2,729
2,932
89
113
136
159
184
207
230
254
277
301
336
383
429
477
524
570
617
665
711
758
804
851
899
946
992
1,039
1,086
1,133
1,180
1,227
1,274
1,320
1,367
1,415
1,462
1,508
1,556
1,603
1,649
1,696
1,743
1,790
1,837
1,884
1,931
1,977
2,024
2,072
2,142
2,235
2,330
2,423
2,517
2,611
2,704
2,799
2,892
2,986
3,150
3,385
3,619
3,853
3,135
3,339
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 95-9 (1995-1 CB 498).
$$ $$$$ $
Page 43

Appendix A-7. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1994
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
14,600
14,900
15,200
15,500
15,800
14,900
15,200
15,500
15,800
16,100
0
2
4
6
8
1
5
9
14
19
1
6
14
21
27
2
9
17
25
34
2
11
20
30
39
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
10
12
14
17
21
24
28
31
35
39
42
46
49
54
62
69
76
83
90
97
104
111
118
125
132
139
146
153
161
168
175
182
189
196
203
210
217
224
231
238
245
252
260
267
274
281
288
295
302
309
397
412
426
440
454
479
514
550
585
24
28
33
39
47
55
62
70
78
85
93
101
109
121
136
151
167
182
198
213
229
244
260
276
291
307
322
338
353
368
384
399
415
431
446
462
477
493
508
524
539
555
570
585
601
617
632
648
663
679
694
717
748
780
811
842
873
903
935
966
997
1,051
1,129
1,206
1,284
34
41
48
57
68
80
92
104
115
127
138
149
161
178
201
224
247
270
293
317
339
363
385
408
431
454
478
500
523
547
569
593
615
638
661
684
708
730
754
776
800
822
845
869
892
914
938
960
984
1,006
1,030
1,065
1,111
1,156
1,202
1,248
1,294
1,341
1,386
1,432
1,478
1,559
1,674
1,789
1,904
42
51
59
70
84
97
111
124
138
152
166
180
193
214
242
270
297
325
352
379
408
435
463
490
518
545
573
601
628
656
684
711
739
766
794
821
849
877
904
932
959
987
1,015
1,042
1,069
1,097
1,125
1,153
1,180
1,208
1,235
1,276
1,332
1,387
1,442
1,497
1,553
1,608
1,663
1,718
49
58
68
81
97
113
129
145
161
176
193
208
225
248
280
312
344
376
408
440
471
503
535
567
599
631
662
694
726
757
790
822
854
886
918
950
981
1,013
1,045
1,077
1,109
1,141
1,172
1,204
1,236
1,268
1,299
1,331
1,363
1,395
1,427
1,475
1,538
1,602
1,666
1,730
1,793
1,857
1,921
1,985
2,048
2,160
2,319
2,478
2,637
1,774
1,870
2,008
2,146
2,284
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 94-53 (1994-2 CB 712).
316
327
341
355
369
383
$$ $$$$ $
Page 44

Appendix A-8. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1987 through 1993
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
12,800
13,100
13,400
13,700
14,000
13,100
13,400
13,700
14,000
14,300
9
28
47
65
84
2
9
26
45
64
0
0
6
18
32
0
0
0
0
0
14,300
14,600
14,900
15,200
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
14,600
14,900
15,200
15,500
15,800
103
122
140
159
178
196
215
234
253
277
309
340
371
402
433
465
496
527
558
605
667
729
792
854
917
979
1,041
1,104
1,166
1,228
1,291
1,353
1,415
1,478
1,540
1,602
1,665
1,727
1,789
1,852
1,914
1,976
2,039
2,101
2,164
2,226
2,288
2,351
2,413
2,475
83
101
120
139
158
176
195
213
232
258
289
319
351
382
413
445
476
507
538
585
647
709
772
834
897
959
1,021
1,084
1,146
1,209
1,270
1,333
1,396
1,458
1,520
1,583
1,664
1,707
1,770
1,832
1,894
1,956
2,019
2,081
2,144
2,205
2,268
2,331
2,393
2,455
45
58
71
85
98
112
124
138
151
169
191
213
235
257
279
301
323
345
368
401
445
489
534
578
622
666
710
755
799
843
888
931
976
1,020
1,064
1,109
1,153
1,197
1,241
1,285
1,330
1,374
1,418
1,462
1,506
1,551
1,595
1,639
1,684
1,727
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1987 or 1988
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1989 or 1990
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1991
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1992
$$ $$$ $
5th and Later
0
0
0
4
15
26
38
49
61
72
84
95
106
118
133
152
171
190
209
228
247
267
285
305
333
371
409
447
485
523
561
600
637
676
713
752
789
828
865
904
942
980
1,018
1,056
1,094
1,132
1,171
1,208
1,247
1,284
1,323
1,360
1,399
1,436
1,475
$
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1993
3
9
17
25
32
40
48
55
63
73
87
99
112
125
137
150
163
175
189
207
233
259
285
310
335
362
387
412
438
464
490
515
540
566
591
617
643
669
695
720
746
771
796
822
847
874
899
925
950
975
Page 45

Appendix A-8. ( Continued)
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
2,538
2,600
2,662
2,725
2,787
2,517
2,580
2,643
2,705
2,767
1,772
1,816
1,860
1,905
1,949
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
2,849
2,912
3,005
3,130
3,255
3,379
3,504
3,629
3,753
3,878
4,003
4,128
4,346
4,658
4,969
2,829
2,892
2,985
3,110
3,235
3,360
3,484
3,609
3,733
3,858
3,983
4,107
4,325
4,638
4,949
1,993
2,037
2,103
2,192
2,280
2,369
2,457
2,546
2,634
2,723
2,811
2,900
3,054
3,276
3,497
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1987 or 1988
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1989 or 1990
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1991
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1992
100,000 
2
95,000 5,281 5,261 3,718
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 1993, Revenue Procedure 93-35 (1993-2 CB 472)
For 1992, Revenue Procedure 92-43 (1992-1 CB 873)
For 1991, Revenue Procedure 91-30 (1991-1 CB 563)
For 1990, Revenue Procedure 90-22 (1990-1 CB 504)
For 1989, Revenue Procedure 89-64 (1989-2 CB 783)
For 1987 or 1988, I.T. Regulation 1.280F-7(a)
$$ $$$ $
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1993
5th and Later
1,513
1,551
1,589
1,627
1,666
1,703
1,741
1,799
1,875
1,951
2,027
2,103
2,179
2,255
2,331
2,407
2,484
2,617
2,807
2,998
3,188
$ 1,002
1,027
1,052
1,078
1,104
1,130
1,155
1,194
1,245
1,295
1,347
1,398
1,450
1,500
1,551
1,603
1,654
1,744
1,871
1,999
2,128
Page 46

Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1997
1
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
1
This table only applies to lease terms beginning after August 5, 1997.
2
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-24 (1998-10 IRB 31).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
1
9
17
25
34
42
50
58
66
74
83
91
99
111
128
144
160
177
193
209
226
242
259
287
328
369
410
4
22
40
58
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
201
219
246
282
318
354
389
425
461
497
533
568
632
721
811
900
7
33
60
87
114
140
167
194
220
247
273
300
326
366
419
472
525
579
632
686
738
792
845
938
1,071
1,204
1,337
9
41
73
104
136
169
200
232
264
296
328
359
392
440
503
567
631
695
759
822
887
950
1,014
1,125
1,285
1,444
1,604
11
48
84
122
159
195
232
269
306
342
379
417
453
508
582
656
730
803
876
950
1,023
1,097
1,171
1,300
1,484
1,669
1,853
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
4
5
13
21
29
38
46
54
62
70
79
87
95
103
115
132
148
164
181
197
214
230
246
263
291
332
373
414
11
29
47
65
83
101
119
137
155
172
190
208
226
253
289
325
361
396
432
468
504
540
576
639
728
818
908
18
45
71
98
124
151
177
204
231
258
284
311
338
378
430
484
537
591
644
697
750
803
856
949
1,083
1,215
1,348
21
52
85
116
148
180
212
244
275
307
340
372
403
451
515
578
643
706
770
834
898
962
1,025
1,137
1,296
1,456
1,615
23
60
96
134
171
207
244
281
318
355
391
428
465
520
594
668
741
815
888
962
1,035
1,109
1,183
1,312
1,496
1,681
1,865
4
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
Page 47

Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
14
28
43
57
71
86
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
206
235
263
291
320
348
377
405
433
462
511
582
654
724
21
42
62
83
105
126
147
168
189
211
232
252
273
305
347
389
432
473
516
558
600
643
684
758
864
968
1,075
26
51
77
102
127
151
177
202
228
253
278
304
329
367
417
468
518
569
619
669
720
771
822
910
1,036
1,163
1,289
30
59
88
118
147
177
205
235
264
292
322
351
380
424
483
541
600
658
716
775
833
891
949
1,052
1,198
1,343
1,489
Appendix B-4. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
17
31
45
59
74
88
102
116
130
145
159
173
187
208
237
266
294
322
351
379
407
436
464
514
585
656
727
26
47
69
90
110
132
153
174
195
216
237
258
279
311
353
394
437
480
521
564
606
648
690
763
869
975
1,080
32
57
82
107
133
157
183
209
234
259
284
310
335
373
423
474
524
574
625
675
727
777
828
916
1,042
1,168
1,295
36
66
95
124
153
183
211
240
270
299
328
357
387
430
489
547
606
664
723
781
838
897
955
1,058
1,204
1,350
1,495
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 726).
Page 48

Index
A
 Accountable plan ....................... 26
Accounting to employer ............. 26
Actual car expenses ............ 15, 29
 Adequate accounting ................. 26
 Adequate records ...................... 23
 Advances, travel .................. 26, 28
 Advertising ........................... 12, 14
Allocating between business and
nonbusiness expenses ....... 7, 9
Allocation of reimbursement ...... 30
Allowances and reimbursements 26
 Armed Forces ........................ 4, 14
 Artists, performing ..................... 30
Assistance (See Tax help)               
 Associated entertainment .......... 11
Away from home ......................... 3
B
Basis of car ......................... 16, 17
Business and nonbusiness enter-
tainment .................................. 9
 Business associate ...................... 4
 Business trip ................................ 6
Business use of
car ................ 15, 16, 17, 20, 22
C
 Car allowance ...................... 26, 27
 Car defined ................................ 16
 Car expenses ............................ 14
 Car pools ................................... 14
 Car rentals ........................... 21, 29
 Clean-fuel cars .................... 14, 19
Client, expenses paid for .......... 29
 Club dues .................................... 9
 Comments ................................... 2
 Commuting ................................ 14
 Conventions ........................... 8, 11
Cost of car ................................. 16
 Cruise ships ................................. 9
Customer, expenses paid for .... 29
D
Depreciation of car:
 Chart, MACRS ..................... 18
 Excess .................................. 21
General rules ...... 15, 16, 18, 19
 Limits .................................... 19
Standard mileage rate .......... 21
Year of disposition ............... 21
 Directly–related entertainment .. 10
Disabled employees, expenses
of .......................................... 31
Disposition of car ................. 16, 21
 Documentary evidence .............. 23
E
 Electric cars ......................... 14, 19
 Employer-provided vehicles ........ 2
 Entertainment:
 50% limit ............................... 11
 Deductible expenses ........ 9, 30
 Facilities ................................. 9
 Tickets .............................. 9, 24
Exceptions to the 50% limit ....... 12
Excess depreciation of car ........ 21
 Excess reimbursements ...... 26, 28
Expenses for others .............. 4, 11
 Extravagant expenses ............. 5, 9
F
Fair market value of car ............ 22
 FAVR allowance ........................ 27
Federal crime investigations or
prosecutions ........................... 4
 Federal rate ............................... 26
 Fee-basis officials ...................... 30
 Forms:
 2106 ............................... 29, 31
 2106–EZ ......................... 29, 31
 4562 ..................................... 25
 4797 ..................................... 21
Free tax services ....................... 36
G
 Gifts, business ........................... 12
H
 Hauling tools .............................. 14
Help (See Tax help)                         
 High-low rate ............................. 27
Home used as office ................. 14
Hours of service limits ............... 12
How to report business
expenses .............................. 25
I
Impairment-related work ex-
penses .................................. 31
 Incidental expenses ..................... 5
 Inclusion amount ....................... 22
 Incomplete records .................... 24
 Indefinite assignment .................. 4
 Independent contractor ............. 29
 Itinerant ........................................ 3
K
 Keeping records .................. 22, 24
L
 Lavish expenses ...................... 5, 9
Leasing a car ....................... 21, 29
 Limits:
 50% limit ............................... 11
Depreciation of car ............... 19
Employee business expenses 30
Exceptions to 50% limit ........ 12
 Gifts ...................................... 12
Luxury water travel ................. 8
Meals and entertainment ..... 11
 Section 179
deduction ............. 16, 17, 19
 Skyboxes .............................. 10
 Local transportation ............. 13, 30
 Luxury skyboxes ........................ 10
Luxury water travel ...................... 8
M
 M&IE ............................................ 5
 MACRS depreciation ................. 18
MACRS depreciation chart ........ 19
Main place of business or work .. 3
 Meal allowance ............................ 5
Meal allowance, standard ......... 27
 Meal expenses ...................... 5, 30
Standard meal allowance ....... 5
Meals and entertainment:
 50% limit ............................... 11
Meals and incidental expenses . 27
Meetings, expenses of attend-
ing ..................................... 9, 11
 Membership fees ......................... 9
 Military personnel .................. 4, 14
More information (See Tax help)     
N
 Necessary expense ..................... 2
 Nonaccountable plan ................. 28
North American area ................... 8
O
Office in the home ..................... 14
Officials paid on a fee basis ...... 30
 Ordinary expense ........................ 2
P
Per diem allowances:
 High-low rate ........................ 27
Meals and incidental expenses
rate .................................. 27
 Regular rate ......................... 27
 Reporting expenses ....... 26, 27
 Performing artists ...................... 30
 Personal trip ............................ 6, 8
Personal use of
car ................ 15, 17, 19, 20, 22
Placed in service, car ................ 16
Probationary work period ............ 4
Prorating standard meal allow-
ance ...................................... 27
 Proving expenses ...................... 22
Publications (See Tax help)             
Purpose of travel ......................... 6
R
 Reasonable period .................... 26
 Recordkeeping .......................... 22
Recovery period of car ........ 18, 19
Regular federal per diem rate ... 27
 Reimbursements:
 Excess .................................. 26
For personal expenses .. 25, 26
 General rules ........................ 25
 Reporting .............................. 30
 Unclaimed ............................ 25
Related to employer .................... 5
Reporting business expenses ... 25
 Returning excess
reimbursement ..................... 28
Rural mail carriers ..................... 14
S
Section 179 deduction ... 16, 17, 19
 Self-employed person ......... 12, 25
 Skyboxes ................................... 10
Spouse, expenses for ........... 4, 11
Standard meal allowance ...... 5, 27
 Amount ................................... 5
 Charitable travel ..................... 5
 Educational travel ................... 5
 Investment-related travel ........ 5
 Medical travel ......................... 5
Standard mileage rate:
 Amount ................................. 14
 Depreciation adjustment ...... 21
How to report ................. 27, 29
Substantiation of expenses ....... 22
 Suggestions ................................. 2
T
 Tax help ..................................... 36
 Tax home .................................... 3
 Taxpayer Advocate ................... 36
 Temporary assignment .......... 4, 13
Temporary work location ........... 13
 Tickets:
 Charity event .......................... 9
 Entertainment ................... 9, 24
 Traffic violations ................... 15
Trade-in of car ..................... 17, 21
 Traffic tickets ............................. 15
 Transient ...................................... 3
 Transportation expenses ........... 13
 Transportation workers ................ 6
 Travel:
 Advance ............................... 28
 Allocation rules ....................... 7
Away from home .................... 3
 Deductible expenses .......... 2, 4
Expenses for others ............... 4
In the United States ............... 6
 Luxury water ........................... 8
 Meals expense ....................... 5
Outside the United States ...... 6
Purpose of travel .................... 6
 TTY/TDD information ................ 36
U
 Unadjusted basis ....................... 17
 Unclaimed reimbursement ........ 25
Union hall, trips from ................. 14
Unrecovered basis of car .......... 19
V
Vehicle provided by employer ... 25
 Volunteers ................................... 2
W
 Water travel ................................. 8
/H18549
Page 49

Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2001
Highlights of 2000 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
and Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other
Information for Members of the
Clergy and Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Scholarships and Fellowships
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
(Business and Nonbusiness)
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With
Income From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care
Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) (Including Roth IRAs and
Education IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and Power
of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of
the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaraci ón de
Impuesto Federal
Cré dito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
508
514
516
517
519
520
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
534
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax,
phone, and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration
of Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes Attributable to IRAs, Other
Qualified Retirement Plans, Annuities,
Modified Endowment Contracts, and MSAs
Alternative Minimum Tax –Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Higher Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Page 50