Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P525.SGM ( 9-Nov-2006) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047d
What’s New for 2006............... 1
Department
What’s New for 2007............... 2of the
Taxable andTreasury Reminders ...................... 2
Internal Introduction..................... 2Revenue Nontaxable
Service Employee Compensation ........... 3
Miscellaneous Compensation....... 3
Fringe Benefits................ 4Income
Retirement Plan Contributions...... 8
Stock Options................. 10
Restricted Property.............. 12
For use in preparing Special Rules for Certain
Employees ................... 13
Clergy ...................... 132006 Returns
Members of Religious Orders....... 13
Foreign Employer............... 13
Military...................... 14
Volunteers................... 14
Business and Investment Income..... 14
Rents From Personal Property...... 14
Royalties.................... 15
Partnership Income............. 15
S Corporation Income............ 15
Sickness and Injury Benefits......... 15
Disability Pensions.............. 16
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts................. 16
Workers’ Compensation.......... 17
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits.................. 17
Miscellaneous Income ............. 17
Bartering.................... 17
Canceled Debts................ 18
Host or Hostess................ 19
Life Insurance Proceeds.......... 19
Recoveries................... 20
Survivor Benefits............... 26
Unemployment Benefits.......... 26
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits.......... 27
Other Income................. 28
Repayments .................... 33
How To Get Tax Help.............. 33
Index.......................... 35
What’s New for 2006
Hurricane relief provisions.The Katrina
Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005 and the Gulf
Opportunity Zone Act of 2005 provide tax relief
for persons affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita,
and Wilma. Some of the provisions are covered
in this publication. For information on other pro-
visions, see Publication 4492, Information for
Taxpayers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita,
and Wilma.
Get forms and other information
Elective deferrals.The limit on the amount offaster and easier by: your wages you can elect to defer into certain
retirement plans (such as section 401(k) plans)
Internet • www.irs.gov increased. If you are age 50 or older, you may
be able to make additional catch-up elective

Page 2 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deferrals. See Elective Deferrals in the discus-Disaster mitigation payments under Welfare and included in your income in the year you receive
sion on retirement plan contributions under Em- Other Public Assistance Benefits. it. However, if you use an accrual method of
ployee Compensation. accounting, you can defer prepaid income youNonqualified deferred compensation plans.receive for services to be performed before theEmployer-owned life insurance contract.If Generally, all amounts deferred under a non-end of the next tax year. In this case, you includeyou receive life insurance proceeds from an qualified deferred compensation plan for all taxthe payment in your income as you earn it byemployer-owned life insurance contract on an years are included in gross income for the cur-performing the services.employee, you may have to include some or all rent year, unless certain requirements are met.
of the proceeds in income. See the discussion See Nonqualified deferred compensation plans,Comments and suggestions. We welcomeunder Life Insurance Proceeds. under Employee Compensation. your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.Designated Roth contributions.Employers Photographs of missing children.The Inter-
with certain retirement plans can create a quali- nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theYou can write to us at the following address:
fied Roth contribution program so that you may National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
elect to have part or all of your elective deferrals dren. Photographs of missing children selectedInternal Revenue Serviceto the plan designated as after-tax Roth contri- by the Center may appear in this publication on
Individual Forms and Publications Branchbutions. See the discussion under Elective De- pages that otherwise would be blank. You can
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Iferrals. help bring these children home by looking at the
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
Washington, DC 20224(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
What’s New for 2007 We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-Introduction clude your daytime phone number, including theIncome exclusion for retired public safety
officer.For distributions in tax years begin- area code, in your correspondence.You can receive income in the form of money,
ning after 2006, a retired public safety officer canproperty, or services. This publication discussesYou can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
elect to exclude from income an eligible retire-many kinds of income and explains whetherasterisk must be included in the address.)
ment plan distribution. The distribution must bethey are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
from a governmental plan and must be trans-cussions on employee wages and fringe bene-ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
ferred directly to pay the premiums for accidentfits, and income from bartering, partnerships, Sally to each email, we do appreciate youror health insurance or qualified long-term carecorporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-feedback and will consider your comments asinsurance for the officer, his or her spouse, andmation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-we revise our tax products.dependents. ceeds, and welfare and other public assistance
Ordering forms and publications. Visitbenefits. Check the index for the location of a
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andspecific subject.
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theGenerally, an amount included in your in-
address below and receive a response within 10come is taxable unless it is specifically ex-Reminders
empted by law. Income that is taxable must bebusiness days after your request is received.
reported on your return and is subject to tax.Terrorist attacks.You can exclude from in-Income that is nontaxable may have to become certain disaster assistance, disability, and National Distribution Centershown on your tax return but is not taxable.death payments received as a result of a terror- P.O. Box 8903
ist or military action. For more information, see Bloomington, IL 61702-8903Constructively received income.You are
Publication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter-generally taxed on income that is available to
rorist Attacks. you, regardless of whether it is actually in yourTax questions. If you have a tax question,possession. visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. WeAstronauts.  You also can exclude death pay-A valid check that you received or that wascannot answer tax questions sent to either of thements for astronauts dying in the line of dutymade available to you before the end of the taxabove addresses.after 2002. year is considered income constructively re-
ceived in that year, even if you do not cash theForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or Useful Itemscheck or deposit it to your account until the nextresident alien, you must report income from You may want to see:year. For example, if the postal service tries tosources outside the United States (foreign in-
deliver a check to you on the last day of the taxcome) on your tax return unless it is exempt by Publicationyear but you are not at home to receive it, youU.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside
must include the amount in your income for thator outside the United States and whether or not ❏ 523 Selling Your Home
tax year. If the check was mailed so that it couldyou receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- ❏ 527 Residential Rental Propertynot possibly reach you until after the end of thement, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This (Including Rental of Vacationtax year, and you otherwise could not get theapplies to earned income (such as wages and Homes)funds before the end of the year, you include thetips) as well as unearned income (such as inter-
amount in your income for the next tax year.est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
and royalties). (Including Capital Gains andAssignment of income. Income received
Losses) If you reside outside the United States, youby an agent for you is income you constructively
may be able to exclude part or all of your foreignreceived in the year the agent received it. If you❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andsource earned income. For details, see Publica-agree by contract that a third party is to receiveAdministratorstion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-income for you, you must include the amount in
❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributionsdent Aliens Abroad. your income when the third party receives it.
❏ 575 Pension and Annuity IncomeDisaster mitigation payments.You can ex- Example. You and your employer agree
clude from income grants you use to mitigate ❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalentthat part of your salary is to be paid directly to
(reduce the severity of) potential damage from Railroad Retirement Benefitsyour former spouse. You must include that
future natural disasters that are paid to youamount in your income when your former ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Educationthrough state and local governments. If you re-spouse receives it. See How To Get Tax Help, near the end ofported income from qualified disaster mitigation
this publication, for information about gettingpayments in previous years, you may be able toPrepaid income. Prepaid income, such as
these publications.file a claim for refund. For more information, see compensation for future services, generally is
Page 2 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 3 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you $500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-
must include these amounts in your income in fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachEmployee
the year you receive them. award by itself would be excluded from income.
However, because the $1,750 total value of theIf you repay unearned commissions or otherCompensation
awards is more than $1,600, Ben must includeamounts in the same year you receive them,
$150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income.Generally, you must include in gross incomereduce the amount included in your income by
everything you receive in payment for personalthe repayment. If you repay them in a later taxDonated accrued leave.If your employer hasservices. In addition to wages, salaries, commis-year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-adopted a leave-based donation program to aidsions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms ofized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),victims of Hurricane Katrina, you can elect tocompensation such as fringe benefits and stockor you may be able to take a credit for that year.give up vacation, sick, or personal leave in ex-options. See Repayments, later. change for cash payments your employer   You should receive a Form W-2, Wage and makes to a qualified tax-exempt organization forAllowances and reimbursements.   If youTax Statement, from your employer showing the the relief of those victims. Your employer mustreceive travel, transportation, or other businesspay you received for your services. Include your make the payments to the organizations beforeexpense allowances or reimbursements frompay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on January 1, 2007. These payments are not in-your employer, see Publication 463, Travel, En-line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re- cluded in your income and you do not get atertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you areceive a Form W-2. deduction for the payments made to the organi-reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-
zation. For more information on qualifying orga-Childcare providers.If you provide childcare,tion 521, Moving Expenses.
nizations, see Organizations That Qualify Toeither in the child’s home or in your home or
Receive Deductible Contributions, in Publicationother place of business, the pay you receiveBack pay awards. Include in income amounts
526, Charitable Contributions.must be included in your income. If you are notyou are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
an employee, you are probably self-employedback pay. These include payments made to youGovernment cost-of-living allowances.and must include payments for your services onfor damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,Cost-of-living allowances generally are includedSchedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss Fromand unpaid health insurance premiums. Theyin your income. However, they are not includedBusiness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Netshould be reported to you by your employer onin your income if you are a federal civilian em-Profit From Business. You generally are not anForm W-2. ployee or a federal court employee who is sta-employee unless you are subject to the will and
tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the UnitedBonuses and awards. Bonuses or awardscontrol of the person who employs you as to
States.you receive for outstanding work are included inwhat you are to do and how you are to do it.
Allowances and differentials that increaseyour income and should be shown on your FormBabysitting.If you babysit for relatives or your basic pay as an incentive for taking a lessW-2. These include prizes such as vacation tripsneighborhood children, whether on a regular desirable post of duty are part of your compen-for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award youbasis or only periodically, the rules for childcare sation and must be included in income. Forreceive is goods or services, you must includeproviders apply to you. example, your compensation includes Foreignthe fair market value of the goods or services in
Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropicalyour income. However, if your employer merelyBankruptcy. If, after October 16, 2005, you differentials. For more information, see Publica-promises to pay you a bonus or award at somefiled for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employeesfuture time, it is not taxable until you receive it orBankruptcy Code, you must allocate your wages Stationed Abroad.it is made available to you.and withheld income tax. Your W-2 will show
your total wages and withheld income tax for the Nonqualified deferred compensation plans.Employee achievement award. If you re-
year. On your tax return, you report the wages Your employer will report to you the total amountceive tangible personal property (other than
and withheld income tax for the period before of deferrals for the year under a nonqualifiedcash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as
you filed for bankruptcy. Your bankruptcy estate deferred compensation plan. This amount isan award for length-of-service or safety achieve-
reports the wages and withheld income tax for shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. Thisment, you generally can exclude its value from
the period after you filed for bankruptcy. If you amount is not included in your income.your income. However, the amount you can ex-
receive other information returns (such as Form However, if at any time during the tax year,clude is limited to your employer’s cost and
1099-DIV or 1099-INT) that report gross income the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or iscannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awards
to you, rather than to the bankruptcy estate, you not operated under those requirements, allthat are not qualified plan awards) for all such
must allocate that income. amounts deferred under the plan for the tax yearawards you receive during the year. Your em-
The only exception is for purposes of figuring and all preceding tax years are included in yourployer can tell you whether your award is a
your self-employment tax, if you are income for the current year. This amount is in-qualified plan award. Your employer must make
self-employed. For that purpose, you must take cluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, boxthe award as part of a meaningful presentation,
into account all your self-employment income for 1. It also is shown on Form W-2, box 12, usingunder conditions and circumstances that do not
the year from services performed both before code Z.create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
and after the beginning of the case. For information on the requirements and theguised pay.
You must file a statement with your income amount to include in income, see Internal Reve-However, the exclusion does not apply to thetax return stating that you filed a Chapter 11 nue Code section 409A and Notice 2005-1. Thefollowing awards.bankruptcy case. The statement must show the notice is on page 274 of Internal Revenue Bulle-
• A length-of-service award if you received itallocation and describe the method used to tin 2005-2 at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/
for less than 5 years of service or if youmake the allocation. For a sample of this state- irb05-02.pdf.
received another length-of-service awardment and other information, see Notice 2006-83
during the year or the previous 4 years.on page 596 of Internal Revenue Bulletin Note received for services.If your employer
2006-40 at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-40. gives you a secured note as payment for your• A safety achievement award if you are apdf. services, you must include the fair market valuemanager, administrator, clerical employee,(usually the discount value) of the note in youror other professional employee or if moreincome for the year you receive it. When youMiscellaneous than 10% of eligible employees previouslylater receive payments on the note, a propor-Compensation received safety achievement awards dur-tionate part of each payment is the recovery ofing the year. the fair market value that you previously in-This section discusses many types of employee cluded in your income. Do not include that partcompensation. The subjects are arranged in al-Example. Ben Green received three em- again in your income. Include the rest of thephabetical order. ployee achievement awards during the year: a payment in your income in the year of payment.
Advance commissions and other earnings. nonqualified plan award of a watch valued at If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable
If you receive advance commissions or other $250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo unsecured note as payment for your services,
amounts for services to be performed in the valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at payments on the note that are credited toward
Publication 525 (2006) Page 3

Page 4 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the principal amount of the note are compensa- the corporation’s stock on the date of use, minus just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 with
tion income when you receive them. the fair market value on the date the right was a notation in box 14.
granted. You include the cash payment in in-Severance pay. You must include in incomecome in the year you use the right.amounts you receive as severance pay and any Accident or Health Planpayment for the cancellation of your employ-
Fringe Benefitsment contract. Generally, the value of accident or health plan
coverage provided to you by your employer isAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed-Fringe benefits received in connection with thenot included in your income. Benefits you re-eral employee and receive a lump-sum paymentperformance of your services are included inceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-for accrued annual leave when you retire oryour income as compensation unless you payplained, later, under Sickness and Injuryresign, this amount will be included as wages onfair market value for them or they are specificallyBenefits.your Form W-2. excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-
If you resign from one agency and are reem-ance of services (for example, under a covenantLong-term care coverage. Contributions byployed by another agency, you may have tonot to compete) is treated as the performance ofyour employer to provide coverage for long-termrepay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-services for purposes of these rules. care services generally are not included in yourment to the second agency. You can reduce See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in thisincome. However, contributions made through agross wages by the amount you repaid in thediscussion, for information on how to determineflexible spending or similar arrangement (suchsame tax year in which you received it. Attach tothe amount to include in income. as a cafeteria plan) must be included in youryour tax return a copy of the receipt or statement income. This amount will be reported as wagesRecipient of fringe benefit.You are the re-given to you by the agency you repaid to explain in box 1 of your Form W-2.cipient of a fringe benefit if you perform thethe difference between the wages on your returnservices for which the fringe benefit is provided.and the wages on your Forms W-2. Archer MSA contributions.Contributions byYou are considered to be the recipient even if ityour employer to your Archer MSA generally areOutplacement services. If you choose to is given to another person, such as a member ofnot included in your income. Their total will beaccept a reduced amount of severance pay soyour family. An example is a car your employerreported in box 12 of Form W-2, with code R.that you can receive outplacement servicesgives to your spouse for services you perform.You must report this amount on Form 8853,(such as training in r´esum´e writing and interviewThe car is considered to have been provided toArcher MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurancetechniques), you must include the unreducedyou and not to your spouse. Contracts. File the form with your return.amount of the severance pay in income. You do not have to be an employee of the
However, you can deduct the value of theseprovider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. IfHealth flexible spending arrangement
outplacement services (up to the difference be-you are a partner, director, or independent con-(health FSA). If your employer provides a
tween the severance pay included in incometractor, you also can be the recipient of a fringehealth FSA that qualifies as an accident or
and the amount actually received) as a miscella-benefit. health plan, the amount of your salary reduction,
neous deduction (subject to the 2% of adjusted and reimbursements of your medical care ex-Provider of benefit.Your employer or an-gross income (AGI) limit) on Schedule A (Form penses and those of your spouse and depen-other person for whom you perform services is1040). dents, generally are not included in your income.the provider of a fringe benefit regardless of
whether that person actually provides the fringeSick pay. Pay you receive from your employer Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).
benefit to you. The provider can be a client orwhile you are sick or injured is part of your salary If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies
customer of an independent contractor.or wages. In addition, you must include in your as an accident or health plan, coverage and
income sick pay benefits received from any of reimbursements of your medical care expensesAccounting period. You must use the samethe following payers. and those of your spouse and dependents gen-accounting period your employer uses to report
erally are not included in your income.your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-• A welfare fund.
See also Reimbursement for medical careployer has the option to report taxable noncash• A state sickness or disability fund. under Other Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.fringe benefits by using either of the following
rules.• An association of employers or employ- Health savings accounts (HSA).If you areees. an eligible individual, you and any other person,• The general rule: benefits are reported for
including your employer or a family member,a full calendar year (January 1–December• An insurance company, if your employer
can make contributions to your HSA. Contribu-31).paid for the plan.
tions, other than employer contributions, are de-• The special accounting period rule: bene-However, if you paid the premiums on an acci- ductible on your return whether or not youfits provided during the last 2 months ofdent or health insurance policy, the benefits you itemize deductions. Contributions made by yourthe calendar year (or any shorter period)receive under the policy are not taxable. For employer are not included in your income. Distri-are treated as paid during the followingmore information, see Other Sickness and Injury butions from your HSA that are used to paycalendar year. For example, each yearBenefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits, qualified medical expenses are not included inyour employer reports the value of bene-later. your income. Distributions not used for qualifiedfits provided during the last 2 months ofmedical expenses are included in your income.Social security and Medicare taxes paid by the prior year and the first 10 months ofSee Publication 969, Health Savings Accountsemployer. If you and your employer have an the current year. and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans, for moreagreement that your employer pays your social information.Your employer does not have to use the samesecurity and Medicare taxes without deducting Contributions by a partnership to a bona fideaccounting period for each fringe benefit, butthem from your gross wages, you must report partner’s HSA are not contributions by an em-must use the same period for all employees whothe amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages ployer. The contributions are treated as a distri-receive a particular benefit.on your tax return. The payment is also treated bution of money and are not included in theas wages for figuring your social security andYou must use the same accounting periodpartner’s gross income. Contributions by a part-Medicare taxes and your social security andthat you use to report the benefit to claim annership to a partner’s HSA for services renderedMedicare benefits. However, these paymentsemployee business deduction (for use of a car,are treated as guaranteed payments that areare not treated as social security and Medicarefor example). includible in the partner’s gross income. In bothwages if you are a household worker or a farmForm W-2. Your employer reports your tax- situations, the partner can deduct the contribu-worker. able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, other tion made to the partner’s HSA.
Stock appreciation rights.Do not include a compensation) of Form W-2. The total value of Contributions by an S corporation to a 2%
stock appreciation right granted by your em- your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14. shareholder-employee’s HSA for services ren-
ployer in income until you exercise (use) the The value of your fringe benefits may be added dered are treated as guaranteed payments and
right. When you use the right, you are entitled to to your other compensation on one Form W-2, or are includible in the shareholder-employee’s
a cash payment equal to the fair market value of you may receive a separate Form W-2 showing gross income. The shareholder-employee can
Page 4 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 5 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct the contribution made to the share- • The total amount of dependent care bene-Group-Term Life Insurance
holder-employee’s HSA. fits you received during the year,
Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 of
• The total amount of qualified expensesgroup-term life insurance coverage provided to
you incurred during the year, you by your employer (or former employer) is notAdoption Assistance
included in your income. However, you must• Your earned income,You may be able to exclude from your income include in income the cost of employer-provided
• Your spouse’s earned income, oramounts paid or expenses incurred by your em- insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000
ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con- of coverage reduced by any amount you pay• $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-nection with your adoption of an eligible child. toward the purchase of the insurance.rately).See Instructions for Form 8839 (Qualified Adop- For exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost
tion Expenses), for more information. excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later.Your employer must show the total amount ofIf your employer provided more than $50,000Adoption benefits are reported by your em-dependent care benefits provided to you duringof coverage, the amount included in your in-ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. Theythe year under a qualified plan in box 10 of yourcome is reported as part of your wages in box 1also are included as social security and Medi-Form W-2. Your employer also will include anyof your Form W-2. It is also shown separately incare wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they aredependent care benefits over $5,000 in yourbox 12 with code C.not included as wages in box 1. To determine
wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must Group-term life insurance.This insurance iscomplete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop- To claim the exclusion, you must completeterm life insurance protection (insurance for ation Expenses. File the form with your return.either Part III of Form 2441, Child and Depen-fixed period of time) that:dent Care Expenses, or Part III of Schedule 2
• Provides a general death benefit,(Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex-Athletic Facilities penses for Form 1040A Filers. (You cannot use• Is provided to a group of employees,
Form 1040EZ.)If your employer provides you with the free or • Is provided under a policy carried by thelow-cost use of an employer-operated gym orSee the instructions for Form 2441 or Sched-employer, andother athletic club on your employer’s premises,ule 2 (Form 1040A) for more information.
• Provides an amount of insurance to eachthe value is not included in your compensation.
employee based on a formula that pre-The gym must be used primarily by employees,
vents individual selection.their spouses, and their dependent children.Educational Assistance
If your employer pays for a fitness programYou can exclude from your income up to $5,250Permanent benefits.If your group-term lifeprovided to you at an off-site resort hotel or
insurance policy includes permanent benefits,of qualified employer-provided educational as-athletic club, the value of the program is in-
such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, yousistance. For more information, see Publicationcluded in your compensation.
must include in your income, as wages, the cost970.
of the permanent benefits minus the amount you
pay for them. Your employer should be able toDe Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
tell you the amount to include in your income.Employee Discounts
If your employer provides you with a product or Accidental death benefits.Insurance thatIf your employer sells you property or services atservice and the cost of it is so small that it would provides accidental or other death benefits buta discount, you may be able to exclude thebe unreasonable for the employer to account for does not provide general death benefits (travelit, the value is not included in your income.amount of the discount from your income. Theinsurance, for example) is not group-term lifeGenerally, the value of benefits such as dis-exclusion applies to discounts on property orinsurance.counts at company cafeterias, cab fares homeservices offered to customers in the ordinary
when working overtime, and company picnics Former employer. If your former employercourse of the line of business in which you work.
are not included in your income. Also see Em- provided more than $50,000 of group-term lifeHowever, it does not apply to discounts on real
ployee Discounts, later. insurance coverage during the year, the amountproperty or property commonly held for invest-
included in your income is reported as wages inment (such as stocks or bonds).Holiday gifts.If your employer gives you a box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separatelyThe exclusion is limited to the price chargedturkey, ham, or other item of nominal value at in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show thenonemployee customers multiplied by the fol-Christmas or other holidays, do not include the amount of uncollected social security and Medi-
value of the gift in your income. However, if yourlowing percentage. care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes
employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or a M and N. You must pay these taxes with your• For a discount on property, your em-similar item that you easily can exchange for income tax return. Include them in your total taxployer’s gross profit percentage (grosscash, you include the value of that gift as extra on line 63, Form 1040, and enter “UT” and theprofit divided by gross sales) on all prop-salary or wages regardless of the amount in- amount of the taxes on the dotted line next toerty sold during the employer’s previousvolved. line 63.tax year. (Ask your employer for this per-
centage.) Two or more employers. Your exclusion for
Dependent Care Benefits employer-provided group-term life insurance• For a discount on services, 20%. coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of
If your employer provides dependent care bene- coverage, whether the insurance is provided by
fits under a qualified plan, you may be able toFinancial Counseling Fees a single employer or multiple employers. If two
exclude these benefits from your income. De- or more employers provide insurance coverage
Financial counseling fees paid for you by yourpendent care benefits include: that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-
employer are included in your income and mustported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not be• Amounts your employer pays directly tobe reported as part of wages. If the fees are forcorrect. You must figure how much to include ineither you or your care provider for the
tax or investment counseling, they can be de-your income. Reduce the amount you figure bycare of your qualifying person while you
ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel- any amount reported with code C in box 12 ofwork, and
your Forms W-2, add the result to the wageslaneous deduction (subject to the 2% of AGI• The fair market value of care in a daycare reported in box 1, and report the total on yourlimit).facility provided or sponsored by your em- return.   Qualified retirement planning services paidployer.
for you by your employer may be excluded fromFiguring the taxable cost. Use the following
your income. For more information, see Retire-The amount you can exclude is limited to the worksheet to figure the amount to include in your
lesser of: ment Planning Services, later. income.
Publication 525 (2006) Page 5

Page 6 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you pay any part of the cost of the insur- 2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-Worksheet 1. Figuring the Cost of
ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar for icy for the entire period the insurance is inGroup-Term Life Insurance To
dollar, the amount you would otherwise include force during the tax year.Include in Income
in your income. However, you cannot reduce the3. A charitable organization to which contri-amount to include in your income by: butions are deductible is the only benefi-1.Enter the total amount of
• Payments for coverage in a different tax ciary of the policy for the entire period theyour insurance coverage
from your employer(s).... 1. year, insurance is in force during the tax year.
(You are not entitled to a deduction for a• Payments for coverage through a cafeteria2.Limit on exclusion for charitable contribution for naming a chari-plan, unless the payments are after-taxemployer-provided table organization as the beneficiary ofcontributions, orgroup-term life insurance your policy.)
coverage............. 2. 50,000 • Payments for coverage not taxed to you4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:because of the exceptions discussed later
3.Subtract line 2 from line 1 . .3. under Entire cost excluded. a. You retired before January 2, 1984, and
were covered by the plan when you re-4.Divide line 3 by $1,000. tired, orExample. You are 51 years old and work forFigure to the nearest tenth4.
employers A and B. Both employers provide b. You reached age 55 before January 2,
group-term life insurance coverage for you for5.Go to Table 1. Using your 1984, and were employed by the em-
the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 withage on the last day of the ployer or its predecessor in 1983.
employer A and $45,000 with employer B. Youtax year, find your age
pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-group in the left column,
ployer B group plan. You figure the amount toand enter the cost from the Entire cost taxed.You are taxed on the entire
column on the right for your include in your income as follows. cost of group-term life insurance if either of the
age group............ 5. following circumstances apply.
Worksheet 1. Figuring the Cost of • The insurance is provided by your em-6.Multiply line 4 by line 5 . . .6.
Group-Term Life Insurance To ployer through a qualified employees’
trust, such as a pension trust or a qualifiedInclude in Income—Illustrated
annuity plan.
7.Enter the number of full 1.Enter the total amount of your • You are a key employee and your em-months of coverage at this insurance coverage from your ployer’s plan discriminates in favor of keycost ................ 7. employer(s)........... 1. 80,000 employees.
2.Limit on exclusion for8.Multiply line 6 by line 7 . . .8. employer-provided
Meals and Lodginggroup-term life insurance9.Enter the coverage ............. 2. 50,000 You do not include in your income the value ofpremiums you 3.Subtract line 2 from line 1 . .3. 30,000paid per month 9. meals and lodging provided to you and your4.Divide line 3 by $1,000. family by your employer at no charge if theFigure to the nearest tenth4. 30.010.Enter the number following conditions are met.5.Go to Table 1. Using yourof months you age on the last day of the tax 1. The meals are:paid the year, find your age group inpremiums .... 10. the left column, and enter the a. Furnished on the business premises of
cost from the column on the your employer, and11.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . .11. right for your age group . . .5. .23
b. Furnished for the convenience of your6.Multiply line 4 by line 5.... 6. 6.9012.Subtract line 11 from line 8. employer.7.Enter the number of fullInclude this amount in months of coverage at thisyour income as wages... 12. 2. The lodging is:cost................. 7. 12
8.Multiply line 6 by line 7.... 8. 82.80 a. Furnished on the business premises of9.Enter the premiums your employer,you paid per month9. 4.15Table 1. Cost of $1,000 of b. Furnished for the convenience of your10.Enter the number ofGroup-Term Life Insurance for One months you paid employer, and
Month the premiums.... 10. 12 c. A condition of your employment. (You11.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . .11. 49.80 must accept it in order to be able toAge Cost 12.Subtract line 11 from line 8. properly perform your duties.)Under 25............. $  . 0 5 Include this amount in your
25 through 29.........  . 0 6 income as wages ....... 12. 33.00  You also do not include in your income the
value of meals or meal money that qualifies as a30 through 34......... . 0 8 The total amount to include in income for thede minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-35 through 39......... . 0 9 cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33.mal) Benefits, earlier.Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur-40 through 44......... . 1 0 ance coverage, so the wages shown on yourLodging for employees affected by Hurri-45 through 49......... . 1 5 Forms W-2 do not include any part of that $33.cane Katrina. If your employer provides
You must add it to the wages shown on yourin-kind lodging to you (or your spouse or depen-50 through 54......... . 2 3 Forms W-2 and include the total on your return.dents), you may be able to exclude from income55 through 59......... . 4 3
part or all of the value of this lodging. The exclu-
sion is equal to the value of lodging furnished60 through 64......... . 6 6 Entire cost excluded.You are not taxed on
from January through June 2006, up to a maxi-the cost of group-term life insurance if any of the65 through 69......... 1.27
mum value of $600 per month.following circumstances apply.
You can exclude this value only if you had70 and older.......... 2.06
1. You are permanently and totally disabled your main home in the Gulf Opportunity Zone on
and have ended your employment. August 28, 2005, and you perform substantially
Page 6 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 7 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
all your work in the Gulf Opportunity Zone for the your income. See Publication 521 for more infor- The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe
mation.employer furnishing the lodging. You cannot be benefit cannot be more than $205 a month.
a dependent of, or related to, your employer. For If the benefits have a value that is more than
information on the Gulf Opportunity Zone, see these limits, the excess must be included in your
No-Additional-Cost ServicesPublication 4492. income.
The value of services you receive from yourFaculty lodging.If you are an employee of an Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high-employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced priceeducational institution or an academic health way vehicle that seats at least six adults (notis not included in your income if your employer:center and you are provided with lodging that including the driver). At least 80% of the vehi-does not meet the three conditions above, you• Offers the same service for sale to cus-cle’s mileage must reasonably be expected tostill may not have to include the value of thetomers in the ordinary course of the line ofbe:lodging in income. However, the lodging mustbusiness in which you work, and
• For transporting employees between theirbe qualified campus lodging, and you must pay
• Does not have a substantial additional homes and work place, andan adequate rent.
cost (including any sales income given up)
• On trips during which employees occupyAcademic health center.This is an organi- to provide you with the service (regardless
zation that meets the following conditions. at least half of the vehicle’s adult seatingof what you paid for the service).
capacity (not including the driver).• Its principal purpose or function is to pro-
Generally, no-additional-cost services are ex-vide medical or hospital care or medical
cess capacity services, such as airline, bus, orTransit pass.This is any pass, token, fare-education or research.
train tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv-card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person• It receives payments for graduate medicalices. to ride mass transit (whether public or private)education under the Social Security Act. free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuterExample. You are employed as a flight at-• One of its principal purposes or functions highway vehicle operated by a person in thetendant for a company that owns both an airlineis to provide and teach basic and clinical business of transporting persons for compensa-and a hotel chain. Your employer allows you tomedical science and research using its tion.take personal flights (if there is an unoccupiedown faculty.
seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if thereQualified parking.This is parking provided tois an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. TheQualified campus lodging.Qualified cam- an employee at or near the employer’s place ofvalue of the personal flight is not included in yourpus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your business. It also includes parking provided on orincome. However, the value of the hotel room isspouse, or one of your dependents by, or on near a location from which the employee com-included in your income because you do notbehalf of, the institution or center for use as a mutes to work by mass transit, in a commuterwork in the hotel business.home. The lodging must be located on or near a highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in-campus of the educational institution or aca- clude parking at or near the employee’s home.demic health center. Retirement Planning Services
Adequate rent. The amount of rent you pay
Tuition ReductionIf your employer has a qualified retirement plan,for the year for qualified campus lodging is con-
qualified retirement planning services providedsidered adequate if it is at least equal to the You can exclude a qualified tuition reductionto you (and your spouse) by your employer arelesser of: from your income. This is the amount of a reduc-not included in your income. Qualified services• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging, tion in tuition:include retirement planning advice, informationor about your employer’s retirement plan, and in-• For education (below graduate level) fur-
formation about how the plan may fit into your• The average of rentals paid by individuals nished by an educational institution to an
overall individual retirement income plan. You(other than employees or students) for employee, former employee who retired or
cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,comparable lodging held for rent by the became disabled, or his or her spouse and
accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-educational institution. dependent children.
vided by your employer. Also, see FinancialIf the amount you pay is less than the lesser of • For education furnished to a graduate stu-Counseling Fees, earlier.these amounts, you must include the difference dent at an educational institution if the
in your income. graduate student is engaged in teaching
or research activities for that institution.TransportationThe lodging must be appraised by an inde-
pendent appraiser and the appraisal must be • Representing payment for teaching, re-If your employer provides you with a qualifiedreviewed on an annual basis. search, or other services if you receive thetransportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedamount under the National Health Servicefrom your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedExample. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes- Corps Scholarship Program or the Armedtransportation fringe benefit is:sor for State University, rents a home from the Forces Health Professions Scholarship
university that is qualified campus lodging. The• Transportation in a commuter highway ve- and Financial Assistance Program.
house is appraised at $100,000. The average hicle (such as a van) between your homeFor more information, see Publication 970.rent paid for comparable university lodging byand work place,
persons other than employees or students is
• A transit pass, or Working Condition Benefits$7,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent of
$5,500. Carl does not include in his income any• Qualified parking. If your employer provides you with a product orrental value because the rent he pays equals at service and the cost of it would have been allow-Cash reimbursement by your employer for theseleast 5% of the appraised value of the house able as a business or depreciation deduction ifexpenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-(5% × $100,000 = $5,000). If Carl paid annual you paid for it yourself, the cost is not included inrangement is also excludable. However, cashrent of only $4,000, he would have to include
your income.reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable$1,000 in his income ($5,000 − $4,000).
only if a voucher or similar item that can be
Example. You work as an engineer andexchanged only for a transit pass is not readily
your employer provides you with a subscriptionavailable for direct distribution to you.Moving Expense Reimbursements
to an engineering trade magazine. The cost of
the subscription is not included in your incomeGenerally, if your employer pays for your movingExclusion limit.The exclusion for commuter
because the cost would have been allowable toexpenses (either directly or indirectly) and thehighway vehicle transportation and transit pass
you as a business deduction if you had paid forexpenses would have been deductible if youfringe benefits cannot be more than a total of
the subscription yourself.paid them yourself, the value is not included in$105 a month.
Publication 525 (2006) Page 7

Page 8 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Any amount specifically excluded from in- 4. Savings incentive match plans for employ-Valuation of Fringe Benefits
ees (SIMPLE plans).come by law.
If a fringe benefit is included in your income, the
The special valuation rules are the following.5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans).amount included is generally its value deter-
mined under the general valuation rule or under• The automobile lease rule. 6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re-
the special valuation rules. For an exception, porting by employer, later.)• The vehicle cents-per-mile rule.see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.
7. Section 457 plans.• The commuting rule.
General valuation rule.You must include in
• The unsafe conditions commuting rule.your income the amount by which the fair market Overall limit on deferrals.For 2006, you gen-
value of the fringe benefit is more than the sum• The employer-operated eating-facility rule.erally should not have deferred more than a total
of: of $15,000 of contributions to the plans listed in
For more information on these rules, see Pub-(1) through (3) above. The specific plan limits for1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene-lication 15-B, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringethe plans listed in (4) through (7) above arefit, plus discussed later.Benefits.
2. The amount, if any, specifically excluded Your employer or plan administrator should For information on the non-commercial flight
from your income by law. apply the proper annual limit when figuring yourand commercial flight valuation rules, see sec-
plan contributions. However, you are responsi-tions 1.61-21(g) and 1.61-21(h) of the regula-If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit, ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensuretions.no amount is included in your income. that the deferrals are not more than the overall
Fair market value.The fair market value of limit.Retirement Plana fringe benefit is determined by all the facts and
Contributionscircumstances. It is the amount you would have Catch-up contributions.You may be allowed
to pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit. catch-up contributions (additional elective defer-Your employer’s contributions to a qualified re-This is determined without regard to: rals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of yourtirement plan for you are not included in incometax year. For more information about catch-up• Your perceived value of the benefit, orat the time contributed. (Your employer can tellcontributions to 403(b) plans, see chapter 6 of
you whether your retirement plan is qualified.)• The amount your employer paid for the Publication 571, Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans
However, the cost of life insurance coveragebenefit. (403(b) Plans).
included in the plan may have to be included.For more information about additional elec-
See Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier, underEmployer-provided vehicles.If your em- tive deferrals to:
Fringe Benefits.ployer provides a car (or other highway motor • SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary ReductionIf your employer pays into a nonqualifiedvehicle) to you, your personal use of the car is Simplified Employee Pension in Publica-usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.plan for you, you generally must include thetion 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-Under the general valuation rules, the value contributions in your income as wages for theness.of an employer-provided vehicle is the amounttax year in which the contributions are made.
you would have to pay a third party to lease theHowever, if your interest in the plan is not trans-• SIMPLE plans, see How Much Can Be
same or a similar vehicle on the same or compa-ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei-Contributed on Your Behalf in chapter 3 of
rable terms in the same geographic area whereture (you have a good chance of losing it) at thePublication 590, Individual Retirement Ar-
you use the vehicle. An example of a compara-time of the contribution, you do not have to rangements (IRAs).
ble lease term is the amount of time the vehicleinclude the value of your interest in your income• Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferralsis available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-until it is transferable or is no longer subject to aunder section 457 plans, later.riod. The value cannot be determined by multi-substantial risk of forfeiture.
plying a cents-per-mile rate times the number ofFor information on distributions fromLimit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans.Ifmiles driven unless you prove the vehicle could retirement plans, see Publication 575you are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, youhave been leased on a cents-per-mile basis. (or Publication 721, Tax Guide for U.S.
TIP
generally should not have deferred more thanFlights on employer-provided aircraft. Civil Service Retirement Benefits, if you are a$10,000 in 2006.  Amounts you defer under aUnder the general valuation rules, if your flightfederal employee or retiree). SIMPLE plan count toward the overall limiton an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri- ($15,000 for 2006) and may affect the amountmarily personal and you control the use of the you can defer under other elective deferralaircraft for the flight, the value is the amount itElective Deferrals plans.would cost to charter the flight from a third party.
If there is more than one employee on theIf you are covered by certain kinds of retirementLimit for tax-sheltered annuities.If you are aflight, the cost to charter the aircraft must beplans, you can choose to have part of yourparticipant in a tax-sheltered annuity plandivided among those employees. The divisioncompensation contributed by your employer to a(403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals formust be based on all the facts, including whichretirement fund, rather than have it paid to you.2006 generally is $15,000. However, if you haveemployee or employees control the use of theThe amount you set aside (called an electiveat least 15 years of service with a public schoolaircraft. deferral) is treated as an employer contributionsystem, a hospital, a home health service
to a qualified plan. An elective deferral, otheragency, a health and welfare service agency, aSpecial valuation rules.You generally can than a designated Roth contribution (discussedchurch, or a convention or association ofuse a special valuation rule for a fringe benefitlater), is not included in wages subject to incomechurches (or associated organization), the limitonly if your employer uses the rule. If your em-tax at the time contributed. However, it is in-on elective deferrals is increased by the least ofployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannotcluded in wages subject to social security andthe following amounts.use a different special rule to value that benefit.Medicare taxes.
You always can use the general valuation rule 1. $3,000.Elective deferrals include elective contribu-discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-tions to the following retirement plans. 2. $15,000, reduced by increases to the over-stances, even if your employer uses a special
all limit that you were allowed in earlierrule. 1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section years because of this years-of-service rule.If you and your employer use a special valua-401(k) plans).
tion rule, you must include in your income the 3. $5,000 times your number of years of serv-2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-amount your employer determines under the ice for the organization, minus the totalees.special rule minus the sum of: elective deferrals under the plan for earlier
years.3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-1. Any amount you repaid your employer,
sion plans (SARSEP).plus For more information, see Publication 571.
Page 8 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 9 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limit for deferral under section 501(c)(18)2. The limit for prior years minus the amount plan then must pay you the amount of the ex-
plans. If you are a participant in a sectionyou deferred in prior years plus the lessercess, along with any income earned on that
501(c)(18) plan (a trust created before June 25,of: amount, by April 15 of the following year.
1959, funded only by employee contributions), You must include the excess deferral in youra. Your includible compensation for theyou should have deferred no more than the income for the year of the deferral unless youcurrent year, orlesser of $7,000 or 25% of your compensation. have an excess deferral of a designated Roth
contribution. File Form 1040 to add the excessb. The dollar limit for the current year.
Limit for deferrals under section 457 plans. deferral amount to your wages on line 7. Do not
If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (a use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to report ex-Catch-up contributions. You generallydeferred compensation plan for employees of cess deferral amounts.can have additional elective deferrals made tostate or local governments or tax-exempt orga- Excess not distributed.If you do not takeyour governmental section 457 plan if:nizations), you should have deferred no more out the excess amount, you cannot include it inthan the lesser of your includible compensation• You reached age 50 by the end of the the cost of the contract even though you in-or $15,000. However, if you are within 3 years ofyear, and cluded it in your income. Therefore, you arenormal retirement age, you may be allowed an• No other elective deferrals can be madetaxed twice on the excess deferral left in theincreased limit if the plan allows it. See In- for you to the plan for the year because ofplan—once when you contribute it, and againcreased limit, later. limits or restrictions. when you receive it as a distribution.
Includible compensation.This is the payIf you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of yourExcess distributed to you.If you take outyou received for the year from the employer whoincludible compensation or $15,000, plus the excess after the year of the deferral and youmaintained the section 457 plan. It generally$5,000. However, if you are within 3 years ofreceive the corrective distribution by April 15 ofincludes all the following payments. retirement age and your plan provides the in-the following year, do not include it in income
creased limit earlier, that limit may be higher.again in the year you receive it. If you receive it1. Wages and salaries.
later, you must include it in income in both the2. Fees for professional services. Designated Roth contributions.Employers year of the deferral and the year you receive it.
with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans canAny income on the excess deferral taken out is3. The value of any employer-provided quali-
create qualified Roth contribution programs sotaxable in the tax year in which you take it out. Iffied transportation fringe benefit (defined
that you may elect to have part or all of youryou take out part of the excess deferral and theunder Transportation, earlier) that is not
elective deferrals to the plan designated as af-income on it, allocate the distribution proportion-included in your income.
ter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Rothately between the excess deferral and the in-4. Other amounts received (cash or noncash)contributions are treated as elective deferrals,come.for personal services you performed, in-except that they are included in income. YourYou should receive a Form 1099-R, Distribu-cluding, but not limited to, the followingretirement plan must maintain separate ac-tions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement oritems. counts and recordkeeping for the designatedProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-Roth contributions. tracts, etc., for the year in which the excessa. Commissions and tips. Qualified distributions from a Roth plan aredeferral is distributed to you. Use the followingb. Fringe benefits. not included in income. Generally, a distribution rules to report a corrective distribution shown onmade before the end of the 5-tax-year periodForm 1099-R for 2006.c. Bonuses. beginning with the first tax year for which you
• If the distribution was for a 2006 excessmade a designated Roth contribution to the plan5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals) deferral, your Form 1099-R should haveis not a qualified distribution.to: the code “8” in box 7. Add the excessReporting by employer.Your employer gen- deferral amount to your wages on youra. The section 457 plan. erally should not include elective deferrals in2006 tax return.your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. Instead, yourb. Qualified cash or deferred arrange-
• If the distribution was for a 2006 excessemployer should mark the Retirement planments (section 401(k) plans) that are
deferral to a designated Roth account,checkbox in box 13 and show the total amountnot included in your income.
your Form 1099-R should have code “B” indeferred in box 12.
c. A salary reduction simplified employee box 7. Do not add this amount to yourSection 501(c)(18)(D) contributions.pension (SARSEP). wages on your 2006 return.Wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2 should
d. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b) • If the distribution was for a 2005 excessnot have been reduced for contributions you
plan). deferral, your Form 1099-R should havemade to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement plan.
the code “P” in box 7. If you did not addThe amount you contributed should be identifiede. A savings incentive match plan for em-
the excess deferral amount to your wageswith code “H” in box 12. You may deduct theployees (SIMPLE plan).
on your 2005 tax return, you must file anamount deferred subject to the limits that apply.
f. A section 125 cafeteria plan. amended return on Form 1040X,Include your deduction in the total on Form
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-1040, line 36. Enter the amount and
Instead of using the amounts listed above to turn. If you did not receive the distribution“501(c)(18)(D)” on the dotted line next to line 36.
determine your includible compensation, your by April 17, 2006, you also must add it toDesignated Roth contributions. Theseemployer can use any of the following amounts. your wages on your 2006 tax return.contributions are elective deferrals but are in-
• Your wages as defined for income tax • If the distribution was for a 2004 excesscluded in your wages in box 1 of Form W-2.
withholding purposes. deferral, your Form 1099-R should haveDesignated Roth contributions to a section
the code “D” in box 7. If you did not add401(k) plan are reported using code AA in box• Your wages as reported in box 1 of Form
the excess deferral amount to your wages12, or, for section 403(b) plans, code BB in boxW-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
on your 2004 tax return, you must file an12.
• Your wages that are subject to social se- amended return on Form 1040X. You alsoExcess deferrals.If your deferrals exceed thecurity withholding (including elective defer- must add it to your wages on your 2006limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-rals). income tax return.quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex-
• If the distribution was for the incomecess amount will be distributed to you. If youIncreased limit.During any, or all, of the
earned on an excess deferral, your Formparticipate in more than one plan, you can havelast 3 years ending before you reach normal
1099-R should have the code “8” in box 7.the excess paid out of any of the plans thatretirement age under the plan, your plan may
Add the income amount to your wages onpermit these distributions. You must notify eachprovide that your limit is the lesser of:
your 2006 income tax return, regardless ofplan by the date required by that plan of the
when the excess deferral was made.1. Twice the dollar limit for the year, oramount to be paid from that particular plan. The
Publication 525 (2006) Page 9

Page 10 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Report a loss on a corrective distribution of an The option privilege for an option to buy is theExcess Annual Additions
opportunity to benefit during the option’s exer-excess deferral in the year the excess amount
The amount contributed in 2006 to a definedcise period from any increase in the value of(reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In-contribution plan is generally limited to theproperty subject to the option without risking anyclude the loss as a negative amount on Formlesser of 100% of your compensation or capital. For example, if during the exercise pe-1040, line 21 and identify it as “Loss on Excess$44,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu-riod the fair market value of stock subject to anDeferral Distribution.” tions that exceed these limits (excess annualoption is greater than the option’s exercise price,
additions) may be corrected by a distribution ofa profit may be realized by exercising the optionEven though a corrective distribution ofyour elective deferrals or a return of your af-and immediately selling the stock at its higherexcess deferrals is reported on Formter-tax contributions and earnings from thesevalue. The option privilege for an option to sell is1099-R, it is not otherwise treated as a
TIP
contributions. the opportunity to benefit during the exercisedistribution from the plan. It cannot be rolled
A corrective payment of excess annual addi-period from a decrease in the value of the prop-over into another plan, and it is not subject to thetions consisting of elective deferrals or earningserty subject to the option.additional tax on early distributions. from your after-tax contributions is fully taxable
in the year paid. A corrective payment consistingIf you or a member of your family is an
of your after-tax contributions is not taxable. officer, director, or more-than-10%Excess Contributions owner of an expatriated corporation,If you received a corrective payment of ex-
CAUTION
!
you may owe an excise tax on the value ofcess annual additions, you should receive aIf you are a highly compensated employee, the nonstatutory options and other stock-basedseparate Form 1099-R for the year of the pay-total of your elective deferrals and other contri- compensation from that corporation. For morement with the code “E” in box 7. Report the totalbutions made for you for any year under a sec- information on the excise tax, see Internal Reve-payment shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R on linetion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as a nue Code section 4985.16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form 1040A.percentage of pay, no more than 125% of theReport the taxable amount shown in box 2a ofaverage deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligible Option with readily determined value.If youForm 1099-R on line 16b of Form 1040 or linenon-highly compensated employees. 12b of Form 1040A. receive a nonstatutory stock option that has a
 If the total contributed to the plan is more readily determined fair market value at the time itEven though a corrective distribution ofthan the amount allowed under the ADP test, the is granted to you, the option is treated like otherexcess annual additions is reported onproperty received as compensation. See Re-excess contributions must be either distributed Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP
stricted Property, later, for rules on how muchto you or recharacterized as after-tax employeetreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotincome to include and when to include it. How-contributions by treating them as distributed tobe rolled over into another plan, and it is notever, the rule described in that discussion foryou and then contributed by you to the plan. Yousubject to the additional tax on early distribu-choosing to include the value of property in yourmust include the excess contributions in yourtions. income for the year of the transfer does notincome as wages on Form 1040, line 7. You apply to a nonstatutory option.cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to Stock Optionsreport excess contribution amounts. Option without readily determined value.If
If you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sellIf you receive excess contributions from a the fair market value of the option is not readily
stock or other property as payment for your401(k) plan and any income earned on the con- determined at the time it is granted to you (even
services, you usually will have income when youif it is determined later), you do not have incometributions within 21/2 months after the close of the
receive the option, when you exercise the optionuntil you exercise or transfer the option.plan year, you must include them in your income
(use it to buy or sell the stock or other property),in the year of the contribution. If you receive Exercise. When you exercise this kind ofor when you sell or otherwise dispose of thethem later, or receive less than $100 excess option, the restricted property rules apply to theoption. However, if your option is a statutorycontributions, include the excess contributions property received. The amount to include in yourstock option (defined later), you will not have anyand earnings in your income in the year distrib- income is the difference between the amountincome until you sell or exchange your stock.uted. If the excess contributions are recharacter- you pay for the property and its fair market valueYour employer can tell you which kind of option
ized, you must include them in income in the when it becomes substantially vested. Your ba-you hold.
sis in the property you acquire under the optionyear a corrective distribution would have oc-
is the amount you pay for it plus any amount youcurred. For a SARSEP, the employer must notify
must include in your gross income under thisyou by March 15 following the year in whichNonstatutory Stock Options
rule. For more information on restricted prop-excess contributions are made that you must
If you are granted a nonstatutory stock option,erty, see Restricted Property, later.withdraw the excess and earnings. You mustthe amount of income to include and the time toinclude the excess contributions in your income Transfer in arm’s-length transaction.Ifinclude it depend on whether the fair marketin the year of the contribution (or the year of the you transfer this kind of option in an arm’s-lengthvalue of the option can be readily determined.notification if less than $100) and include the transaction to an unrelated person, you mustThe fair market value of an option can be readilyearnings in your income in the year withdrawn. include in your income the money or other prop-determined if it is actively traded on an estab-erty you received for the transfer, as if you hadYou should receive a Form 1099-R for thelished market. exercised the option.year in which the excess contributions are dis-The fair market value of an option that is not
tributed to you (or are recharacterized). Add Transfer in non-arm’s-length transaction.traded on an established market can be readily
If you transfer this kind of option in aexcess contributions or earnings shown ondetermined only if all of the following conditions
non-arm’s-length transaction (for example, aForm 1099-R for 2006 to your wages on yourexist.
gift), the option is not treated as exercised or2006 tax return if code “8” is in box 7. If code “P”• You can transfer the option. closed at that time. You must include in youror “D” is in box 7, you may have to file an
income, as compensation, any money or prop-• You can exercise the option immediatelyamended 2005 or 2004 return on Form 1040X to
erty received. When the transferee exercisesin full.add the excess contributions or earnings to your
the option, you must include in your income, aswages in the year of the contribution. • The option or the property subject to thecompensation, the excess of the fair marketoption is not subject to any condition orEven though a corrective distribution of value of the stock acquired by the transfereerestriction (other than a condition to se-excess contributions is reported on over the sum of the exercise price paid and anycure payment of the purchase price) thatForm 1099-R, it is not otherwise amount you included in income at the time you
TIP
has a significant effect on the fair markettreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot transferred the option. At the time of the exer-value of the option.be rolled over into another plan, and it is not cise, the transferee recognizes no income and
subject to the additional tax on early distribu- has a basis in the stock acquired equal to the fair• The fair market value of the option privi-
tions. market value of the stock.lege can be readily determined.
Page 10 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 11 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Any transfer of this kind of option to a related Report your ordinary income as wages on FormEmployee stock purchase plan.If you sold
person after July 1, 2003, is treated as a1040, line 7, for the year of the sale. stock acquired by exercising an option granted
non-arm’s-length transaction. See Regulations under an employee stock purchase plan, deter-
Incentive stock options (ISOs).If you sellsection 1.83-7 for the definition of a related per- mine your ordinary income and your capital gain
son. stock acquired by exercising an ISO and meetor loss as follows.
the holding period requirement, your gain or lossRecourse note in satisfaction of the exer- Option granted at a discount.If at the timefrom the sale is capital gain or loss.cise price of an option.If you are an em- the option was granted, the option price perIf you do not meet the holding period require-ployee, and you issue a recourse note to your share was less than 100% (but not less thanment and you have a gain from the sale, the gainemployer in satisfaction of the exercise price of 85%) of the fair market value of the share, andis ordinary income up to the amount by whichan option to acquire your employer’s stock, and you dispose of the share after meeting the hold-the stock’s fair market value when you exercisedyour employer and you subsequently agree to
ing period requirement, or you die while owningreduce the stated principal amount of the note, the option exceeded the option price. Any ex-
the share, you must include in your income asyou generally recognize compensation incomecess gain is capital gain. If you have a loss from
compensation, the lesser of:at the time and in the amount of the reduction.the sale, it is a capital loss and you do not have
any ordinary income. • The amount, if any, by which the priceTax form. If you receive compensation from paid under the option was exceeded byemployer-provided nonstatutory stock options, itExample. Your employer, X Corporation, the fair market value of the share at theis reported in box 1 of Form W-2. It is alsogranted you an ISO on March 11, 2004, to buytime the option was granted, orreported in box 12 using code “V.” 100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a
• The amount, if any, by which the priceshare, its fair market value at the time. You If you are a nonemployee spouse and you
paid under the option was exceeded byexercise nonstatutory stock options you re- exercised the option on January 14, 2005, when
the fair market value of the share at theceived incident to a divorce, the income is re-the stock was selling on the open market for $12
ported to you on Form 1099-MISC, time of the disposition or death.a share. On January 24, 2006, you sold the
Miscellaneous Income, in box 3. stock for $15 a share. Although you held theFor this purpose, if the option price was not fixedstock for more than a year, less than 2 years hador determinable at the time the option waspassed from the time you were granted the op-granted, the option price is figured as if theStatutory Stock Options tion. In 2006, you must report the differenceoption had been exercised at the time it wasbetween the option price ($10) and the value ofThere are two kinds of statutory stock options. granted.the stock when you exercised the option ($12)
• Incentive stock options (ISOs), and Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have aas wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain,
loss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you dofigured as follows:• Options granted under employee stock not have any ordinary income.purchase plans. Selling price ($15 × 100 shares)..... $  1,500
Purchase price ($10 × 100 shares) . . .−1,000 Example. Your employer, Y Corporation,For either kind of option, you must be anGain ....................... $  5 0 0 granted you an option under its employee stockemployee of the company granting the option, orAmount reported as wages purchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of Ya related company, at all times beginning with[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000]...... − 200 Corporation for $20 a share at a time when thethe date the option is granted, until 3 monthsAmount reported as capital gain $ 300 stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteenbefore you exercise the option (for an incentive
months later, when the value of the stock wasstock option, 1 year before if you are disabled).Alternative minimum tax (AMT).For the $23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14Also, the option must be nontransferable except
AMT, you must treat stock acquired through theat death. If you do not meet the employment months after that you sold your stock for $30 a
exercise of an ISO as if no special treatmentrequirements, or you receive a transferable op- share. In the year of sale, you must report asapplied. This means that, when your rights in thetion, your option is a nonstatutory stock option. wages the difference between the option pricestock are transferable or no longer subject to aSee Nonstatutory Stock Options, earlier in this ($20) and the value at the time the option wassubstantial risk of forfeiture, you must include asdiscussion. granted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 peran adjustment in figuring alternative minimumIf you receive a statutory stock option, do not share) is capital gain, figured as follows:taxable income the amount by which the fairinclude any amount in your income either when
market value of the stock exceeds the optionthe option is granted or when you exercise it. Selling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $  3,000
price. Enter this adjustment on line 13 of FormYou have taxable income or a deductible loss Purchase price (option price)
6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals.($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000when you sell the stock that you bought by
Increase your AMT basis in any stock you ac-Gain ...................... $  1,000exercising the option. Your income or loss is the
Amount reported as wagesquire by exercising the ISO by the amount of thedifference between the amount you paid for the
[($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 200adjustment. However, no adjustment is requiredstock (the option price) and the amount you
receive when you sell it. You generally treat this if you dispose of the stock in the same year youAmount reported as capital gain $ 800
amount as capital gain or loss and report it onexercise the option.
Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains and See Restricted Property, later, for more infor-Holding period requirement not met.If
Losses, for the year of the sale. mation. you do not meet the holding period requirement,
However, you may have ordinary income for your ordinary income is the amount by which theYour AMT basis in stock acquiredthe year that you sell or otherwise dispose of the stock’s fair market value when you exercised thethrough an ISO is likely to differ fromstock in either of the following situations. option exceeded the option price. This ordinaryyour regular tax basis. Therefore, keepRECORDS
income is not limited to your gain from the sale of• You do not meet the holding period re-adequate records for both the AMT and regular
the stock. Increase your basis in the stock by thequirement. This situation generally appliestax so that you can figure your adjusted gain or
if you sell the stock within 1 year after its amount of this ordinary income. The differenceloss.
transfer to you or within 2 years after the between your increased basis and the selling
option was granted. However, you are price of the stock is a capital gain or loss.Example. The facts are the same as in the
considered to meet the holding period re-previous example. On January 18, 2006, when
quirement for certain sales after October Example.   The facts are the same as in thethe stock was selling on the open market for $14
22, 2004, to comply with con- previous example, except that you sold thea share, your rights to the stock first becameflict-of-interest requirements. stock only 6 months after you exercised thetransferable. You include $400 ($1,400 value
option. You did not hold the stock long enough,when your rights first became transferable mi-• You meet the conditions described under
so you must report $300 as wages and $700 asnus $1,000 purchase price) as an adjustment onOption granted at a discount, under Em-
Form 6251, line 13.ployee stock purchase plan, later. capital gain, figured as follows:
Publication 525 (2006) Page 11

Page 12 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Selling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $3,000 Example. The Spin Corporation transfers to• A statement that you have provided copies
Purchase price (option price) to the appropriate persons.you as compensation for services 100 shares of
($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000 its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under the
Gain ...................... $1,000 terms of the transfer, you must resell the stock toDividends received on restricted stock.Amount reported as wages the corporation at $100 a share if you leave yourDividends you receive on restricted stock are[($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 300 job for any reason within 3 years from the date oftreated as compensation and not as dividend
transfer. You must perform substantial servicesAmount reported as capital gain income. Your employer should include these[$3,000 – ($2,000 + $300)] $700 over a period of time and you must resell thepayments on your Form W-2. If they also are
stock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard-reported on a Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and
less of its value) if you do not perform the serv-Distributions, you should list them on ScheduleRestricted Property ices, so your rights to the stock are subject to aB (Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),
substantial risk of forfeiture. Interest and Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040AGenerally, if you receive property for your serv-
Filers, with a statement that you have includedices, you must include its fair market value inChoosing to include in income for year ofthem as wages. Do not include them in the totalyour income in the year you receive the prop-transfer.You can choose to include the valuedividends received.erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-of restricted property at the time of transfer (mi-erty that has certain restrictions that affect its Stock you chose to include in your in-nus any amount you paid for the property) invalue, you do not include the value of the prop- come. Dividends you receive on restrictedyour income for the year it is transferred. If youerty in your income until it has been substantially stock you chose to include in your income in themake this choice, the substantial vesting rulesvested. (You can choose to include the value of year transferred are treated the same as anydo not apply and, generally, any later apprecia-the property in your income in the year it is other dividends. You should receive a Formtion in value is not included in your compensa-transferred to you, as discussed later, rather 1099-DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-tion when the property becomes substantiallythan the year it is substantially vested.) clude the dividends in your wages on your re-vested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss whenUntil the property becomes substantially turn. Report them as dividends.you sell the property is the amount you paid for itvested, it is owned by the person who makes the
plus the amount you included in income as com-transfer to you, usually your employer. However, Sale of property not substantially vested.pensation.any income from the property, or the right to use These rules apply to the sale or other disposition
the property, is included in your income as addi- of property that you did not choose to include inIf you make this choice, you cannot
tional compensation in the year you receive the your income in the year transferred and that isrevoke it without the consent of the
income or have the right to use the property. Internal Revenue Service. Consent willnot substantially vested.CAUTION
!
When the property becomes substantiallybe given only if you were under a mistake of factIf you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-
vested, you must include its fair market value,as to the underlying transaction. erty in an arm’s-length transaction, include in
minus any amount you paid for it, in your income your income as compensation for the year ofIf you forfeit the property after you have in-for that year. sale the amount realized minus the amount youcluded its value in income, your loss is the
paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-amount you paid for the property minus anyExample. Your employer, the RST Corpo- erty in an arm’s-length transaction for otheramount you realized on the forfeiture.ration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 a property that is not substantially vested, treat theshare. At the time of the sale the fair market You cannot make this choice for a non-new property as if it were substituted for thevalue of the stock is $100 a share. Under the statutory stock option. exchanged property.terms of the sale, the stock is under a substantialCAUTION
!
The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-risk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of tory stock option to a related person is not con-losing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not sidered an arm’s-length transaction. Seesubstantially vested when it is transferred, soHow to make the choice. You make the Regulations section 1.83-7 for the definition of ayou do not include any amount in your income inchoice by filing a written statement with the Inter-related person.the year you buy it. At the end of the 5-yearnal Revenue Service Center where you file yourIf you sell the property in a transaction that isperiod, the fair market value of the stock is $200return. You must file this statement no later thannot at arm’s length, include in your income asa share. You must include $19,000 in your in-30 days after the date the property was trans-compensation for the year of sale the total of anycome [100 shares × ($200 fair market value − ferred. A copy of the statement must be attachedmoney you received and the fair market value of$10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor-to your tax return for the year the property wasany substantially vested property you receivedporation on your 100 shares of stock are taxabletransferred. You also must give a copy of thison the sale. In addition, you will have to reportto you as additional compensation during thestatement to the person for whom you per-income when the original property becomesperiod the stock can be forfeited. formed the services and, if someone other thansubstantially vested, as if you still held it. Reportyou received the property, to that person.as compensation its fair market value minus theSubstantially vested.Property is substan- You must sign the statement and indicate ontotal of the amount you paid for the property andtially vested when: it that you are making the choice under sectionthe amount included in your income from the83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-• It is transferable, or earlier sale.ment must contain all of the following informa-• It is not subject to a substantial risk oftion. Example. In 2003, you paid your employerforfeiture. (You do not have a good
$50 for a share of stock that had a fair market• Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-chance of losing it.)
value of $100 and was subject to forfeiture untilcation number.
2006. In 2005, you sold the stock to your spouseTransferable property.Property is trans- • A description of each property for whichfor $10 in a transaction not at arm’s length. Youferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge youryou are making the choice. had compensation of $10 from this transaction.interest in the property to any person (other than
In 2006, when the stock had a fair market value• The date or dates on which the propertythe transferor), and if the person receiving your
of $120, it became substantially vested. Forwas transferred and the tax year for whichinterest in the property is not required to give up
2006, you must report additional compensationyou are making the choice.the property, or its value, if the substantial risk of
of $60, figured as follows:forfeiture occurs. • The nature of any restrictions on the prop-
erty.Substantial risk of forfeiture.A substan- Fair market value of stock at time
tial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in the of substantial vesting........ $120• The fair market value at the time of trans-property transferred depend on performing (or Minus: Amount paid for stock . . . $50fer (ignoring restrictions except those thatnot performing) substantial services, or on a Minus: Compensation previouslywill never lapse) of each property forcondition related to the transfer, and the possi- included in income from sale towhich you are making the choice. spouse.................. 1 0 −60bility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition is
Additional income $60• Any amount that you paid for the property.not satisfied.
Page 12 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 13 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Inherited property not substantially vested.depends on whether your services are per- Gene’s private practice as a psychologist
If you inherit property not substantially vested atformed for the order. does not make him an agent of the religious
the time of the decedent’s death, any income order. The psychological services provided by
Services performed for the order.If you areyou receive from the property is considered in- Gene are not the type of services that are pro-
performing the services as an agent of the ordercome in respect of a decedent and is taxed vided by the order. The income Gene earns as a
in the exercise of duties required by the order,according to the rules for restricted property psychologist is earned in his individual capacity.do not include in your income the amountsreceived for services. For information about in- Gene must include in his income the earningsturned over to the order.come in respect of a decedent, see Publication from his private practice.If your order directs you to perform services559.
for another agency of the supervising church or
Foreign Employeran associated institution, you are considered to
be performing the services as an agent of theSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreignorder. Any wages you earn as an agent of anemployer.Special Rules for order that you turn over to the order are not
included in your income.Certain Employees U.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen who
works in the United States for a foreign govern-Example. You are a member of a churchThis part of the publication deals with special ment, an international organization, a foreignorder and have taken a vow of poverty. Yourules for people in certain types of employment: embassy, or any foreign employer, you mustrenounce any claims to your earnings and turnmembers of the clergy, members of religious include your salary in your income.over to the order any salaries or wages youorders, people working for foreign employers,earn. You are a registered nurse, so your orderSocial security and Medicare taxes.Youmilitary personnel, and volunteers. assigns you to work in a hospital that is anare exempt from social security and Medicareassociated institution of the church. However,employee taxes if you are employed in theClergy you remain under the general direction and con-United States by an international organization ortrol of the order. You are considered to be ana foreign government. However, you must payIf you are a member of the clergy, you mustagent of the order and any wages you earn atself-employment tax on your earnings from serv-include in your income offerings and fees youthe hospital that you turn over to your order areices performed in the United States, evenreceive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,not included in your income. though you are not self-employed. This rule alsomasses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the
applies if you are an employee of a qualifyingoffering is made to the religious institution, it isServices performed outside the order.If
wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-not taxable to you. you are directed to work outside the order, your
ernment.services are not an exercise of duties requiredIf you are a member of a religious organiza-
by the order unless they meet both of the follow-tion and you give your outside earnings to the
Employees of international organizations oring requirements.organization, you still must include the earnings
foreign governments. Your compensationin your income. However, you may be entitled to• They are the kind of services that are ordi-for official services to an international organiza-a charitable contribution deduction for the narily the duties of members of the order.tion is exempt from federal income tax if you areamount paid to the organization. See Publica-
• They are part of the duties that you mustnot a citizen of the United States or you are ation 526. Also, see Members of Religious Or-
exercise for, or on behalf of, the religiouscitizen of the Philippines (whether or not you areders, later.
order as its agent. a citizen of the United States).
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a Your compensation for official services to aIf you are an employee of a third party, the
member of the clergy usually is treated as any foreign government is exempt from federal in-services you perform for the third party will not
other pension or annuity. It must be reported on come tax if all of the following are true.be considered directed or required of you by the
lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12aorder. Amounts you receive for these services• You are not a citizen of the United Statesand 12b of Form 1040A. are included in your income, even if you haveor you are a citizen of the Philippinestaken a vow of poverty. (whether or not you are a citizen of the
United States).Housing Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of a
religious order and has taken a vow of poverty.• Your work is like the work done by em-Special rules for housing apply to members ofHe renounces all claims to his earnings and ployees of the United States in foreignthe clergy. Under these rules, you do not includeturns over his earnings to the order. countries.in your income the rental value of a home (in-Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructedcluding utilities) or a designated housing allow- • The foreign government gives an equalby the superiors of the order to get a job with aance provided to you as part of your pay. exemption to employees of the Unitedprivate tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-
However, the exclusion cannot be more than the States in its country.ployee of the school, and, at his request, the
reasonable pay for your service. If you pay forschool made the salary payments directly to the
the utilities, you can exclude any allowance des- Waiver of alien status.If you are an alienorder.
ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost. who works for a foreign government or interna-Because Mark is an employee of the school,
The home or allowance must be provided as tional organization and you file a waiver underhe is performing services for the school rather
compensation for your services as an ordained, section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark
licensed, or commissioned minister. However, ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salaryearns working for the school are included in his
you must include the rental value of the home orincome. you receive after the date you file the waiver is
the housing allowance as earnings from not exempt under this rule. However, it may be
self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040),Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of aexempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi-
Self-Employment Tax, if you are subject to thereligious order who, as a condition of member-cation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more
self-employment tax. For more information, seeship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience.information about treaties.Publication 517, Social Security and Other Infor-All claims to his earnings are renounced. Gene
Nonwage income. This exemption appliesmation for Members of the Clergy and Religiousreceived permission from the order to establish
only to employees’ wages, salaries, and fees.Workers. a private practice as a psychologist and coun-
Pensions and other income do not qualify for thissels members of religious orders as well as
exemption.nonmembers. Although the order reviewsMembers of Religious Orders
Gene’s budget annually, Gene controls not only
Employment abroad. For information on theIf you are a member of a religious order who hasthe details of his practice but also the means by
tax treatment of income earned abroad, seetaken a vow of poverty, how you treat earningswhich his work as a psychologist is accom-
Publication 54.that you renounce and turn over to the orderplished.
Publication 525 (2006) Page 13

Page 14 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot claim a deduction or credit for you have in training for, or actually providing,Military
amounts you receive as a mileage reimburse- volunteer federal income tax counseling for the
ment. elderly (TCE).Payments you receive as a member of a military
The reimbursements must be for the use of aservice generally are taxed as wages except for You can deduct as a charitable contribution
private passenger automobile for the benefit ofretirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in
the organization in providing relief related toAllowances generally are not taxed. For more taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-
Hurricane Katrina during the period beginninginformation on the tax treatment of military al- tance (VITA) program.
on August 25, 2005, and ending on Decemberlowances and benefits, see Publication 3,
31, 2006. You must keep records of milesArmed Forces’ Tax Guide.
driven, time, place (or use), and purpose of theMilitary retirement pay.If your retirementmileage. The amount you can exclude from in-Business andpay is based on age or length of service, it iscome can be up to the standard business mile-taxable and must be included in your income asage rate. Investment Incomea pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orFor expenses incurred after December 31,on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not2005, the standard business mileage rate isThis section provides information on the treat-include in your income the amount of any reduc-44.5 cents per mile. ment of income from certain rents and royalties,tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a
and from interests in partnerships and S corpo-Peace Corps. Living allowances you receivesurvivor annuity for your spouse or children
rations. For additional information about busi-as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leaderunder the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec-
ness and investment income, you may want tofor housing, utilities, household supplies, food,tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.
see the following publications.and clothing are exempt from tax.For a more detailed discussion of survivor
annuities, see Publication 575. • Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Busi-Taxable allowances. The following al-
ness (For Individuals Who Use Schedulelowances must be included in your income andDisability.If you are retired on disability,
C or C-EZ).reported as wages.see Military and Government Disability Pen-
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. • Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-• Allowances paid to your spouse and minor
erty (Including Rental of Vacation Homes).children while you are a volunteer leaderVeterans’ benefits.Do not include in your in-
training in the United States.come any veterans’ benefits paid under any law, • Publication 541, Partnerships.
regulation, or administrative practice adminis-• Living allowances designated by the Di-• Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-tered by the Department of Veterans Affairs rector of the Peace Corps as basic com- tions of Assets.(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans orpensation. These are allowances fortheir families are not taxable. • Publication 550, Investment Income andpersonal items such as domestic help,
Expenses (Including Capital Gains andlaundry and clothing maintenance, enter-• Education, training, and subsistence al-
Losses).tainment and recreation, transportation,lowances.
and other miscellaneous expenses.• Disability compensation and pension pay-
Income from sales at auctions, includ-• Leave allowances.ments for disabilities paid either to veter-
ing online auctions, may be businessans or their families. • Readjustment allowances or termination income. For more information, seeCAUTION
!
payments. These are considered received• Grants for homes designed for wheelchair Publication 334.
by you when credited to your account.living.
• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who Rents From Personal
Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corpslost their sight or the use of their limbs. Propertyvolunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment• Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-allowance during his period of service, to be paidIf you rent out personal property, such as equip-dends paid either to veterans or their ben-to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofment or vehicles, how you report your incomeeficiaries, including the proceeds of aduty. Although the allowance is not available toand expenses is generally determined by:veteran’s endowment policy paid beforehim until the end of his service, Gary must in-death. • Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is
ness, andcredited to his account.• Interest on insurance dividends left on de-
posit with the VA. • Whether or not the rental activity is con-Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA).If
ducted for profit.you are a VISTA volunteer, you must include• Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
meal and lodging allowances paid to you in yourtance program. Generally, if your primary purpose is income or
income as wages. profit and you are involved in the rental activity• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a
with continuity and regularity, your rental activitymember of the Armed Forces who died National Senior Service Corps programs.
is a business. See Publication 535, Businessafter September 10, 2001. Do not include in your income amounts you
Expenses, for details on deducting expenses forreceive for supportive services or reimburse-
both business and not-for-profit activities.Rehabilitative program payments. VA ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-
payments to hospital patients and resident vet-lowing programs. Reporting business income and expenses.erans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-• Retired Senior Volunteer Program If you are in the business of renting personaltic or rehabilitative programs are not treated as(RSVP). property, report your income and expenses onnontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report these
Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). Thepayments as income on Form 1040, line 21. • Foster Grandparent Program.
form instructions have information on how to
• Senior Companion Program. complete them.Volunteers
Reporting nonbusiness income. If you areService Corps of Retired ExecutivesThe tax treatment of amounts you receive as a not in the business of renting personal property,(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-volunteer is covered in the following discus- report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21.ive services or reimbursements for out-sions. List the type and amount of the income on theof-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not in-Mileage reimbursements to charitable volun- dotted line next to line 21.clude these amounts in gross income.teers providing relief relating to Hurricane
Katrina.  You can exclude from income Volunteer tax counseling.Do not include inReporting nonbusiness expenses. If you
amounts you receive as mileage reimburse- your income any reimbursements you receive rent personal property for profit, include your
ments from qualified charitable organizations. for transportation, meals, and other expenses rental expenses in the total amount you enter on
Page 14 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 15 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040, line 36. Also, enter the amount and amount to arrive at your taxable income from the year and the items of income, losses, deduc-
“PPR” on the dotted line next to line 36. property. tions, or credits that affect the shareholders’
If you do not rent personal property for profit, individual income tax returns.
your deductions are limited and you cannot re-Partnership Income Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). You shouldport a loss to offset other income. See Activity receive from the S corporation in which you arenot for profit under Other Income in the discus-A partnership generally is not a taxable entity.a shareholder a copy of Schedule K-1 (Formsion of Miscellaneous Income, later. The income, gains, losses, deductions, and1120S), Shareholder’s Share of Income, Deduc-credits of a partnership are passed through totions, Credits, etc., showing your share of in-the partners based on each partner’s distributiveRoyalties come, losses, deductions, and credits, of the Sshare of these items. For more information, seecorporation for the tax year. Retain ScheduleRoyalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, Publication 541. K-1 for your records. Do not attach it to yourand mineral properties are taxable as ordinary Form 1040.Partner’s distributive share.Your distribu-income. tive share of partnership income, gains, losses,  You generally report royalties in Part I of Shareholder’s return.Your distributive sharedeductions, or credits generally is based on theSchedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income of the items of income, losses, deductions, orpartnership agreement. You must report yourand Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil, credits of the S corporation must be shown sep-distributive share of these items on your returngas, or mineral interest or are in business as a arately on your Form 1040. The character ofwhether or not they actually are distributed toself-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., report these items generally is the same as if you hadyou. However, your distributive share of theyour income and expenses on Schedule C or realized or incurred them personally.partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba-Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). sis of your partnership interest at the end of theGenerally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)
partnership year in which the losses took place.Copyrights and patents. Royalties from will tell you where to report each item of
copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, income on your individual return.
TIP
Partnership agreement. The partnershipand similar property, or from patents on inven-agreement usually covers the distribution ofDistributions.Generally, S corporation dis-tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to useprofits, losses, and other items. However, if thetributions are a nontaxable return of your basisyour work over a specified period of time. Royal-agreement does not state how a specific item ofin the corporation stock. However, in certainties generally are based on the number of unitsgain or loss will be shared, or the allocationcases, part of the distributions may be taxablesold, such as the number of books, tickets to astated in the agreement does not have substan-as a dividend, or as a long-term or short-termperformance, or machines sold. tial economic effect, your distributive share iscapital gain, or as both. The corporation’s distri-figured according to your interest in the partner-Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income from butions may be in the form of cash or property.ship.oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount
you receive when natural resources are ex- More information.  For more information, seePartnership return.Although a partnershiptracted from your property. The royalties are the Instructions for Form 1120S.generally pays no tax, it must file an informationbased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., andreturn on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnershipare paid to you by a person or company whoIncome. This shows the result of the partner-leases the property from you. ship’s operations for its tax year and the items
Sickness andthat must be passed through to the partners.Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco-
nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gasSchedule K-1 (Form 1065).You should re- Injury Benefitswells, you can recover your investment throughceive from each partnership in which you are athe depletion allowance. For information on thismember a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),Generally, you must report as income anysubject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535.Partner’s Share of Income, Deductions, Credits,amount you receive for personal injury or sick-
etc., showing your share of income, deductions,Coal and iron ore.Under certain circum- ness through an accident or health plan that is
credits, and tax preference items of the partner-stances, you can treat amounts you receive paid for by your employer. If both you and your
ship for the tax year. Retain Schedule K-1 forfrom the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay- employer pay for the plan, only the amount you
your records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040.ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather receive that is due to your employer’s payments
than as royalty income. For information about is reported as income. However, certain pay-Partner’s return.You generally must reportgain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore, ments may not be taxable to you. For informa-partnership items on your individual return thesee Publication 544. tion on nontaxable payments, see Military andsame way as they are reported on the partner-Government Disability Pensions and Othership return. That is, if the partnership had aSale of property interest.If you sell your Sickness and Injury Benefits, later in this discus-capital gain, you report your share on Schedulecomplete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, sion.D (Form 1040). You report your share of partner-the amount you receive is considered payment
ship ordinary income on Schedule E (Formfor the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty Do not report as income any amounts
1040).income. Under certain circumstances, the sale paid to reimburse you for medical ex-
is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on penses you incurred after the plan was
TIP
Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information established.will tell you where to report each item ofon selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 income on your individual return.
TIP
Cost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost ofof Publication 544.
an accident or health plan, do not include anyIf you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,
amounts you receive from the plan for personalor a net profit interest in a mineral property forS Corporation Income
injury or sickness as income on your tax return.the life of the property, you have made a lease or
If your plan reimbursed you for medical ex-a sublease, and any cash you receive for theIn general, an S corporation does not pay tax on
penses you deducted in an earlier year, you mayassignment of other interests in the property isits income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-
have to include some, or all, of the reimburse-ordinary income subject to a depletion allow-tions, and credits of the corporation are passed
ment in your income. See Recoveries underance. through to the shareholders based on each
Miscellaneous Income, later.shareholder’s pro rata share. You must reportPart of future production sold.If you own your share of these items on your return. Gener-mineral property but sell part of the future pro- Cafeteria plans.Generally, if you are coveredally, the items passed through to you will in-duction, you generally treat the money you re- by an accident or health insurance plan throughcrease or decrease the basis of your Sceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur-corporation stock as appropriate.loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your ance premiums was not included in your in-
income or take depletion based on it. S corporation return.An S corporation must come, you are not considered to have paid the
When production begins, you include all the file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Tax premiums and you must include any benefits
proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- Return for an S Corporation. This shows the you receive in your income. If the amount of the
tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that results of the corporation’s operations for its tax premiums was included in your income, you are
Publication 525 (2006) Page 15

Page 16 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
considered to have paid the premiums and any a. Results directly from armed conflict, long-term care insurance contract, you must file
benefits you receive are not taxable. Form 8853 with your return.b. Takes place while you are engaged in
A long-term care insurance contract is anextra-hazardous service,
insurance contract that only provides coverageDisability Pensions
c. Takes place under conditions simulat-for qualified long-term care services. The con-
ing war, including training exercisesIf you retired on disability, you must include in tract must:
such as maneuvers, orincome any disability pension you receive under
• Be guaranteed renewable,a plan that is paid for by your employer. Youd. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.must report your taxable disability payments as • Not provide for a cash surrender value or
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A other money that can be paid, assigned,4. You would be entitled to receive disabilityuntil you reach minimum retirement age. Mini- pledged, or borrowed,compensation from the Department of Vet-mum retirement age generally is the age at erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-• Provide that refunds, other than refundswhich you can first receive a pension or annuitytion for it. Your exclusion under this on the death of the insured or completeif you are not disabled. condition is equal to the amount you wouldsurrender or cancellation of the contract,be entitled to receive from the VA.You may be entitled to a tax credit if and dividends under the contract may beyou were permanently and totally dis- used only to reduce future premiums orabled when you retired. For informa-
TIP
Pension based on years of service.If you increase future benefits, andtion on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit forreceive a disability pension based on years of• Generally not pay or reimburse expensesthe Elderly or the Disabled. service, you generally must include it in yourincurred for services or items that wouldBeginning on the day after you reach mini-income. However, if the pension qualifies for thebe reimbursed under Medicare, exceptmum retirement age, payments you receive areexclusion for a service-connected disability (dis-where Medicare is a secondary payer ortaxable as a pension or annuity. Report thecussed earlier), do not include in income the partthe contract makes per diem or other peri-payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orof your pension that you would have received ifodic payments without regard to ex-on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For morethe pension had been based on a percentage ofpenses.information on pensions and annuities, see Pub-disability. You must include the rest of your pen-
lication 575. sion in your income.
Qualified long-term care services.QualifiedRetirement and profit-sharing plans.If you Retroactive VA determination.If you retirelong-term care services are:receive payments from a retirement or from the armed services based on years of serv-
profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-ice and are later given a retroactive serv-• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
bility retirement, do not treat the payments as aice-connected disability rating by the VA, yourpeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili-
disability pension. The payments must be re-retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-tative services, and maintenance and
ported as a pension or annuity. cluded from income up to the amount of VA personal care services, and
disability benefits you would have been entitledAccrued leave payment.If you retire on disa- • Required by a chronically ill individual andto receive. You can claim a refund of any taxbility, any lump-sum payment you receive for provided pursuant to a plan of care pre-paid on the excludable amount (subject to theaccrued annual leave is a salary payment. The scribed by a licensed health care practi-statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-payment is not a disability payment. Include it in tioner.turn on Form 1040X for each previous yearyour income in the tax year you receive it.during the retroactive period.
If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-Chronically ill individual.A chronically ill in-
ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-dividual is one who has been certified by aMilitary and Government
ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severancelicensed health care practitioner within the previ-Disability Pensions
benefit from your income. However, you mustous 12 months as one of the following.
include in your income any lump-sum readjust-Certain military and government disability pen- • An individual who, for at least 90 days, isment or other nondisability severance paymentsions are not taxable. unable to perform at least two activities ofyou received on release from active duty, even ifService-connected disability.You may be daily living without substantial assistanceyou are later given a retroactive disability ratingable to exclude from income amounts you re- due to loss of functional capacity. Activi-by the VA.ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance ties of daily living are eating, toileting,
for personal injury or sickness resulting from transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-Terrorist attack or military action.Do not
active service in one of the following govern- nence.include in your income disability payments you
ment services. receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-• An individual who requires substantial su-rorist or military action.• The armed forces of any country. pervision to be protected from threats toA terrorist action is one that is directedhealth and safety due to severe cognitive• The National Oceanic and Atmospheric against the United States or any of its alliesimpairment.Administration. (including a multinational force in which the
United States is participating). A military action• The Public Health Service.
Limit on exclusion.The exclusion for pay-is one that involves the armed forces of the• The Foreign Service. ments made on a per diem or other periodicUnited States and is a result of actual or
basis under a long-term care insurance contractthreatened violence or aggression against theConditions for exclusion.Do not include is subject to a limit. The limit applies to the totalUnited States or any of its allies, but does notthe disability payments in your income if any of of these payments and any accelerated deathinclude training exercises.the following conditions apply. benefits made on a per diem or other periodic
basis under a life insurance contract becauseLong-Term Care1. You were entitled to receive a disability the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa-payment before September 25, 1975. Insurance Contracts tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In-
2. You were a member of a listed govern- surance Proceeds  under MiscellaneousLong-term care insurance contracts generallyment service or its reserve component, or Income, later.)are treated as accident and health insurancewere under a binding written commitment Under this limit, the excludable amount forcontracts. Amounts you receive from themto become a member, on September 24, any period is figured by subtracting any reim-(other than policyholder dividends or premium1975. bursement received (through insurance or oth-refunds) generally are excludable from income
erwise) for the cost of qualified long-term careas amounts received for personal injury or sick-3. You receive the disability payments for a
services during the period from the larger of theness. To claim an exclusion for payments madecombat-related injury. This is a personal
on a per diem or other periodic basis under afollowing amounts.injury or sickness that:
Page 16 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 17 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The cost of qualified long-term care serv- If part of the payments you receivebeneficial to your general health are included in
under FECA reduces your social se-income.ices during the period.
curity or equivalent railroad retirementCAUTION
!
• The dollar amount for the period ($250 perbenefits received, that part is considered socialday for any period in 2006). security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-
fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of theSee Section C of Form 8853 and its instructions Miscellaneous Income
taxability of these benefits, see Other Incomefor more information.
under Miscellaneous Income, later. This section discusses various types of income.
You may have taxable income from certainYou can deduct the amount you spend to buyWorkers’ Compensation
transactions even if no money changes hands.back sick leave for an earlier year to be eligible
Amounts you receive as workers’ compensation For example, you may have taxable income iffor nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It is
for an occupational sickness or injury are fully you lend money at a below-market interest ratea miscellaneous deduction subject to the 2% of
exempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’ or have a debt you owe canceled.AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you buy
compensation act or a statute in the nature of aback sick leave in the same year you used it, the
workers’ compensation act. The exemption alsoamount reduces your taxable sick leave pay. DoBartering
applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-not deduct it separately.
ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits Bartering is an exchange of property or services.
Other compensation. Many other amountsyou receive based on your age, length of serv- You must include in your income, at the time
you receive as compensation for sickness orice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you received, the fair market value of property or
injury are not taxable. These include the follow-retired because of an occupational sickness or services you receive in bartering. If you ex-
ing amounts.injury. change services with another person and you
both have agreed ahead of time as to the value• Compensatory damages you receive forIf part of your workers’ compensation of the services, that value will be accepted asphysical injury or physical sickness,reduces your social security or fair market value unless the value can be shownwhether paid in a lump sum or in periodicequivalent railroad retirement benefitsCAUTION
!
to be otherwise.payments. See Court awards and dam-received, that part is considered social security  Generally, you report this income on Sched-ages under Other Income, later.(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and ule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). However,may be taxable. For a discussion of the taxability• Benefits you receive under an accident orif the barter involves an exchange of somethingof these benefits, see Other Income under Mis- health insurance policy on which eitherother than services, such as in Example 4 be-cellaneous Income, later. you paid the premiums or your employerlow, you may have to use another form or sched-
paid the premiums but you had to includeule instead.Return to work. If you return to work after them in your income.qualifying for workers’ compensation, salary Example 1. You are a self-employed attor-• Disability benefits you receive for loss ofpayments you receive for performing light duties ney who performs legal services for a client, aincome or earning capacity as a result ofare taxable as wages. small corporation. The corporation gives youinjuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-shares of its stock as payment for your services.icy.Disability pension.If your disability pension You must include the fair market value of theis paid under a statute that provides benefits shares in your income on Schedule C or Sched-• Compensation you receive for permanentonly to employees with service-connected disa- ule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receiveloss or loss of use of a part or function ofbilities, part of it may be workers’ compensation. them.your body, or for your permanent disfig-That part is exempt from tax. The rest of yoururement. This compensation must bepension, based on years of service, is taxable as Example 2. You are a self-employed ac-based only on the injury and not on thepension or annuity income. If you die, the part of countant. You and a house painter are membersperiod of your absence from work. Theseyour survivors’ benefit that is a continuation of of a barter club. Members get in touch with eachbenefits are not taxable even if your em-the workers’ compensation is exempt from tax. other directly and bargain for the value of theployer pays for the accident and health
services to be performed. In return for account-plan that provides these benefits.
Other Sickness ing services you provided, the house painter
painted your home. You must report as yourand Injury Benefits Reimbursement for medical care. A reim- income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formbursement for medical care generally is not tax-1040) the fair market value of the house paintingIn addition to disability pensions and annuities,able. However, it may reduce your medicalservices you received. The house painter mustyou may receive other payments for sickness orexpense deduction. If you receive reimburse-include in income the fair market value of theinjury. ment for an expense you deducted in an earlieraccounting services you provided.year, see Recoveries, later.Railroad sick pay.Payments you receive as If you receive an “advance reimbursement”Example 3. You are self-employed and asick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-or “loan” for future medical expenses from yourmember of a barter club. The club uses creditsurance Act are taxable and you must includeemployer without regard to whether you sufferedunits as a means of exchange. It adds creditthem in your income. However, do not includea personal injury or sickness or incurred medicalunits to your account for goods or services youthem in your income if they are for an on-the-jobexpenses, that amount is included in your in-provide to members, which you can use toinjury. come, whether or not you incur uninsured medi-purchase goods or services offered by other
cal expenses during the year.Black lung benefit payments. These pay- members of the barter club. The club subtracts
Reimbursements received under your em-ments are similar to workers’ compensation and credit units from your account when you receive
ployer’s plan for expenses incurred before thegoods or services from other members. Yougenerally are not taxable.
plan was established are included in income.must include in your income the value of the
Federal Employees’ Compensation Act Amounts you receive under a reimburse-credit units that are added to your account, even
(FECA). Payments received under this Act for ment plan that provides for the payment of un-though you may not actually receive goods or
used reimbursement amounts in cash or otherpersonal injury or sickness, including payments services from other members until a later tax
benefits are included in your income.to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable. year.
However, you are taxed on amounts you receive Reimbursements received under your em-
under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45ployer’s plan of the amount paid for nonprescrip-Example 4. You own a small apartment
days while a claim is being decided. Report thistion medicines and drugs (such as allergybuilding. In return for 6 months rent-free use of
income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A ormedicine, pain reliever, and cold medicine) arean apartment, an artist gives you a work of art
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sicknot included in income. However, reimburse-she created. You must report as rental income
leave while a claim is being processed is taxablements of the amount paid for dietary supple-on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market value
and must be included in your income as wages.ments (such as vitamins) that are merely of the artwork, and the artist must report as
Publication 525 (2006) Page 17

Page 18 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form must include the interest portion of the canceled debt. The debt must be canceled by an applica-
1040) the fair rental value of the apartment. debt in your income depends on whether the ble entity after August 24, 2005, and before
interest would be deductible if you paid it. See January 1, 2007.Form 1099-B from barter exchange.If you Deductible debt under Exceptions, later. You qualify for this relief if your main homeexchanged property or services through a barterIf the interest would not be deductible (suchon August 25, 2005, was located:exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds from Brokeras interest on a personal loan), include in yourand Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similar • In the core disaster area, orincome the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. Ifstatement from the barter exchange should bethe interest would be deductible (such as on a• In the Hurricane Katrina disaster area (butsent to you by January 31, 2007. It should showbusiness loan), include in your income the netoutside the core disaster area) and youthe value of cash, property, services, credits, oramount of the canceled debt (the amount shownsuffered economic loss that was causedscrip you received from exchanges during 2006.in box 2 less the interest amount shown in boxby Hurricane Katrina.The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B.3). For a definition of Hurricane Katrina disasterBackup withholding. The income you re- Discounted mortgage loan. If your financialarea and the core disaster area, see Publicationceive from bartering generally is not subject toinstitution offers a discount for the early payment4492.regular income tax withholding. However, of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-This exclusion does not apply to a canceledbackup withholding will apply in certain circum-count is canceled debt. You must include thedebt to the extent that real property, which wasstances to ensure that income tax is collected oncanceled amount in your income. security for the debt, is located outside of thethis income.
Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-Hurricane Katrina disaster area.Under backup withholding, the barter ex-
tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgagechange must withhold, as income tax, 28% of Applicable entity.The term applicable en-(recourse debt), and you are relieved of thethe income if: tity means an executive, judicial, or legislativemortgage when you dispose of the property, you
agency and an applicable financial entity as de-• You do not give the barter exchange yourmay realize gain or loss up to the fair market
fined in Internal Revenue Code sectiontaxpayer identification number (generally avalue of the property. To the extent the mort-
6050P(c).social security number or an employergage discharge exceeds the fair market value of
identification number), or the property, it is income from discharge of in-Student loans. Certain student loans containdebtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion• The IRS notifies the barter exchange that a provision that all or part of the debt incurred tounder Excluded debt, later. Report any incomeyou gave it an incorrect identification num- attend the qualified educational institution will befrom discharge of indebtedness on nonbusinessber. canceled if you work for a certain period of timedebt that does not qualify for exclusion as otherin certain professions for any of a broad class ofIf you join a barter exchange, you must certifyincome on Form 1040, line 21. employers.under penalties of perjury that your taxpayer If you are not personally liable for a mort-
identification number is correct and that you are You do not have income if your student loangage (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved
not subject to backup withholding. If you do not is canceled after you agreed to this provisionof the mortgage when you dispose of the prop-
make this certification, backup withholding may and then performed the services required. Toerty (such as through foreclosure or reposses-
begin immediately. The barter exchange will qualify, the loan must have been made by:sion), that relief is included in the amount you
give you a Form W-9, Request for Taxpayerrealize. You may have a taxable gain if the1. The Federal Government, a state or localIdentification Number and Certification, or a sim-amount you realize exceeds your adjusted basisgovernment, or an instrumentality, agency,ilar form, for you to make this certification. Thein the property. Report any gain on nonbusinessor subdivision thereof,barter exchange will withhold tax only up to theproperty as a capital gain.
amount of any cash paid to you or deposited inSee Foreclosures and Repossessions in 2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation
your account and any scrip or credit issued toPublication 544 for more information. that has assumed control of a state,
you (and converted to cash). county, or municipal hospital, and whoseStockholder debt.If you are a stockholder inemployees are considered public employ-a corporation and the corporation cancels orIf tax is withheld from your barter in- ees under state law, orforgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is acome, the barter exchange will report
constructive distribution that is generally divi-3. An educational institution:the amount of tax withheld on Form
TIP
dend income to you. For more information, see1099-B, or similar statement. a. Under an agreement with an entity de-Publication 542, Corporations.
scribed in (1) or (2) that provided theIf you are a stockholder in a corporation and
Canceled Debts funds to the institution to make the loan,you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-
ortion, you generally do not realize income. This isGenerally, if a debt you owe is canceled orbecause the canceled debt is considered as ab. As part of a program of the institutionforgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youcontribution to the capital of the corporation designed to encourage students tomust include the canceled amount in your in-equal to the amount of debt principal that you serve in occupations or areas with un-come. You have no income from the canceledcanceled. met needs and under which the serv-debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt
ices provided are for or under theRepayment of canceled debt.If you includedincludes any indebtedness for which you are
direction of a governmental unit or aa canceled amount in your income and later payliable or which attaches to property you hold.
tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-the debt, you may be able to file a claim forIf the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the
tion (defined later).refund for the year the amount was included incanceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a
income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X ifbusiness debt, report the amount on Schedule C
A loan to refinance a qualified student loanthe statute of limitations for filing a claim is stillor Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedule
also will qualify if it was made by an educationalopen. The statute of limitations generally doesF (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, if
institution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-not end until 3 years after the due date of yourthe debt is farm debt and you are a farmer).
zation under its program designed as describedoriginal return.Form 1099-C. If a Federal Government in (3)(b) above.
agency, financial institution, or credit union An educational institution is an organization
cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 orExceptions with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu-
more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella- larly enrolled body of students in attendance at
tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt isThere are several exceptions to the inclusion ofthe place where the educational activities are
shown in box 2. canceled debt in income. These are explainedcarried on.
next.Interest included in canceled debt.If any A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor-
interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofDebt canceled as a result of Hurricane Ka-poration, community chest, fund, or foundation
canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interesttrina.If you qualify, you can exclude from in- organized and operated exclusively for one or
also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not you come the amount of a canceled nonbusiness more of the following purposes.
Page 18 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 19 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Charitable. expenses. These expenses are deductible as employee, and you (or a related person) are a
miscellaneous itemized deductions subject tobeneficiary under the contract.• Educational. the 2% of AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040),However, you may exclude the full amount of
• Fostering national or international amateurbut only up to the amount of income you receivethe life insurance proceeds if the following apply.
sports competition (but only if none of thefor giving the party.
1. You provided written notice about the in-organization’s activities involve providingFor more information about the 50% limit for
surance to the employee and the em-athletic facilities or equipment). meal and entertainment expenses, see 50%
ployee agreed to be insured.Limit in Publication 463.• Literary.
2. Either:• Preventing cruelty to children or animals.Life Insurance Proceeds
a. The employee was your employee• Religious.
within the 12-month period beforeLife insurance proceeds paid to you because of
• Scientific. death, or, at the time the contract wasthe death of the insured person are not taxable
issued, was a director or highly com-unless the policy was turned over to you for a• Testing for public safety.
pensated employee, orprice. This is true even if the proceeds were paid
under an accident or health insurance policy orException. You do have income if your stu- b. The amount is paid to the family or des-an endowment contract.dent loan was made by an educational institu- ignated beneficiary of the employee.
tion and is canceled because of services you
Proceeds not received in installments.Ifperformed for the institution or other organiza-
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum ortion that provided the funds. Interest option on insurance.If an insuranceother than at regular intervals, include in yourcompany pays you interest only on proceedsincome only the benefits that are more than theDeductible debt. You do not have income from life insurance left on deposit, the interestamount payable to you at the time of the insuredfrom the cancellation of a debt if your payment of you are paid is taxable.person’s death. If the benefit payable at death isthe debt would be deductible. This exception
If your spouse died before October 23, 1986,not specified, you include in your income theapplies only if you use the cash method of ac-
and you chose to receive only the interest frombenefit payments that are more than the presentcounting. For more information, see chapter 5 of
your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interestvalue of the payments at the time of death.Publication 334.
exclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply.Education loan repayment assistance. If you later decide to receive the proceeds fromProceeds received in installments.If you re-Education loan repayments made to you by the the policy in installments, you can take the inter-ceive life insurance proceeds in installments,National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment est exclusion from the time you begin to receiveyou can exclude part of each installment fromProgram (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) or the installments.your income.a state education loan repayment program eligi-To determine the excluded part, divide theble for funds under the Public Health Service Act Surrender of policy for cash.If you surren-amount held by the insurance company (gener-are not taxable if you agree to provide primary der a life insurance policy for cash, you mustally the total lump sum payable at the death ofhealth services in health professional shortage include in income any proceeds that are morethe insured person) by the number of install-areas. For more information, see Publication than the cost of the life insurance policy. Inments to be paid. Include anything over this970. general, your cost (or investment in the contract)excluded part in your income as interest.
is the total of premiums that you paid for the lifePrice reduced after purchase.Generally, if
insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,Example. The face amount of the policy isthe seller reduces the amount of debt you owe
rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were$75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re-for property you purchased, you do not have
not included in your income.ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each.income from the reduction. The reduction of the
The excluded part of each installment is $625You should receive a Form 1099-R showingdebt is treated as a purchase price adjustment
($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an entire year.the total proceeds and the taxable part. Reportand reduces your basis in the property.
The rest of each payment, $375 a month (orthese amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Form
Excluded debt. Do not include a canceled $4,500 for an entire year), is interest income to1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
debt in your gross income in the following situa-you. For information on when the proceedstions. Installments for life.If, as the beneficiary are excluded from income, see Accel-
• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy caseunder an insurance contract, you are entitled toerated Death Benefits, later.
TIP
under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-receive the proceeds in installments for the rest
cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. of your life without a refund or period-certainSplit-dollar life insurance.Generally, aguarantee, you figure the excluded part of each• The debt is canceled when you are insol- split-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar-installment by dividing the amount held by thevent. However, you cannot exclude any rangement between an owner and a non-ownerinsurance company by your life expectancy. Ifamount of canceled debt that is more than of a life insurance contract under which eitherthere is a refund or period-certain guarantee, thethe amount by which you are insolvent. party to the arrangement pays all or part of theamount held by the insurance company for thisSee Publication 908. premiums, and one of the parties paying thepurpose is reduced by the actuarial value of thepremiums is entitled to recover all or part of• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-guarantee. those premiums from the proceeds of the con-celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3Surviving spouse. If your spouse died tract. There are two mutually exclusive regimesof Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide.before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-to tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.
• The debt is qualified real property busi-ceeds paid to you because of the death of your
ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publication 1. Under the economic benefit regime, thespouse are received in installments, you can
334. owner of the life insurance contract isexclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-
treated as providing current life insurancecluded in the installments. If you remarry, you• The cancellation is intended as a gift. protection and other taxable economiccan continue to take the exclusion.
benefits to the non-owner of the contract.
Employer-owned life insurance contract.IfHost or Hostess 2. Under the loan regime, the non-owner ofyou are the policyholder of an employer-ownedthe life insurance contract is treated asIf you host a party at which sales are made, any life insurance contract, you must include in in-loaning premium payments to the owner ofgift you receive for giving the party is a payment come any life insurance proceeds received thatthe contract.for helping a direct seller make sales. You must are more than the premiums and any other
Only one of these regimes applies to any onereport it as income at its fair market value. amounts you paid on the policy. You are subject
policy. For more information, see sectionsYour out-of-pocket party expenses are sub- to this rule if you have a trade or business, you
1.61-22 and 1.7872-15 of the regulations.ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment own a life insurance contract on the life of your
Publication 525 (2006) Page 19

Page 20 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Is a director, officer, or employee of the income tax deduction. You choose to deduct theEndowment Contract Proceeds
person, or general sales tax deduction. In 2006 you return
An endowment contract is a policy under which an item you had purchased and receive a $500• Has a financial interest in the person’syou are paid a specified amount of money on a sales tax refund. In 2006 you also receive abusiness.certain date unless you die before that date, in $1,500 state income tax refund. The maximum
which case, the money is paid to your desig- refund that you may have to include in income is
nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid inForm 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-$500, since it is less than the excess of the tax
a lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifated death benefits made on a per diem or otherdeducted ($11,500) over the tax you did not
the proceeds are more than the cost of theperiodic basis, you must file Form 8853 withchoose to deduct ($11,200 - $1,500 = $9,700).
policy. To determine your cost, subtract anyyour return. You do not have to file Form 8853 toSince you did not choose to deduct the state
amount that you previously received under theexclude accelerated death benefits paid on theincome tax, you do not include the state income
contract and excluded from your income frombasis of actual expenses incurred. tax refund in income.
the total premiums (or other consideration) paid
for the contract. Include the part of the lump sumRecoveries Mortgage interest refund.If you received apayment that is more than your cost in your refund or credit in 2006 of mortgage interest paidincome. A recovery is a return of an amount you de-in an earlier year, the amount should be shownEndowment proceeds that you choose to ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. Thein box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interestreceive in installments instead of a lump-summost common recoveries are refunds, reim-Statement. Do not subtract the refund amountpayment at the maturity of the policy are taxedbursements, and rebates of deductions itemizedfrom the interest you paid in 2006. You mayas an annuity. This is explained in Publicationon Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may havehave to include it in your income under the rules575. For this treatment to apply, you mustrecoveries of non-itemized deductions (such asexplained in the following discussions.choose to receive the proceeds in installmentspayments on previously deducted bad debts)
before receiving any part of the lump sum. Thisand recoveries of items for which you previouslyInterest on recovery.Interest on any of theelection must be made within 60 days after theclaimed a tax credit. amounts you recover must be reported as inter-lump-sum payment first becomes payable to est income in the year received. For example,you. Tax benefit rule.You must include a recoveryreport any interest you received on state or localin your income in the year you receive it up to theincome tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a.amount by which the deduction or credit you
Accelerated Death Benefits took for the recovered amount reduced your taxRecovery and expense in same year.If thein the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-refund or other recovery and the expense occurCertain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-crease to an amount carried over to the currentin the same year, the recovery reduces the de-efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalyear that resulted from the deduction or credit isduction or credit and is not reported as income.settlement before the insured’s death are ex-considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-cluded from income if the insured is terminally orlier year.chronically ill. Recovery for 2 or more years.If you receive
a refund or other recovery that is for amountsFederal income tax refund.Refunds of fed-Viatical settlement.This is the sale or assign- you paid in 2 or more separate years, you musteral income taxes are not included in your in-ment of any part of the death benefit under a life allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recoveredcome because they are never allowed as ainsurance contract to a viatical settlement pro- amount between the years in which you paid it.deduction from income.vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person This allocation is necessary to determine the
who regularly engages in the business of buying amount of recovery from any earlier years and toState tax refund.If you received a state oror taking assignment of life insurance contracts determine the amount, if any, of your allowablelocal income tax refund (or credit or offset) inon the lives of insured individuals who are termi- deduction for this item for the current year.2006, you generally must include it in income ifnally or chronically ill and who meets the require-you deducted the tax in an earlier year. Thements of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal Example. You paid 2005 estimated statepayer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov-Revenue Code. income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2007.You made your fourth payment in January 2006.The IRS also will receive a copy of the FormExclusion for terminal illness.Accelerated You had no state income tax withheld during1099-G. Use the worksheet in the 2006 Formdeath benefits are fully excludable if the insured 2005. In 2006, you received a $400 tax refund1040 instructions for line 10 to figure the amountis a terminally ill individual. This is a person who based on your 2005 state income tax return. You(if any) to include in your income. See Itemizedhas been certified by a physician as having an claimed itemized deductions each year on yourDeduction Recoveries, later, for when you mustillness or physical condition that can reasonably federal income tax return.use Worksheet 2 on page 22 of this publication.be expected to result in death within 24 months You must allocate the $400 refund betweenAfter 2003, you could choose to deduct for afrom the date of the certification. 2005 and 2006, the years in which you paid thetax year either: tax on which the refund is based. You paid 75%Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insured • State and local income taxes, or ($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2005,is a chronically ill individual who is not terminally so 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for• State and local general sales taxes.ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis amounts you paid in 2005 and is a recoveryof costs incurred for qualified long-term care item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item,For 2006, the maximum refund that you mayservices are fully excludable. Accelerated death you will include $300 on Form 1040, line 10, forhave to include in income is limited to the excessbenefits paid on a per diem or other periodic 2006, and attach a copy of your computationof the tax you chose to deduct for that year overbasis are excludable up to a limit. This limit showing why that amount is less than thethe tax you did not choose to deduct for thatapplies to the total of the accelerated death amount shown on the Form 1099-G you re-year.benefits and any periodic payments received ceived from the state.from long-term care insurance contracts. ForExample 1. For 2005 you can choose an The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is forinformation on the limit and the definitions of$11,000 state income tax deduction or a your January 2006 estimated tax payment.chronically ill individual, qualified long-term care$10,000 state general sales tax deduction. YouWhen you figure your deduction for state andservices, and long-term care insurance con-choose to deduct the state income tax. In 2006local income taxes paid during 2006, you willtracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con- you receive a $2,500 state income tax refund.reduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Yourtracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits,The maximum refund that you may have to in-deduction for state and local income taxes paidearlier. clude in income is $1,000, since you could haveduring 2006 will include the January net amount
deducted $10,000 in state general sales tax.of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimatedException. The exclusion does not apply to
state income taxes paid in 2006 for 2006, andany amount paid to a person (other than theExample 2. For 2005 you can choose an
any state income tax withheld during 2006.insured) who has an insurable interest in the life$11,500 state general sales tax deduction
of the insured because the insured: based on actual expenses or an $11,200 state
Page 20 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 21 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deductions not itemized.If you did not item- on line 4 were reduced by 80% of the the following recoveries for amounts deducted
ize deductions for the year for which you re- refund you received in 2006. on your 2005 return:
ceived the recovery of an expense that was
Medical expenses.............. $200deductible only if you itemized, do not include If you also recovered an amount de-State and local income tax refund.... 4 0 0any of the recovery amount in your income. ducted as a non-itemized deduction,Refund of mortgage interest........ 3 2 5figure the amount of that recovery toCAUTION
!
Total recoveries................ $925Example. You claimed the standard deduc-include in your income and add it to your ad-tion on your 2005 federal income tax return. In None of the recoveries were more than thejusted gross income before applying the rules2006 you received a refund of your 2005 state deductions taken for 2005. The difference be-explained here. See Non-Itemized Deductionincome tax. Do not report any of the refund as tween the state and local income tax you de-Recoveries, later.income because you did not itemize deductions ducted and your local general sales tax wasfor 2005. more than $400.Total recovery included in income.If you
Your total recoveries are less than therecover any amount that you deducted in an
amount by which your itemized deductions ex-earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), youItemized Deduction Recoveries
ceeded the standard deduction ($11,000 −generally must include the full amount of the
The following discussion explains how to deter- $10,000 = $1,000), so you must include yourrecovery in your income in the year you receive
mine the amount to include in your income from total recoveries in your income for 2006. Reportit. This rule applies if, for the earlier year, all of
a recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier the state and local income tax refund of $400 onthe following statements are true.
year as an itemized deduction. However, you Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your
1. Your itemized deductions exceeded thegenerally do not need to use this discussion if recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21.
standard deduction by at least the amountthe recovery is for state or local income taxes
of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-paid in 2005. Instead, use the worksheet in the Total recovery not included in income.If
tions did not exceed the standard deduc-2006 Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure one or more of the six statements listed in the
tion by at least the amount of the recovery,the amount (if any) to include in your income. preceding discussion is not true, you may be
see Standard deduction limit, later.)You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheet able to exclude at least part of the recovery from
and must use this discussion if any of the follow- your income. If statements (4), (5), and (6) are2. You had taxable income. (If you had noing statements are true. true (your itemized deductions were not limited,taxable income, see Negative taxable in-
you had no unused tax credits, and you were notcome, later.)1. The recovery is for a tax year other than subject to the alternative minimum tax), you can2005. 3. Your deduction for the item recovereduse Worksheet 2 to determine the part of yourequals or exceeds the amount recovered.2. The recovery is for a deducted item other recovery to include in your income. You also can(If your deduction was less than thethan state or local income taxes, such as a use Worksheet 2 to determine the part of a stateamount recovered, see Recovery limited togeneral sales tax or real property tax re- tax refund (discussed earlier) to include in in-deduction, later.)fund. come.
4. Your itemized deductions were not subject3. On your 2005 Form 1040, line 42 was Allocating the included part.If you are notto the limit on itemized deductions. (If yourmore than line 41. required to include all of your recoveries in yourdeductions were limited, see Itemized de- income, and you have both a state income tax4. You received a refund of state and localductions limited, later.) refund and other itemized deduction recoveries,income taxes in 2006 that was more than you must allocate the taxable recoveries be-5. You had no unused tax credits. (If you hadthe excess of your 2005 state and local tween the state income tax refund you report onunused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-income tax deduction over the amount you Form 1040, line 10, and the amount you reportits, later.)could have deducted for your 2005 state as other income on Form 1040, line 21. If you doand local general sales tax. 6. You were not subject to alternative mini-not use Worksheet 2, make the allocation asmum tax. (If you were subject to alternative5. You made your last payment of 2005 state follows.minimum tax, see Subject to alternativeor local estimated tax in 2006. minimum tax, later.) 1. Divide your state income tax refund by the
6. You owed alternative minimum tax for total of all your itemized deduction recov-If any of the above statements is not true,2005. eries.see Total recovery not included in income, later.
7. You could not deduct all your tax credits 2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveriesState tax refund.In addition to the previousfor 2005 because their total was more than by the percentage in (1). This is thesix items, you must include in your income thethe amount of tax shown on your 2005 amount you report as a state income taxfull amount of a refund of state or local incomeForm 1040, line 46. refund.tax or general sales tax if the excess of the tax
8. You could be claimed as a dependent byyou deducted over the tax you did not deduct is3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the
someone else in 2005. more than the refund of the tax deducted. amount of taxable recoveries. This is the
amount you report as other income.If the refund is more than the excess, see9. You had to use the Itemized Deductions
Total recovery not included in income, later.Worksheet in the 2005 Schedule A instruc-
tions because your 2005 adjusted gross Example. In 2006 you recovered $2,500 ofWhere to report.Enter your state or local
income was over $145,950 ($72,975 if your 2005 itemized deductions, but the recov-income tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and
married filing separately) and both of the eries you must include in your 2006 income arethe total of all other recoveries as other income
following apply. only $1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500on Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form
was due to your state income tax refund. Your1040A or Form 1040EZ.a. You could not deduct all of the amount state income tax was more than your state gen-on the 2005 Itemized Deductions Work- eral sales tax by $600. The amount you reportExample. For 2005, you filed a joint return.sheet, line 1. as a state tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, isYour taxable income was $60,000 and you were
$300 [($500 ÷ $2,500) × $1,500]. The balance ofnot entitled to any tax credits. Your standardb. The amount on line 8 of that 2005 work-
the taxable recoveries, $1,200, is reported asdeduction was $10,000, and you had itemizedsheet would be more than the amount
other income on Form 1040, line 21.deductions of $11,000. In 2006, you receivedon line 4 of that worksheet if the amount
Publication 525 (2006) Page 21

Page 22 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in
income on your 2006 Form 1040, see Total recovery not included in income under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If
you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income tax refund from 2005 and a casualty loss
reimbursement from 2004, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use information from Schedule A (Form
1040) for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year
(year of the deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to
zero, see Unused tax credits and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your
recovery was for an itemized deduction that was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized
Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit
1 ....................................... 1 .
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)2 .................................. 2 .
3. Add lines 1 and 2........................................................ 3 .
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year
(for example, line 28 of Schedule A for 2005).................. 4 .
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2).................. 5 .
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4................................. 6 .
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (The standard deduction
amounts for 2005, 2004, and 2003 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4.) 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here.
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable.................................. 8 .
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8........................................... 9 .
10. Taxable income for prior year3 (for example, line 43, Form 1040 for
2005)................................................ 1 0 .
11. Amount to include in income for 2006:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result
(but not less than zero).4 ............................................... 1 1 .
If line 11 equals line 3—
Enter the amount from line 1 on line 10, Form 1040.
Enter the amount from line 2 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero—
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on line 10, Form 1040.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following
worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the
percentage......................................... A .
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A.
Enter the result here and on line 10, Form 1040............................... B .
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11.
Enter the result here and on line 21, Form 1040............................... C .
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. Do not enter more than the excess of your state and local income tax deduction over your
state and local general sales taxes you could have deducted.
2 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. If you deducted state and local general sales taxes and received a refund of those taxes,
include the amount on line 2, but do not enter more than the excess of your sales tax deduction over your state and local income tax you could have
deducted.
3 If taxable income is a negative amount (for example, line 42 was more than line 41 on your 2005 Form 1040), enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter
zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. Taxable income will have to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see
Publication 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.
4 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Page 22 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 23 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2. 2005 Standard Deduction Tables
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before
January 2, 1941, or you are blind.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet forTHEN your standard Dependents*IF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
Single or Married filing separately $5,000 If you were born before January 2, 1941, or you were blind, check the
correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,000
widow(er) with dependent child
You Born before
Head of household 7,300 January 2, 1941/H18554 Blind /H18554
Your spouse, if* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1941, or you are
claiming spouse’s Born beforeblind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead. exemption January 2, 1941 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who Total number of boxes you checked ____
Were Born Before January 2, 1941, or Were Blind*
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
2.  Additional amount 2. $250You Born before
January 2, 1941/H18554Blind /H18554 3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.Your spouse, if claiming Born before
spouse’s exemption January 2, 1941 /H18554Blind /H18554 4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $800
Total number of boxes you checked _____ 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
THEN your 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
IF your AND the number on standard deduction status.filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . . • Single or Married filing separately—$5,000
• Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)Single 1 $6,250
2 7,500 with dependent child—$10,000
• Head of household—$7,300Married filing joint return or 1 11,000
Qualifying widow(er) with 2 12,000
7. Standard deduction.dependent child 3 13,000 a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.4 14,000
January 1, 1941, and not blind, stop here. This
Married filing separate return 1 6,000 is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
2 7,000 line 7b.3 8,000 b.If born before January 2, 1941, or blind, multiply 7b.4 9,000 $1,250 ($1,000 if married or qualifying
Head of household 1 8,550 widow(er) with dependent child) by the number
2 9,800 in the box above.
c.Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
deduction for 2005.jointly), use Table III instead.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. It
also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
your spouse if married filing jointly).
Standard deduction limit.You generally are standard deduction for your filing status for theNegative taxable income.If your taxable in-
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you doyear the deduction was claimed. The standard come was a negative amount, reduce the recov-
not itemize your deductions. Only your itemizeddeduction tables for 2005, 2004, and 2003 are ery you must otherwise include in your income
deductions that are more than your standardshown in Tables 2, 3, and 4. If you need the by the negative amount. For example, line 42
deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-standard deduction amounts for years beforewas more than line 41 on your 2005 Form 1040.
less you are required to itemize your deduc-2003, see the copy of your return for that year.    
Example. The facts are the same as in thetions). If your total deductions on the earlier year
Example. You filed a joint return for 2005return were not more than your income for that previous example except line 42 was $200 more
with taxable income of $45,000. Your itemizedyear, include in your income this year the lesser than line 41 on your 2005 Form 1040 giving you
deductions were $10,350. The standard deduc-of: a negative taxable income of $200. You must
tion that you could have claimed was $10,000. Ininclude $150 in your 2006 income, rather than• Your recoveries, or 2006, you recovered $2,100 of your 2005 item-$350.
ized deductions. None of the recoveries were• The amount by which your itemized de-
Recovery limited to deduction.You do notmore than the actual deductions for 2005. In-ductions exceeded the standard deduc-
include in your income any amount of your re-clude $350 of the recoveries in your 2006 in-tion.
covery that is more than the amount you de-come. This is the smaller of your recoveries
ducted in the earlier year. The amount youStandard deduction for earlier years.To ($2,100) or the amount by which your itemized
include in your income is limited to the smallerdetermine if amounts recovered in 2006 must be deductions were more than the standard deduc-
of:included in your income, you must know the tion ($10,350 − $10,000 = $350).
Publication 525 (2006) Page 23

Page 24 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3. 2004 Standard Deduction Tables
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before
January 2, 1940, or you are blind.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet forTHEN your standard Dependents*IF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
Single or Married filing separately $4,850 If you were born before January 2, 1940, or you were blind, check the
correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.Married filing joint return or Qualifying 9,700
widow(er) with dependent child
You Born before
Head of household 7,150 January 2, 1940/H18554 Blind /H18554
Your spouse, if* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1940, or you are
claiming spouse’s Born beforeblind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead. exemption January 2, 1940 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who Total number of boxes you checked ____
Were Born Before January 2, 1940, or Were Blind*
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
2.  Additional amount 2. $250You Born before
January 2, 1940 /H18554Blind /H18554 3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.Your spouse, if claiming Born before
spouse’s exemption January 2, 1940 /H18554Blind /H18554 4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $800
Total number of boxes you checked ____ 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
THEN your 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
IF your AND the number on standard deduction status.filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . .
• Single or Married filing separately—$4,850
Single 1 $6,050 • Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
2 7,250 with dependent child—$9,700
• Head of household—$7,150Married filing joint return or 1 10,650
Qualifying widow(er) with 2 11,600
7. Standard deduction.dependent child 3 12,550
a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.4 13,500
January 1, 1940, and not blind, stop here. ThisMarried filing separate return 1 5,800 is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to2 6,750 line 7b.3 7,700
b.If born before January 2, 1940, or blind, multiply 7b.4 8,650
$1,200 ($950 if married or qualifying widow(er)
Head of household 1 8,350 with dependent child) by the number in the box2 9,550 above.
c.Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead. deduction for 2004.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. It
also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
your spouse if married filing jointly).
• The amount deducted on Schedule A earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)• 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-
(Form 1040), or was more than a base amount. For example, tions other than medical and dental ex-
this amount was: penses, investment interest expense,• The amount recovered. nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,• For 2005, $145,950 ($72,975 if married and gambling losses.filing separately),Example. During 2005, you paid $1,700 for
medical expenses. From this amount you sub-• For 2004, $142,700 ($71,350 if married If the amount you recovered was deducted in
tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjustedfiling separately), and a year in which your itemized deductions were
gross income. Your actual medical expense de- limited, you must include it in income up to the• For 2003, $139,500 ($69,750 if marriedduction was $200. In 2006, you received a $500 difference between the amount of itemized de-filing separately).reimbursement from your medical insurance for ductions actually allowed that year and the
your 2005 expenses. The only amount of theIf the limit applied, your itemized deductionsamount you would have been allowed (the
$500 reimbursement that must be included inwere reduced by the smaller of the followinggreater of your itemized deductions or your stan-
your income for 2006 is $200—the amount ac-amounts. dard deduction) if you had figured your deduc-
tually deducted. tions using only the net amount of the recovery• 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-item.Itemized deductions limited.You were sub- ceeded the base amount.
ject to the limit on itemized deductions in the
Page 24 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 25 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. 2003 Standard Deduction Tables
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before
January 2, 1939, or you are blind.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet forTHEN your standard Dependents*IF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
Single or Married filing separately $4,750 If you were born before January 2, 1939, or you were blind, check the
correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.Married filing joint return or Qualifying 9,500
widow(er) with dependent child
You Born before
Head of household 7,000 January 2, 1939 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Your spouse, if* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1939, or you are
claiming spouse’s Born beforeblind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead. exemption January 2, 1939 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who Total number of boxes you checked ____
Were Born Before January 2, 1939, or Were Blind*
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
2.  Additional amount 2. $250You Born before
January 2, 1939/H18554Blind /H18554 3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.Your spouse, if claiming Born before
spouse’s exemption January 2, 1939 /H18554Blind /H18554 4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $750
Total number of boxes you checked ____ 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
IF your AND the number on THEN your 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . standard deduction status.is . . .
• Single or Married filing separately—$4,750
Single 1 $5,900 • Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
2 7,050 with dependent child—$9,500
• Head of household—$7,000Married filing joint return or 1 10,450
Qualifying widow(er) with 2 11,400
7. Standard deduction.dependent child 3 12,350
a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.4 13,300
January 1, 1939, and not blind, stop here. ThisMarried filing separate return 1 5,700 is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to2 6,650 line 7b.3 7,600
b.If born before January 2, 1939, or blind, multiply 7b.4 8,550
$1,150 ($950 if married or qualifying widow(er)
Head of household 1 8,150 with dependent child) by the number in the box2 9,300 above.
c.Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead. deduction for 2003.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. It
also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
your spouse if married filing jointly).
To determine the part of the recovery you 2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from the She was not subject to alternative minimum tax
must include in income, follow the two steps and was not entitled to any credit against incomeamount of itemized deductions actually al-
below. tax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000lowed in the earlier year after applying the
of state income taxes. Her state general saleslimit on itemized deductions.1. Figure the greater of: tax was $20,000. Eileen deducted only $10,000The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov-of her state income taxes in 2005 because hera. The standard deduction for the earlierery to include in your income for the year youotherwise allowable deductions of $40,000 wereyear, or receive the recovery. If your taxable income forreduced by $30,000. In 2006, she received a
the earlier year was a negative amount, reduceb. The amount of itemized deductions you $5,000 refund of her state income taxes for
your recovery by the negative amount.would have been allowed for the earlier 2005.
year (after taking into account the limit The following shows how Eileen figured theIf you had unused tax credits in the earlier
on itemized deductions) if you had fig- $30,000 reduction and other amounts from theyear, see Unused tax credits on page 26.
ured them using only the net amount of Itemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2005For more information on this computation,the recovery item. The net amount is Schedule A (Form 1040) instructions. Thesesee Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is inthe amount you actually paid reduced amounts are needed to figure the part of theCumulative Bulletin 1993-2.by the recovery amount. $5,000 refund that Eileen must include in her
income for 2006.Example. Eileen Martin is single. She hadNote. If you were required to itemize your
an AGI of $1,145,950 and itemized her deduc-deductions in the earlier year, use step 1(b)
and not step 1(a). tions on her federal income tax return for 2005.
Publication 525 (2006) Page 25

Page 26 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
AGI for 2005................ $1,145,950 regular tax, as shown in the preceding example, the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit
State income taxes paid in 2005 . . . $40,000and a recomputation of your alternative mini-for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture of In-
3% reduction (amount on mum tax. If inclusion of the recovery does notvestment Credit, for details.2005 Itemized Deduction change your total tax, you do not include theWorksheet, line 8), recovery in your income. However, if your totalSurvivor Benefits [($1,145,950 − $145,950) × 3%] . . . $30,000 tax increases by any amount, you received a tax80% reduction not applied (amount
benefit from the deduction and you must includeGenerally, payments made by or for an em-on 2005 Itemized
the recovery in your income up to the amount ofDeduction Worksheet, line 4) ployer because of an employee’s death must be
($40,000 × 80%) ............. $32,000 the deduction that reduced your tax in the earlierincluded in income. The following discussions
2005 deduction (amount on year. explain the tax treatment of certain payments
2005 Itemized Deduction made to survivors. For additional information,Worksheet, line 10) see Publication 559.($40,000 − $30,000).......... $10,000 Non-Itemized DeductionRefund received in 2006 of 2005 Recoveries Lump-sum payments. Lump-sum paymentsstate income tax............. $5,000
you receive from a decedent’s employer as theNet amount of 2005 state income This section discusses recovery of deductionstax ($40,000 − $5,000)......... $35,000 surviving spouse or beneficiary may be accruedother than those deducted on Schedule A (Formsalary payments; distributions from employeeIf Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount of1040). profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or stock bonusstate income tax to figure her itemized deduc- plans; or other items that should be treated sep-Total recovery included in income.If youtions for 2005, the deduction allowed would arately for tax purposes. The tax treatment ofrecover an amount that you deducted in an ear-have been $7,000. This is her otherwise allowa- these lump-sum payments depends on the typelier year in figuring your adjusted gross income,ble deduction of $35,000 reduced by $28,000 of payment.you generally must include the full amount of the($35,000 × 80%). By deducting the full $10,000
recovery in your income in the year received.paid in 2005, she derived a tax benefit of $3,000 Salary or wages.Salary or wages received
($10,000 − $7,000). Therefore, only $3,000 of after the death of the employee are usually ordi-Total recovery not included in income.Ifthe $5,000 refund is included in her income for nary income to you.any part of the deduction you took for the recov-2006. ered amount did not reduce your tax, you mayQualified employee retirement plans.
be able to exclude at least part of the recoveryLump-sum distributions from qualified employeeUnused tax credits.If you recover an item
from your income. You must include the recov-retirement plans are subject to special tax treat-deducted in an earlier year in which you had
ery in your income only up to the amount of thement. For information on these distributions, seeunused tax credits, you must refigure the earlier
deduction that reduced your tax in the year ofPublication 575 (or Publication 721, if you areyear’s tax to determine if you must include the
the deduction. (See Tax benefit rule, earlier.) the survivor of a federal employee or retiree).recovery in your income. To do this, add the
amount of the recovery to your earlier year’sNegative taxable income.If your taxable in-Public safety officer killed in the line of duty.taxable income and refigure the tax and thecome was a negative amount, reduce the recov-If you are a survivor of a public safety officer whocredits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-ery by that negative amount. For example, linewas killed in the line of duty, you may be able toputed tax, after application of the credits, is more42 was more than line 41 on your 2005 Formexclude from income certain amounts you re-than the actual tax in the earlier year, include the1040. Include this reduced recovery in your in-ceive. For this purpose, the term public safetyrecovery in your income up to the amount of thecome. officer includes law enforcement officers,deduction that reduced the tax in the earlier
firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad andUnused tax credits.If you recover an itemyear. For this purpose, any increase to a credit
ambulance crew members. For more informa-deducted in an earlier year in which you hadcarried over to the current year that resulted
tion, see Publication 559.unused tax credits, you must refigure the earlierfrom deducting the recovered amount in the
year’s tax to determine if you must include theearlier year is considered to have reduced your
recovery in your income. To do this, add thetax in the earlier year. If the recovery is for an Unemployment Benefits
amount of the recovery to your earlier year’sitemized deduction claimed in a year in which
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits youtaxable income and refigure the tax and thethe deductions were limited, see Itemized de-
receive depends on the type of program payingcredits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-ductions limited, earlier.
the benefits.puted tax, after application of the credits, is moreIf your tax, after application of the credits,
than the actual tax in the earlier year, include thedoes not change, you did not have a tax benefit
recovery in your income up to the amount of thefrom the deduction. Do not include the recovery Unemployment compensation. You must in-
deduction that reduced the tax in the earlierin your income. clude in your income all unemployment compen-
year. For this purpose, any increase to a creditsation you receive. You should receive a Form
Example. In 2005, Jean Black filed as headcarried over to the current year that resulted1099-G showing the amount paid to you. Gener-
of household and itemized her deductions. Herfrom deducting the recovered amount in theally, you enter unemployment compensation on
taxable income was $5,260 and her tax wasearlier year is considered to have reduced yourline 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or
$528. She claimed a child care credit of $1,200.tax in the earlier year. line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
The credit reduced her tax to zero and she hadIf your tax, after application of the credits,Types of unemployment compensation.an unused tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). Indoes not change, you did not have a tax benefitUnemployment compensation generally in-2006, Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemizedfrom the deduction. Do not include the recoverycludes any amount received under an unem-deductions. She reduces her 2005 itemized de-in your income. ployment compensation law of the United Statesductions by $1,000 and recomputes that year’s or of a state. It includes the following benefits.tax on taxable income of $6,260. However, the
Amounts Recovered for Creditschild care credit exceeds the recomputed tax of • Benefits paid by a state or the District of
$628. Jean’s tax liability for 2005 is not changed Columbia from the Federal Unemployment
If you received a recovery in 2006 for an item forby reducing her deductions by the recovery. She Trust Fund.
which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier year,did not have a tax benefit from the recovered • State unemployment insurance benefits.you must increase your 2006 tax by the amountdeduction and does not include any of the recov-
of the recovery, up to the amount by which theery in her income for 2006. • Railroad unemployment compensation
credit reduced your tax in the earlier year. Youbenefits.
Subject to alternative minimum tax.If you had a recovery if there was a downward price
• Disability payments from a governmentwere subject to the alternative minimum tax in adjustment or similar adjustment on the item for
program paid as a substitute for unem-the year of the deduction, you will have to re- which you claimed a credit.
ployment compensation. (Amounts re-compute your tax for the earlier year to deter- This rule does not apply to the investment
ceived as workers’ compensation formine if the recovery must be included in your credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of
injuries or illness are not unemploymentincome. This will require a recomputation of your these credits are covered by other provisions of
Page 26 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 27 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
compensation. See Workers’ Compensa- repay in a later year is more than $3,000, youPersons with disabilities.If you have a disa-
tion under Sickness and Injury Benefits,may be able to take a credit against your tax forbility, you must include in income compensation
earlier.) the later year instead of deducting the amount you receive for services you perform unless the
repaid. For information on this, see Repay- compensation is otherwise excluded. However,
• Trade readjustment allowances under thements, later. you do not include in income the value of goods,
Trade Act of 1974. services, and cash that you receive, not in return
Private unemployment fund. Unemploy- for your services, but for your training and reha-• Unemployment assistance under the Dis-ment benefit payments from a private (nonun-bilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-aster Relief and Emergency Assistanceion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute areble amounts include payments for transportationAct of 1974. taxable only if the amounts you receive are moreand attendant care, such as interpreter services
than your total payments into the fund. Reportfor the deaf, reader services for the blind, andGovernmental program. If you contributethe taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.services to help mentally retarded persons doto a governmental unemployment compensa- their work.tion program and your contributions are not de-Payments by a union.Benefits paid to you as
ductible, amounts you receive under the an unemployed member of a union from regularDisaster relief grants. Do not includeprogram are not included as unemployment union dues are included in your income on Formpost-disaster grants received under the Disastercompensation until you recover your contribu-1040, line 21. However, if you contribute to aRelief and Emergency Assistance Act in yourtions. special union fund and your payments to theincome if the grant payments are made to helpfund are not deductible, the unemployment ben-Repayment of unemployment compensa- you meet necessary expenses or serious needsefits you receive from the fund are includible intion. If you repaid in 2006 unemployment for medical, dental, housing, personal property,your income only to the extent they are morecompensation you received in 2006, subtract transportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de-than your contributions.the amount you repaid from the total amount you duct casualty losses or medical expenses thatreceived and enter the difference on line 19 of are specifically reimbursed by these disasterGuaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of relief grants. Unemployment assistance pay-ceive from your employer during periods of un-Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your ments under the Act are taxable unemploymentemployment, under a union agreement thatentry, enter “Repaid” and the amount you re- compensation. See Unemployment compensa-guarantees you full pay during the year, arepaid. If you repaid unemployment compensation tion under Unemployment Benefits, earlier.taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofin 2006 that you included in your income in anForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formearlier year, you can deduct the amount repaid Disaster relief payments.You can exclude1040EZ.on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22, if you item- from income any amount you receive that is aize deductions. If the amount is more thanState employees. Payments similar to a qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-$3,000, see Repayments, later. state’s unemployment compensation may be aster relief payment is an amount paid to you: 
Tax withholding.You can choose to have made by the state to its employees who are not
1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-federal income tax withheld from your unem-covered by the state’s unemployment compen-
essary personal, family, living, or funeralployment compensation. To make this choice,sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-
expenses that result from a qualified disas-complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholdingable, do not report them as unemployment
ter,Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax willcompensation. Report these payments on Form
be withheld at 10% of your payment. 1040, line 21. 2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
essary expenses incurred for the repair orIf you do not choose to have tax with-
Welfare and Other rehabilitation of your home or repair or re-held from your unemployment com-
placement of its contents to the extent it ispensation, you may be liable for Public Assistance BenefitsCAUTION
!
due to a qualified disaster,estimated tax. For more information on esti-
Do not include in your income governmentalmated tax, see Publication 505, Tax Withholding 3. By a person engaged in the furnishing orbenefit payments from a public welfare fundand Estimated Tax. sale of transportation as a common carrierbased upon need, such as payments due to because of the death or personal physicalblindness. Payments from a state fund for theSupplemental unemployment benefits. injuries incurred as a result of a qualifiedvictims of crime should not be included in theBenefits received from an employer-financed disaster, orvictims’ incomes if they are in the nature offund (to which the employees did not contribute)welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-4. By a federal, state, or local government, orare not unemployment compensation. They arepenses that are reimbursed by such a fund. Youagency or instrumentality in connectiontaxable as wages and are subject to withholdingmust include in your income any welfare pay-with a qualified disaster in order to pro-for income tax. They may be subject to socialments that are compensation for services or thatmote the general welfare.security and Medicare taxes. For more informa-are obtained fraudulently.tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefits You can exclude this amount only to the extent
in Publication 15-A, section 5, Employer’s Sup- any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-Work-training program. Payments you re-
plemental Tax Guide. Report these payments ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not applyceive from a state welfare agency for taking part
on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line if you were a participant or conspirator in ain a work-training program are not included in
1 of Form 1040EZ. terrorist action or his or her representative.your income, as long as the payments (exclu-
A qualified disaster is:sive of extra allowances for transportation orRepayment of benefits.You may have to
other costs) do not total more than the publicrepay some of your supplemental unemploy- • A disaster which results from a terrorist orwelfare benefits you would have received other-ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment military action,wise. If the payments are more than the welfareallowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you
• A Presidentially declared disaster, orbenefits you would have received, the entirerepay supplemental unemployment benefits in
amount must be included in your income asthe same year you receive them, reduce the • A disaster which results from an accidentwages.total benefits by the amount you repay. If you involving a common carrier, or from any
repay the benefits in a later year, you must other event, which is determined to be cat-Alternative trade adjustment assistance
include the full amount of the benefits in your astrophic by the Secretary of the Treasury(ATAA) payments. Payments you receive
income for the year you received them. or his or her delegate.from a state agency under the Demonstration
Deduct the repayment in the later year as an Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis-
For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster isadjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (You tance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in-
qualified if it is determined by an applicablecannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In- cluded in your income. The state must send you
federal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, and Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount you
tance from the federal, state, or local govern-enter “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on the should include in income. The amount should be
ment, agency, or instrumentality.dotted line next to line 36. If the amount you reported on Form 1040, line 21.
Publication 525 (2006) Page 27

Page 28 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Disaster mitigation payments.You also Nutrition Program for the Elderly.Food The borrower may have to report this payment
benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro- as income, depending on its classification.can exclude from income any amount you re-
gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-ceive that is a qualified disaster mitigation pay- For more information on below-market loans,pare and serve free meals for the program,ment. Like qualified disaster relief payments, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.include in your income as wages the cash payqualified disaster mitigation payments are also
you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodBribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in yourmost commonly paid to you in the period imme-
benefits. income.diately following damage to property as a result
of a natural disaster. However, disaster mitiga- Campaign contributions. These contribu-Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.tion payments are grants you use to mitigate tions are not income to a candidate unless theyPayments made by a state to qualified people to(reduce the severity of) potential damage from are diverted to his or her personal use. To bereduce their cost of winter energy use are notfuture natural disasters. They are paid to you exempt from tax, the contributions must betaxable.through state and local governments based on spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundthe provisions of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster for use in future campaigns. However, interestOther IncomeRelief and Emergency Assistance Act or the earned on bank deposits, dividends received onNational Flood Insurance Act. contributed securities, and net gains realized onThe following brief discussions are arranged inYou cannot increase the basis or adjusted sales of contributed securities are taxable andalphabetical order. Income items that are dis-basis of your property for improvements made must be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In-cussed in greater detail in another publicationwith nontaxable disaster mitigation payments. come Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza-include a reference to that publication.If in a previous year you filed a tax return tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to an
reporting disaster mitigation payments as tax- office account must be included in the office-Activity not for profit.You must include on
able income, you should file Form 1040X to holder’s income on Form 1040, line 21, in theyour return income from an activity from which
claim a refund for tax years that are not closed year transferred.you do not expect to make a profit. An example
by the statute of limitations. The statute of limita-of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm youCanceled sales contract.If you sell propertytions generally does not end until 3 years afteroperate mostly for recreation and pleasure.(such as land or a residence) under a contract,the due date of your original return. Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-but the contract is canceled and you return thetions for expenses related to the activity arebuyer’s money in the same tax year as theMortgage assistance payments. Payments limited. They cannot total more than the incomeoriginal sale, you have no income from the sale.made under section 235 of the National Housingyou report and can be taken only if you itemizeIf the contract is canceled and you return theAct for mortgage assistance are not included indeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Seebuyer’s money in a later tax year, you mustthe homeowner’s income. Interest paid for theNot-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica-include your gain in your income for the year ofhomeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-tion 535 for information on whether an activity isthe sale. When you return the money and takegram cannot be deducted. considered carried on for a profit. back the property in the later year, you treat the
transaction as a purchase that gives you a newReplacement housing payments. Replace- Alaska Permanent Fund dividend.If you re-basis in the property equal to the funds youment housing payments made under the Uni-ceived a payment from Alaska’s mineral incomereturn to the buyer.form Relocation Assistance and Real Propertyfund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), reportSpecial rules apply to the reacquisition ofAcquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder-it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 ofreal property where a secured indebtednessally Assisted Programs are not includible inForm 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The(mortgage) to the original seller is involved. Forgross income, but are includible in the basis ofstate of Alaska sends each recipient a documentfurther information, see Repossession in Publi-the newly acquired property. that shows the amount of the payment with thecation 537, Installment Sales.check. The amount also is reported to the IRS.
Relocation payments and home rehabilita- Car pools. Do not include in your incometion grants.A relocation payment under sec-Alimony. Include in your income on Form amounts you receive from the passengers fortion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Community1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-driving a car in a car pool to and from work.Development Act made by a local jurisdiction toceive. Amounts you receive for child support areThese amounts are considered reimbursementa displaced individual moving from a not income to you. For complete information,for your expenses. However, this rule does notflood-damaged residence to another residencesee Publication 504, Divorced or Separated In-apply if you have developed car pool arrange-is not includible in gross income. Home rehabili-dividuals. ments into a profit-making business of transport-tation grants received by low-income homeown- ing workers for hire.Below-market loans. A below-market loan isers in a defined area under the same act are
a loan on which no interest is charged or onCash rebates. A cash rebate you receive fromalso not includible in gross income.
which the interest is charged at a rate below thea dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy is
applicable federal rate. If you make a be-not income, but you must reduce your basis byIndian financing grants.Nonreimbursable
low-market gift or demand loan, you must in-the amount of the rebate.grants under title IV of the Indian Financing Act
clude the forgone interest (at the federal rate) asof 1974 to Indians to expand profit-making In-
Example. You buy a new car for $9,000interest income on your return. These loans aredian-owned economic enterprises on or near
cash and receive a $400 rebate check from theconsidered a transaction in which you, thereservations are not includible in gross income.
manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.lender, are treated as having made:
Your basis in the car is $8,600. This is your basisMedicare. Medicare benefits received under• A loan to the borrower in exchange for aon which you figure gain or loss if you sell thetitle XVIII of the Social Security Act are notnote that requires the payment of interestcar, and depreciation if you use it for business.includible in the gross income of the individualsat the applicable federal rate, andfor whom they are paid. This includes basic (part Casualty insurance and other reimburse-• An additional payment to the borrower,A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged)) ments. You generally should not report thesewhich the borrower transfers back to youand supplementary (part B (Supplementary reimbursements on your return, unless you areas interest.Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)). figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft.
See Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, andDepending on the transaction, the additionalOld-age, survivors, and disability insurance Thefts, for more information.payment to the borrower is treated as a:benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under
section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act Charitable gift annuities.If you are the bene-• Gift,
are not includible in the gross income of the ficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must in-• Dividend,individuals to whom they are paid. This applies clude the yearly annuity or fixed percentage
to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance payment in your income.• Contribution to capital,
benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows, The payer will report the types of income you• Payment of compensation, orwidowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, as received on Form 1099-R. Report the gross dis-
well as the lump-sum death payment. • Another type of payment. tribution from box 1 on Form 1040, line 16a, or
Page 28 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 29 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on Form 1040A, line 12a, and the part taxed as• The attorney fees and court costs may be 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and
paid by you or on your behalf in connec-Trusts, and your share of the income is reportedordinary income (box 2a minus box 3) on Form
tion with the claim for unlawful discrimina-to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Benefi-1040, line 16b, or on Form 1040A, line 12b.
tion, the claim against the United Statesciary’s Share of Income, Deductions, Credits,Report the portion taxed as capital gain (box 3)
government, or the claim under sectionetc.on Schedule D, line 8.
1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act.Current income required to be distributed.
Child support payments.You should not re- • The deduction you are claiming cannot be If you are the beneficiary of an estate or trust
port these payments on your return. See Publi-more than the amount of the judgment orthat must distribute all of its current income, you
cation 504 for more information. settlement you are including in income formust report your share of the distributable net
the tax year. income, whether or not you actually received it.
Court awards and damages. To determine if Current income not required to be distrib-• The judgment or settlement to which yoursettlement amounts you receive by compromise uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate orattorney fees and court costs apply mustor judgment must be included in your income,occur after October 22, 2004. trust and the fiduciary has the choice of whetheryou must consider the item that the settlement to distribute all or part of the current income, youreplaces. Include the following as ordinary in-Pre-existing agreement. If you receive must report:come. damages under a written binding agreement, • All income that is required to be distributedcourt decree, or mediation award that was in1. Interest on any award. to you, whether or not it is actually distrib-effect (or issued on or before) September 13,uted, plus2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits1995, do not include in income any of those
in most cases. damages received on account of personal inju-• All other amounts actually paid or credited
ries or sickness. to you,3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does
not matter if they relate to a physical injury up to the amount of your share of distributableCredit card insurance.Generally, if you re-or physical sickness. net income.ceive benefits under a credit card disability or
unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are4. Amounts received in settlement of pension How to report. Treat each item of incometaxable to you. These plans make the minimumrights (if you did not contribute to the plan). the same way that the estate or trust would treatmonthly payment on your credit card account ifit. For example, if a trust’s dividend income is5. Damages for: you cannot make the payment due to injury,distributed to you, you report the distribution asillness, disability, or unemployment. Report ondividend income on your return. The same rulea. Patent or copyright infringement, Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits youapplies to distributions of tax-exempt interestreceived during the year that is more than theb. Breach of contract, or and capital gains.amount of the premiums you paid during the The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tellc. Interference with business operations.year. you the type of items making up your share of
the estate or trust income and any credits youDown payment assistance. If you purchase6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
are allowed on your individual income tax return.a home and receive assistance from a nonprofittress received to satisfy a claim under Title
corporation to make the down payment, thatVII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-assistance is not included in your income. If theally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin-corporation qualifies as a tax-exempt charitable
gent fees) where the underlying recovery Grantor trust.Income earned by a grantororganization, the assistance is treated as a gift
is included in gross income. trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-and is included in your basis of the house. If the
ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overcorporation does not qualify, the assistance is Do not include in your income compensatory the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferredtreated as a rebate or reduction of the purchasedamages for personal physical injury or physical property to the trust.) This rule applies if theprice and is not included in your basis.sickness (whether received in a lump sum or property (or income from the property) put intoinstallments). Employment agency fees. If you get a jobthe trust will or may revert (be returned) to the
through an employment agency, and the fee isEmotional distress.Emotional distress it- grantor or the grantor’s spouse.
paid by your employer, the fee is not includible inself is not a physical injury or physical sickness, Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if theyour income if you are not liable for it. However,but damages you receive for emotional distress grantor has a reversionary interest valued (atif you pay it and your employer reimburses youdue to a physical injury or sickness are treated the date of transfer) at more than 5% of thefor it, it is includible in your income.as received for the physical injury or sickness. value of the transferred property.
Do not include them in your income. Energy conservation subsidies. You can
Expenses paid by another.If your personalIf the emotional distress is due to a personalexclude from gross income any subsidy pro-
expenses are paid for by another person, suchinjury that is not due to a physical injury orvided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-
as a corporation, the payment may be taxable tosickness (for example, unlawful discriminationties for the purchase or installation of an energy
you depending upon your relationship with thator injury to reputation), you must include theconservation measure for a dwelling unit.
person and the nature of the payment. But if thedamages in your income, except for any dam-Energy conservation measure. This in- payment makes up for a loss caused by thatages you receive for medical care due to thatcludes installations or modifications that are pri-person, and only restores you to the position youemotional distress. Emotional distress includesmarily designed to reduce consumption of were in before the loss, the payment is notphysical symptoms that result from emotionalelectricity or natural gas, or improve the man-includible in your income.distress, such as headaches, insomnia, andagement of energy demand.stomach disorders. Fees for services.Include all fees for yourDwelling unit.This includes a house, apart-Deduction for costs involved in unlawful services in your income. Examples of these feesment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-discrimination suits.You may be able to de- are amounts you receive for services you per-lar property. If a building or structure containsduct attorney fees and court costs paid to re- form as:both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustcover a judgment or settlement for a claim ofbe properly allocated. • A corporate director,unlawful discrimination under various provisions
of federal, state, and local law listed in Internal • An executor, administrator, or personalEstate and trust income. An estate or trust,
Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim against representative of an estate,unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal
the United States government, or a claim underincome tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estate• A manager of a trade or business you op-section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act.or trust, you may be taxed on your share of itserated before declaring Chapter 11 bank-You can claim this deduction as an adjustmentincome distributed or required to be distributedruptcy,to income on Form 1040, line 36. The followingto you. However, there is never a double tax.
rules apply. • A notary public, orEstates and trusts file their returns on Form
Publication 525 (2006) Page 29

Page 30 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• An election precinct official. b. A qualified foster care placement lump sum, you must report the amount you re-
ceive from the sale as ordinary income (Formagency.
1040, line 21) in the year you receive it.If you are not an employee and the fees
for your services from the same payorDifficulty-of-care payments.These are Form W-2G. You may have received a
total $600 or more for the year, you Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show-additional payments that are designated by the
TIP
may receive a Form 1099-MISC. ing the amount of your gambling winnings andpayer as compensation for providing the addi-
any tax taken out of them. Include the amounttional care that is required for physically, men-
Corporate director. Corporate director from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include thetally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster
fees are self-employment income. Report these amount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 64,individuals. A state must determine that the ad-
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ as federal income tax withheld.ditional compensation is needed, and the care(Form 1040). for which the payments are made must be pro-Gifts and inheritances.Generally, propertyvided in your home.Personal representatives. All personal you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance isYou must include in your income diffi-representatives must include in their gross in- not included in your income. However, if prop-culty-of-care payments received for more than:come fees paid to them from an estate. If you erty you receive this way later produces incomeare not in the trade or business of being an such as interest, dividends, or rents, that income• 10 qualified foster individuals under ageexecutor (for instance, you are the executor of a is taxable to you. If property is given to a trust19, orfriend’s or relative’s estate), report these fees on and the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 orForm 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade or tributed to you, that income is also taxable toolder.business of being an executor, report these fees you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is theas self-employment income on Schedule C or income from the property, that income is taxableMaintaining space in home.If you are paidSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is not to you.to maintain space in your home for emergencyincludible in income if it is waived.
Inherited pension or IRA.If you inherited afoster care, you must include the payment inManager of trade or business for bank- pension or an individual retirement arrangementyour income.ruptcy estate.Include in your income all pay- (IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-ments received from your bankruptcy estate forReporting taxable payments. If you re- ited amount in your income. See Survivors andmanaging or operating a trade or business thatceive payments that you must include in yourBeneficiaries in Publication 575, if you inheritedyou operated before you filed for bankruptcy.income, you are in business as a foster-carea pension. See What If You Inherit an IRA inReport this income on Form 1040, line 21.provider and you are self-employed. Report thePublication 590, if you inherited an IRA.
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZNotary public.Report payments for these Expected inheritance.If you sell an inter-(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Businessservices on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ est in an expected inheritance from a living per-Use of Your Home (Including Use by Daycare(Form 1040). These payments are not subject to son, include the entire amount you receive inProviders), to help you determine the amountself-employment tax. (See the separate instruc- gross income on Form 1040, line 21.you can deduct for the use of your home.tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.)
Bequest for services.If you receive cashElection precinct official.You should re- Found property. If you find and keep propertyor other property as a bequest for services youceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-that does not belong to you that has been lost orperformed while the decedent was alive, theices performed as an election official or electionabandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to youvalue is taxable compensation.worker. Report these payments on line 7 ofat its fair market value in the first year it is your
Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form Historic preservation grants.Do not includeundisputed possession.
1040EZ. in your income any payment you receive under
Free tour. If you received a free tour from athe National Historic Preservation Act to pre-Food program payments to daycare provid- travel agency for organizing a group of tourists,serve a historically significant property.ers. If you operate a daycare service and re-you must include its value in your income. Re-Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notceive payments under the Child and Adult Careport the fair market value of the tour on Formdeductible from other income. A hobby is anFood Program administered by the Department1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade oractivity from which you do not expect to make aof Agriculture that are not for your services, thebusiness of organizing tours. You cannot deductprofit. See Activity not for profit, earlier underpayments generally are not included in youryour expenses in serving as the voluntary leaderOther Income.income. However, you must include in your in-of the group at the group’s request. If you organ-come any part of the payments you do not use toize tours as a trade or business, report the tour’sIf you collect stamps, coins, or otherprovide food to individuals eligible for help undervalue on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form items as a hobby for recreation andthe program. 1040). pleasure, and you sell any of the items,CAUTION
!
your gain is taxable as a capital gain. However, ifForeign currency transactions.If you have Gambling winnings. You must include your you sell items from your collection at a loss, youa gain on a personal foreign currency transac-gambling winnings in your income on Form cannot deduct the loss.tion because of changes in exchange rates, you1040, line 21. If you itemize your deductions ondo not have to include that gain in your incomeSchedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-Holocaust victims restitution.Restitutionunless it is more than $200. If the gain is morebling losses you had during the year, but only uppayments you receive as a Holocaust victim (orthan $200, report it as a capital gain. to the amount of your winnings. the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest
earned on the payments, including interestFoster-care providers.Payments you re- Lotteries and raffles.Winnings from lotter-earned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-ceive from a state, political subdivision, or aies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-counts or funds, are not taxable. You also do notqualified foster care placement agency for pro-tion to cash winnings, you must include in yourinclude them in any computations in which youviding care to qualified foster individuals in yourincome the fair market value of bonds, cars,would ordinarily add excludable income to yourhome generally are not included in your income.houses, and other noncash prizes. However, theadjusted gross income, such as the computationHowever, you must include in your income pay-difference between the fair market value and theto determine the taxable part of social securityments received for the care of more than 5cost of an oil and gas lease obtained from thebenefits. If the payments are made in property,individuals age 19 or older and certain diffi-government through a lottery is not includible inyour basis in the property is its fair market valueculty-of-care payments. income. when you receive it.A qualified foster individual is a person who:
Installment payments. Generally, if you Excludable restitution payments are pay-
1. Is living in a foster family home, andwin a state lottery prize payable in installments,ments or distributions made by any country or
you must include in your gross income the an-any other entity because of persecution of an2. Was placed there by:
nual payments and any amounts you receiveindividual on the basis of race, religion, physical
designated as interest on the unpaid install-a. An agency of a state or one of its politi- or mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazi
ments. If you sell future lottery payments for acal subdivisions, or Germany, any other Axis regime, or any other
Page 30 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 31 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whether either pays you an allowance or reimburses youBonuses and awards under Miscellaneous
the payments are made under a law or as a for your transportation and other travel ex-Compensation, earlier.
result of a legal action. They include compensa- penses, the amount you receive generally is notPrize points.If you are a salesperson andtion or reparation for property losses resulting taxable. You include in income only the amountreceive prize points redeemable for merchan-from Nazi persecution, including proceedsyou receive that is more than your actual ex-dise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu-under insurance policies issued before and dur- penses. facturer to employees of dealers, you musting World War II by European insurance compa- include their fair market value in your income.Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must benies. The prize points are taxable in the year they areincluded in your income on Form 1040, line 21,
paid or made available to you, rather than in theIllegal income.Illegal income, such as moneyor Form 1040A, line 13. If you must give the pay
year you redeem them for merchandise.from dealing illegal drugs, must be included into your employer because your employer contin-
your income on Form 1040, line 21, or on ues to pay your salary while you serve on thePulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If youSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) ifjury, you can deduct the amount turned over towere awarded a prize in recognition of accom-from your self-employment activity. your employer as an adjustment to income.plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-Enter the amount you repay your employer ontistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, youIndian fishing rights.If you are a member ofForm 1040, line 34, or Form 1040A, line 19.generally must include the value of the prize ina qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights
your income. However, you do not include thissecured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofKickbacks. You must include kickbacks, side
prize in your income if you meet all of the follow-Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not includecommissions, push money, or similar payments
ing requirements.in your income amounts you receive from activi-you receive in your income on Form 1040, line
ties related to those fishing rights. The income is21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form1. You were selected without any action onnot subject to income tax, self-employment tax,1040) if from your self-employment activity.your part to enter the contest or proceed-or employment taxes. ing.Example. You sell cars and help arrangeInterest on frozen deposits.In general, youcar insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay2. You are not required to perform substantialexclude from your income the amount of interestback part of their commissions to you for refer-future services as a condition for receivingearned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is frozenring customers to them. You must include thethe prize or award.if, at the end of the calendar year, you cannotkickbacks in your income.withdraw any part of the deposit because: 3. The prize or award is transferred by the
payer directly to a governmental unit orManufacturer incentive payments. You• The financial institution is bankrupt or in- tax-exempt charitable organization as des-must include as other income on Form 1040, linesolvent, or ignated by you. The following conditions21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
• The state where the institution is located apply to the transfer.1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay-
has placed limits on withdrawals becausements from a manufacturer that you receive as aa. You cannot use the prize or awardother financial institutions in the state aresalesperson. This is true whether you receive before it is transferred.bankrupt or insolvent. the payment directly from the manufacturer or
through your employer. b. You should provide the designation
Excludable amount. The amount of inter- before the prize or award is presented
est you exclude from income for the year is theExample. You sell cars for an automobile to prevent a disqualifying use. The des-
interest that was credited on the frozen depositdealership and receive incentive payments from ignation should contain:
for that tax year minus the sum of: the automobile manufacturer every time you sell
i. The purpose of the designation bya particular model of car. You report the incen-1. The net amount withdrawn from the de- making a reference to sectiontive payments on Form 1040, line 21.posit during that year, and 74(b)(3) of the Internal RevenueMedical savings accounts (Archer MSAs and Code,2. The amount that could have been with-Medicare Advantage MSAs). You generallydrawn at the end of that tax year (not re- ii. A description of the prize or award,do not include in income amounts you withdrawduced by any penalty for premature from your Archer MSA or Medicare Advantage iii. The name and address of the organ-withdrawals of a time deposit). MSA if you use the money to pay for qualified ization to receive the prize or award,medical expenses. Generally, qualified medicalThe excluded part of the interest is included in
iv. Your name, address, and taxpayerexpenses are those you can deduct on Sched-your income in the tax year it becomes with-
identification number, andule A (Form 1040). For more information aboutdrawable.
Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage MSAs, v. Your signature and the date signed.Interest on qualified savings bonds.You see Publication 969.may be able to exclude from income the interest
c. In the case of an unexpected presenta-Moving expense reimbursements. You gen-from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if
tion, you must return the prize or awarderally should not report these benefits on youryou pay qualified higher educational expenses
before using it (or spending, depositing,return. See Publication 521 for more informa-in the same year. Qualified higher educational
investing it, etc., in the case of money)tion.expenses are those you pay for tuition and re-
and then prepare the statement as de-quired fees at an eligible educational institutionPrizes and awards. If you win a prize in a scribed in (b).for you, your spouse, or your dependent. A qual-lucky number drawing, television or radio quizified U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond d. After the transfer, you should receiveprogram, beauty contest, or other event, youissued after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond from the payer a written response stat-must include it in your income. For example, ifmust have been issued to you when you were 24 ing when and to whom the designatedyou win a $50 prize in a photography contest,years of age or older. For more information on amounts were transferred.you must report this income on Form 1040, linethis exclusion, see Education Savings Bond 21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not includeProgram in chapter 1 of Publication 550. These rules do not apply to scholarship orits value in your income. fellowship awards. See Scholarships and fellow-Interest on state and local government obli-Prizes and awards in goods or services mustships, later.gations. This interest is usually exempt frombe included in your income at their fair market
federal tax. However, you must show the value. Qualified tuition program (QTP).A qualifiedamount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-Employee awards or bonuses. Cash tuition program (also known as a 529 program)eral income tax return. For more information,awards or bonuses given to you by your em- is a program set up to allow you to either prepaysee State or Local Government Obligations in ployer for good work or suggestions generally or contribute to an account established for pay-chapter 1 of Publication 550. must be included in your income as wages. ing a student’s qualified higher education ex-
Job interview expenses.If a prospective em- However, certain noncash employee achieve- penses at an eligible educational institution. A
ployer asks you to appear for an interview and ment awards can be excluded from income. See program can be established and maintained by
Publication 525 (2006) Page 31

Page 32 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, Armed Forces Health Professions ScholarshipTaxable amount. Use the worksheet in the
or an eligible educational institution. and Financial Assistance Program. Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruction package
The part of a distribution representing the to determine the amount of your benefits toFor information about the rules that apply to
amount paid or contributed to a QTP is not include in your income. Publication 915 also hasa tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to
included in income. This is a return of the invest- worksheets you can use. However, you mustemployees and their families by an educational
ment in the program. use the worksheets in Publication 915 if any ofinstitution, see Publication 970.
The beneficiary generally does not include in the following situations apply.VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-income any earnings distributed from a QTP if • You received a lump-sum benefit paymentpartment of Veterans Affairs are not included inthe total distribution is less than or equal to during the year that is for one or moreyour income. These allowances are not consid-adjusted qualified higher education expenses. earlier years.ered scholarship or fellowship grants.See Publication 970 for more information.
• You exclude employer-provided adoptionPrizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestRailroad retirement annuities.The following benefits or interest from qualified U.S. sav-are not scholarships or fellowships if you do nottypes of payments are treated as pension or ings bonds.have to use the prizes for educational purposes.annuity income and are taxable under the rulesYou must include these amounts in your income• You take the foreign earned income exclu-explained in Publication 575. on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you usesion, the foreign housing exclusion or de-• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are the amounts for educational purposes.duction, the exclusion of income frommore than the social security equivalent American Samoa, or the exclusion of in-Smallpox vaccine injuries.If you are an eligi-benefit. come from Puerto Rico by bona fide re-ble individual who receives benefits under thesidents of Puerto Rico.• Tier 2 benefits. Smallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Act
of 2003 for a covered injury resulting from a• Vested dual benefits. Benefits may affect your IRA deduction.covered countermeasure, you can exclude theYou must use the special worksheets in appen-payment from your income (to the extent it is notdix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxableRewards. If you receive a reward for providingallowed as a medical and dental expense de-benefits and your IRA deduction if all of theinformation, include it in your income. duction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligiblefollowing conditions apply.individuals include health care workers, emer-Sale of home. You may be able to exclude • You receive social security or equivalentgency personnel, and first responders in afrom income all or part of any gain from the sale railroad retirement benefits.smallpox emergency, who have received aor exchange of a personal residence. See Publi-
smallpox vaccination.cation 523. • You have taxable compensation.
Social security and equivalent railroad re-• You contribute to your IRA.Sale of personal items.If you sold an item
tirement benefits. Social security oryou owned for personal use, such as a car, • You or your spouse is covered by a retire-equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if tax-refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or ment plan at work.able, must be included in the income of thesilverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.
person who has the legal right to receive theReport it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can- How to report. If any of your benefits arebenefits. Whether any of your benefits are tax-not deduct a loss. taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or Formable, and the amount that is taxable, depends onHowever, if you sold an item you held for 1040A to report the taxable part. You cannot usethe amount of the benefits and your other in-investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins, Form 1040EZ. Report your net benefits (thecome.or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain amount in box 5 of your Forms SSA-1099 andand any loss is deductible as a capital loss.Social security benefits include any monthlyRRB-1099) on line 20a of Form 1040 or line 14abenefit under Title II of the Social Security Actof Form 1040A. Report the taxable part (from theExample. You sold a painting on an onlineand any part of a tier I railroad retirement benefitlast line of the worksheet) on line 20b of Formauction website for $100. You bought the paint-treated as a social security benefit. Social secur-1040 or on line 14b of Form 1040A.ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Reportity benefits do not include any supplementalyour $80 gain as a capital gain on Schedule Dsecurity income (SSI) payments. Stolen property.If you steal property, you(Form 1040).
must report its fair market value in your incomeForm SSA-1099. If you received social se-Scholarships and fellowships.A candidate in the year you steal it unless in the same year,curity benefits during the year, you will receivefor a degree can exclude amounts received as a you return it to its rightful owner.Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State-qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiedment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed withTransporting school children.Do not in-scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-your Form SSA-1099. This notice includes aclude in your income a school board mileageceive that is for: worksheet you can use to figure whether any ofallowance for taking children to and from school
your benefits are taxable.• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an if you are not in the business of taking children to
educational institution, or For an explanation of the information foundschool. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-
on your Form SSA-1099, see Publication 915.ing this transportation.• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-
quired for courses at the educational insti-Form RRB-1099. If you received equivalentUnion benefits and dues.Amounts deductedtution. railroad retirement or special guaranty benefitsfrom your pay for union dues, assessments,during the year, you will receive FormAmounts used for room and board do not qualify contributions, or other payments to a union can-RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire-for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for more not be excluded from your income.ment Board.information on qualified scholarships and fellow- You may be able to deduct some of these
For an explanation of the information foundship grants. payments as a miscellaneous deduction subject
on your Form RRB-1099, see Publication 915.to the 2% of AGI limit if they are related to yourPayment for services.Generally, you must If you received other railroad retirement ben- job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule Ainclude in income the part of any scholarship orefits, see Railroad retirement annuities, earlier. (Form 1040). For more information, get Publica-fellowship that represents payment for past, tion 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.present, or future teaching, research, or otherJoint return.If you are married and file a
services. This applies even if all candidates for a joint return, you and your spouse must combineStrike and lockout benefits.Benefits paid
degree must perform the services to receive theyour incomes and your social security and to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,
degree. equivalent railroad retirement benefits when fig- including both cash and the fair market value of
Do not include in income the part of any uring whether any of your combined benefits are other property, usually are included in your in-
scholarship or fellowship representing payment taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive any come as compensation. You can exclude these
for teaching, research, or other services if you benefits, you must add your spouse’s income to benefits from your income only when the facts
receive the amount under the National Health yours when figuring if any of your benefits are clearly show that the union intended them as
Service Corps Scholarship Program or the taxable. gifts to you.
Page 32 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 33 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reimbursed union convention expenses. tax under both methods and compare the re-Year of deduction (or credit).If you use the
If you are a delegate of your local union chapter cash method, you can take the deduction (orsults. Use the method (deduction or credit) that
and you attend the annual convention of the credit, if applicable) for the tax year in which youresults in less tax.
international union, do not include in your in- actually make the repayment. If you use anyMethod 1. Figure your tax for 2006 claimingcome amounts you receive from the interna- other accounting method, you can deduct thea deduction for the repaid amount. If you musttional union to reimburse you for expenses of repayment or claim a credit for it only for the tax
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,traveling away from home to attend the conven- year in which it is a proper deduction under your
enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27.tion. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex- accounting method. For example, if you use an
penses, even if you are reimbursed in a later accrual method, you are entitled to the deduc-Method 2. Figure your tax for 2006 claiming
year. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, you tion or credit in the tax year in which the obliga-a credit for the repaid amount. Follow thesemust include that reimbursement in your in- tion for the repayment accrues.steps.come.
1. Figure your tax for 2006 without deducting
Utility rebates.If you are a customer of an the repaid amount.electric utility company and you participate in the How To Get Tax Help2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearutility’s energy conservation program, you may
without including in income the amountreceive on your monthly electric bill either: You can get help with unresolved tax issues,you repaid in 2006. order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-• A reduction in the purchase price of elec-
tions, and get information from the IRS in sev-3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax showntricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or
eral ways. By selecting the method that is beston your return for the earlier year. This is• A nonrefundable credit against the for you, you will have quick and easy access tothe credit.purchase price of the electricity. tax help.
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forThe amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund- Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The2006 figured without the deduction (stepable credit is not included in your income. Taxpayer Advocate Service is an independent1).
organization within the IRS whose employees
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct theassist taxpayers who are experiencing eco-
amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,nomic harm, who are seeking help in resolving
Repayments claim the credit figured in (3) above on Formtax problems that have not been resolved
1040, line 70, and enter “I.R.C. 1341” in thethrough normal channels, or who believe that an
If you had to repay an amount that you includedcolumn to the right of line 70. IRS system or procedure is not working as it
in your income in an earlier year, you may be should.
able to deduct the amount repaid from your Example. For 2005 you filed a return and You can contact the Taxpayer Advocate
income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, ifreported your income on the cash method. InService by calling toll-free 1-877-777-4778 or
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you2006 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2005TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi-
may be able to take a credit against your tax for ble for assistance. You also can call or write toincome under a claim of right. Your filing status
the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you your local taxpayer advocate, whose phonein 2006 and 2005 is single. Your income and tax
can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay- number and address are listed in your localfor both years are as follows:
ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in telephone directory and in Publication 1546, The
your trade or business or in a for-profit transac- Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS - How to2005tion. Get Help With Unresolved Tax Problems. You With Income  Without Income can file Form 911, Application for Taxpayer As-TaxableType of deduction.The type of deduction you sistance Order, or ask an IRS employee to com-Income $15,000 $10,000are allowed in the year of repayment depends plete it on your behalf. For more information, go
Tax $ 1,889 $ 1,139on the type of income you included in the earlier to www.irs.gov/advocate.
year. You generally deduct the repayment on
Low income tax clinics (LITCs).LITCs are2006the same form or schedule on which you previ-
independent organizations that provide low in-Without Deduction With Deductionously reported it as income. For example, if you
come taxpayers with representation in federalTaxablereported it as self-employment income, deduct it
Income $49,950 $44,950 tax controversies with the IRS for free or for aas a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-
nominal charge. The clinics also provide taxule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form Tax $ 9,051 $ 7,801 education and outreach for taxpayers with lim-1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deduct
ited English proficiency or who speak English asit as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). IfYour tax under method 1 is $7,801. Your tax
a second language. Publication 4134, Low In-you reported it as wages, unemployment com-under method 2 is $8,301, figured as follows:
come Taxpayer Clinic List, provides informationpensation, or other nonbusiness income, deduct
on clinics in your area. It is available at www.irs.Tax previously determined for 2005 $1,889it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction on
gov or at your local IRS office.Less: Tax as refigured.......... − 1,139Schedule A (Form 1040).
Decrease in 2005 tax $ 750If you repaid social security or equivalent Free tax services.To find out what services
railroad retirement benefits, see Publication are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide toRegular tax liability for 2006....... $9,051915. Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free taxLess: Decrease in 2005 tax....... − 750 publications and describes other free tax infor-Refigured tax for 2006 $8,301Repayment of $3,000 or less.If the amount mation services, including tax education andyou repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from assistance programs and a list of TeleTax top-You pay less tax using method 1, so you shouldyour income in the year you repaid it. If you must ics.take a deduction for the repayment in 2006.deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,
Internet. You can access the IRS web-enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22.
site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7Repayment rules do not apply.This discus-Repayment over $3,000. If the amount you days a week to:sion does not apply to:repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct • E-file your return. Find out about commer-• Deductions for bad debts,the repayment (as explained earlier under Type cial tax preparation and e-file servicesof deduction). However, you can choose instead• Deductions from sales to customers, such available free to eligible taxpayers.to take a tax credit for the year of repayment ifas returns and allowances, and similaryou included the income under a claim of right. • Check the status of your 2006 refund.items, orThis means that at the time you included the Click on Where’s My Refund. Wait at least
• Deductions for legal and other expensesincome, it appeared that you had an unrestricted 6 weeks from the date you filed your re-
of contesting the repayment.right to it. If you qualify for this choice, figure your turn (3 weeks if you filed electronically).
Publication 525 (2006) Page 33

Page 34 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Have your 2006 tax return available be- in January and the final release ships in
Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-March.cause you will need to know your social
ices. To ensure IRS representatives give accu-security number, your filing status, and the • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-rate, courteous, and professional answers, weexact whole dollar amount of your refund. lications.use several methods to evaluate the quality of• Download forms, instructions, and publica- • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-our telephone services. One method is for ations. tions.second IRS representative to listen in on or
record random telephone calls. Another is to ask• Order IRS products online. • Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD -some callers to complete a short survey at theShips with the final release.• Research your tax questions online. end of the call.
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and• Search publications online by topic or
finding aid.keyword. Walk-in. Many products and services
are available on a walk-in basis. • Tax law frequently asked questions.• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
published in the last few years. • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-
• Products. You can walk in to many post sponse system.• Figure your withholding allowances using offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upour withholding calculator. • Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxcertain forms, instructions, and publica-
forms.• Sign up to receive local and national taxtions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
news by email. stores, copy centers, city and county gov-• Internal Revenue Bulletins.
ernment offices, credit unions, and office• Get information on starting and operating • Toll-free and email technical support.supply stores have a collection of productsa small business. available to print from a CD or photocopy
Buy the CD from National Technical Informa-from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
tion Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders foroffices and libraries have the Internal Rev-Phone. Many services are available by $25 (no handling fee) or call 1-877-CDFORMSenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuephone. (1-877-233-6767) toll free to buy the CD for $25Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-
(plus a $5 handling fee). Price is subject toable for research purposes.
change.• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-• Services. You can walk in to your localtions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur- CD for small businesses. PublicationTaxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
rent-year forms, instructions, and 3207, The Small Business Resourceness day for personal, face-to-face tax
publications, and prior-year forms and in- Guide CD for 2006, is a must for everyhelp. An employee can explain IRS letters,
structions. You should receive your order small business owner or any taxpayer about torequest adjustments to your tax account,
within 10 days. start a business. This year’s CD includes:or help you set up a payment plan. If you
need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with • Helpful information, such as how to pre-tions about how the tax law applies to youryour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. pare a business plan, find financing forindividual tax return, or you’re more com-your business, and much more.• Solving problems. You can get fortable talking with someone in person,
face-to-face help solving tax problems • All the business tax forms, instructions,visit your local Taxpayer Assistance
every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- and publications needed to successfullyCenter where you can spread out your
sistance Centers. An employee can ex- manage a business.records and talk with an IRS representa-
plain IRS letters, request adjustments totive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-• Tax law changes for 2006.your account, or help you set up a pay- essary, but if you prefer, you can call your
ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andlocal Center and leave a message re-
tance Center for an appointment. To find finding aid.questing an appointment to resolve a tax
the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon- account issue. A representative will call• Web links to various government agen-tacts or look in the phone book under you back within 2 business days to sched-cies, business associations, and IRS orga-United States Government, Internal Reve- ule an in-person appointment at your con-nizations.nue Service. venience. To find the number, go to www.
• “Rate the Product” survey—your opportu-irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access nity to suggest changes for future editions.book under United States Government, In-to TTY/TDD equipment, call ternal Revenue Service.1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to • A site map of the CD to help you navigate
order forms and publications. the pages of the CD with ease.
Mail. You can send your order for• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis- • An interactive “Teens in Biz” module thatforms, instructions, and publications toten to pre-recorded messages covering gives practical tips for teens about startingthe address below. You should receivevarious tax topics. their own business, creating a businessa response within 10 business days after yourplan, and filing taxes.request is received.• Refund information. To check the status of
your 2006 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 An updated version of this CD is availableNational Distribution Centerand press 1 for automated refund informa- each year in early April. You can get a free copyP.O. Box 8903tion or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.Bloomington, IL 61702-8903wait at least 6 weeks from the date you gov/smallbiz.filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-CD for tax products. You can ordertronically). Have your 2006 tax return Publication 1796, IRS Tax Productsavailable because you will need to know CD, and obtain:your social security number, your filing
status, and the exact whole dollar amount• A CD that is released twice so you have
of your refund. the latest products. The first release ships
Page 34 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 35 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Athletic facilities, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title Deferred compensation:
employer-provided......... 5 VII: Nonqualified plans........... 31231 property sale.......... 1 5
Back pay and damages forAutomobile (See Vehicle, Dependent care benefits..... 5401(k) plans.................. 8
emotional distressemployer-provided) Depletion allowance......... 1 5Excess contributions........ 1 0
under.................... 2 9Awards  (See Damages from Directors’ fees.............. 3 0403(b) plans.................. 8
Clergy....................... 1 3lawsuits;  Prizes and awards) Disability:Limit for..................... 8
Coal ......................... 1 5Military.................... 1 4457 plans..................... 8
Colleges and universities: Pensions .................. 1 6Limit for deferrals under...... 9 B Workers’Faculty lodging.............. 7501(c)(18)(D) plans........... 8 Baby-sitting.................. 3 compensation.......... 1 7Scholarships andContributions................ 9Back pay, award for.......... 3 Person with................ 2 7fellowships............... 3 2501(c)(3) organizations...... 1 8Backup withholding: Unemployment compensation,Comments on publication.... 2529 program ................ 3 1 paid as substitute for..... 2 7Barter exchange Commissions:83(b) election................ 1 2 transactions............. 1 8 Disaster mitigationAdvance .................... 3
payments ................. 2 8Bankruptcy: Commuter highwayCanceled debt not deemed to Disaster relief:vehicles.................... 7A be income............... 1 9 Disaster Relief and EmergencyCompensation:Academic health centers: Assistance Act:Barter income............... 1 7Meals and lodging when Employee ................... 3 Grants................... 2 7Below-market loans......... 2 8teaching and research Miscellaneous............... 3 UnemploymentBequest for services........ 3 0organization.............. 7 Unemployment ............. 2 6 benefits............... 2 7Black lung benefitAccelerated death Workers’................... 1 7Payments .................. 2 7payments ................. 1 7benefits................... 2 0 Compensatory damages ... 1 7 ,Discounts:Bonuses ..................3 ,  3 1Accident insurance........... 4 29 Employee discounts......... 5Breach of contract:Accidental death benefits.... 5 Constructive receipt of Employee stock purchaseDamages as income........ 2 9 income ..................... 2Accrual method taxpayers... 2 plans.................... 1 1Bribes....................... 2 8Copyrights:Accrued leave payment: Mortgage loan for early
Business expenses: Infringement damages...... 2 9At time of retirement or payment ................. 1 8
Reimbursements ............ 3resignation................ 4 Royalties.................. 1 5Dividends:
Business income.........14-15Disability retirement and.... 1 6 Corporate directors......... 3 0 Restricted stock............ 1 2
Donated .................... 3 Cost-of-living allowances.... 3 Divorced taxpayers:
Activity not for profit........ 2 8 Stock options exercised incidentCourt awards: (See alsoCAdoption: to divorce................ 1 1Damages from lawsuits).... 2 9Cafeteria plans.............. 1 5Employer assistance........ 5 Down paymentCredit card Insurance....... 2 9Campaign contributions..... 2 8Advance commissions ....... 3 assistance................ 2 9Credits:Campus lodging .............. 7Aircraft....................... 8 Recoveries, refiguring ofCancellation of debt......... 1 8Airlines: unused credits........... 2 6ECancellation of salesNo-additional-cost Currency transactions, Educational assistance:contracts.................. 2 8services.................. 7 foreign.................... 3 0Employer-provided.......... 5Capital gains or losses:Valuation of flights on Scholarships andEmployee stock option plansemployer-provided fellowships............... 3 2(ESOPs) ................. 1 1Daircraft.................... 8 Educational institutions:Incentive stock options Damages from lawsuits..... 2 9Alaska Permanent Fund Faculty lodging.............. 7(ISOs)................... 1 1dividend .................. 2 8 Back pay awards............ 3 Elderly persons:Sale of personal Breach of contract.......... 2 9Alien status, waiver of....... 1 3 Nutrition Program for theproperty................. 3 2CompensatoryAlimony ..................... 2 8 Elderly................... 2 8Car (See Vehicle, damages ............17, 29Alternative minimum tax (AMT): Tax Counseling for theemployer-provided) Emotional distress under TitleRecoveries, refiguring of.... 2 6 Elderly................... 1 4Car pools ................... 2 8 VII, Civil Rights Act ofStock options.............. 1 1 Election precinctCash or deferred arrangements 1964 .................... 2 9Annuities: officials................... 3 0(CODAs) ................... 8 Punitive damages.......... 2 9Charitable gift.............. 2 8 Elective deferrals............. 8Cash rebates................ 2 8Daycare providers: (See alsoRailroad retirement......... 3 2 Catch-up contributions.....8 ,  9Childcare providers)......... 3Casualty insurance:Tax-sheltered............... 8 Excess annual additions.... 1 0Reimbursements from...... 2 8 Food program paymentsArcher MSAs ..............4 ,  3 1 Excess contributions........ 1 0t o ....................... 3 0Catch-up contributions.....8 ,  9Armed forces................ 1 4 Excess deferrals............ 9
De minimis benefits........5 ,  6Charitable gift annuities..... 2 8Disability................... 1 4 Increased limit for last 3 years
Death benefits: (See also LifeChild and Adult Care Food prior to retirement age..... 9Disability pensions......... 1 6
insurance)................. 1 9Program: Limit on..................... 8Military action as cause of
Accelerated................ 2 0Payments to daycare Reporting by employer....... 9disability injuries......... 1 6
providers................ 3 0Debts:Rehabilitative program Emotional distress
payments ................ 1 4Child support payments..... 2 9 Canceled .................. 1 8damages .................. 2 9
Retirement pay............. 1 4 Excluded debt.............. 1 9Childcare providers.......3 ,  3 0 Employee achievement
Veterans’ benefits.......... 1 4 Nonrecourse debts......... 1 8 awards ..................... 3Chronic illness.............. 1 6
Armed Forces Health Recourse .................. 1 8Accelerated death benefits paid Employee awards or
Professions Stockholder’s.............. 1 8t o ....................... 2 0 bonuses .................. 3 1
Scholarship................ 7 Deduction:Citizens outside U.S.: Employee
Assistance (See Tax help) Exclusion of foreign Costs of discrimination compensation ...........3-13
Astronauts................... 2 income ................... 2 suits..................... 2 9Fringe benefits............ 4 - 8
Publication 525 (2006) Page 35

Page 36 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employee compensation (Cont.) Flights: Form 1065: Elective deferrals, reporting by
Restricted property......12-13 employer ................. 9Employer-provided Partnership return.......... 1 5
aircraft.................... 8 Fringe benefits reportedRetirement plan Form 1065, Schedule K-1:
No-additional-cost on ........................ 4contributions...........8-10 Partner’s share of
services.................. 7 Stock options fromincome .................. 1 5Stock options...........10-11
employers............... 1 1Food benefits: Form 1098:Employee discounts ......... 5
Wage and tax statement..... 3Daycare providers, food Mortgage interestEmployee stock purchase
program payments to..... 3 0 Form W-2G:statement................ 2 0plans...................... 1 1
Nutrition Program for the Gambling winnings......... 3 0Form 1099-B:Employer, foreign........... 1 3 Elderly................... 2 8 Form W-4V:Barter exchangeEmployer-owned life Foreign: Unemployment compensation,transactions............. 1 8insurance ................. 1 9Currency transactions...... 3 0 voluntary withholdingForm 1099-C:Employer-provided educational Employment ............... 1 3 request.................. 2 7Cancellation of debt........ 1 8assistance................. 5 Governments, employees Form W-9:Form 1099-DIV:Employer-provided o f ....................... 1 3 Request for taxpayerRestricted stockvehicles.................... 8 Income ..................... 2 identification number..... 1 8dividends................ 1 2Employment: Service.................... 1 6 Foster care.................. 3 0Form 1099–G:Abroad .................... 1 3Form 1040: Foster GrandparentState tax refunds........... 2 0Agency fees............... 2 9 Excess contributions to elective Program .................. 1 4Form 1099-G:Contracts: deferrals................. 1 0 Found property ............. 3 0UnemploymentSeverance pay for Recoveries................ 2 1 Free tax services............ 3 3compensation............ 2 6cancellation of.......... 4 Unemployment Fringe benefits............. 4 - 8Form 1099–MISC:Endowment proceeds ....... 2 0 compensation............ 2 6 Accident and healthServices totaling $600 orWages from Form W-2 ...... 3Energy: insurance................. 4more .................... 3 0Assistance................. 2 8Form 1040, Schedule A: Adoption, employerForm 1099-MISC:Outplacement services,Conservation: assistance................ 5Stock options exercised incidentdeduction for.............. 4Subsidies................ 2 9 Athletic facilities............. 5to divorce................ 1 1Repayment of commissionsUtility rebates............ 3 3 Commuter highwayForm 1099-R:paid in advance........... 3Estate income............... 2 9 vehicles.................. 7Charitable gift annuities..... 2 8Form 1040, Schedule B: De minimis benefits.......5 ,  6Estimated tax: Excess annual additions.... 1 0Restricted stock Dependent care benefits..... 5Unemployment Excess contributiondividends................ 1 2 Educational assistance...... 5compensation............ 2 7 amounts ................. 1 0Form 1040, Schedule C: Employee discounts......... 5Excess: Excess deferral amounts..... 9Bartering................... 1 7 Faculty lodging.............. 7Annual additions........... 1 0 Surrender of life insuranceChildcare providers to Financial counseling fees.... 5policy for cash........... 1 9Contributions............... 1 0 u s e....................... 3 Holiday gifts................. 5Deferrals.................... 9 Form 1120-POL:Personal property rental, Meals and lodging........... 6Political organizations...... 2 8Expected inheritance........ 3 0 reporting income from.... 1 4 Moving expenses (See MovingForm 1120S:Expenses paid by Royalties.................. 1 5 expenses)S corporation return........ 1 5another ................... 2 9Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ: No-additional-costForm 1120S, Schedule K-1:Bartering................... 1 7 services.................. 7Shareholder’s share of income,Childcare providers to Parking..................... 7F credits, deductions,u s e....................... 3 Retirement planning (SeeFaculty lodging.............. 7 etc....................... 1 5Personal property rental, Retirement planning services)Fair market value (FMV)...... 8 Form 2441:reporting income from.... 1 4 Transit pass................. 7
Stock options.............. 1 0 Child and dependent careRoyalties.................. 1 5 Tuition reduction............ 7
expenses ................. 5Farming: Form 1040, Schedule D: Valuation of................. 8
Form 4255:Qualified farm debt, cancellationStock options reported Working condition
Recapture of investmento f ....................... 1 9o n....................... 1 1 benefits................... 7
credit.................... 2 6Federal employees: Form 1040, Schedule E: Frozen deposits:
Form 6251:Partner’s return............ 1 5Accrued leave payment...... 4 Interest on................. 3 1
Alternative minimum tax.... 1 1Royalties.................. 1 5Compensation Act (FECA)
Form 8839:Form 1040A:payments ................ 1 7
GAdoption assistance......... 5Recoveries................ 2 1Cost-of-living allowances.... 3
Gambling winnings andUnemployment Form 8853:Disability pensions......... 1 6
losses..................... 3 0compensation............ 2 6 Accelerated deathThrift Savings Plan for....... 8
Wages from Form W-2 ...... 3 Gas:benefits.................. 2 0Federal income tax:
Royalties from............. 1 5Form 1040A, Schedule 1: Archer MSAs and long-termRefunds ................... 2 0Restricted stock care insurance Gifts........................ 3 0Fees for services............ 2 9 dividends................ 1 2 contracts................. 4 Holiday gifts fromFinancial counseling fees.... 5 employer ................. 5Form 1040A, Schedule 2: Form RRB-1099:Fellowships................. 3 2Child and dependent care Railroad retirement board Government employees  (SeeFICA withholding: expenses ................. 5 payments ................ 3 2 Federal employees;  StateForeign employers, U.S. employees)Form 1040EZ: Form SSA-1099:citizens working for in Recoveries................ 2 1 Social security benefit Grantor trusts............... 2 9U.S...................... 1 3Unemployment statement................ 3 2Group-term life insurance:Paid by employer............ 4 compensation............ 2 6Form W-2: Worksheets...............5 ,  6Fiduciaries: Wages from Form W-2 ...... 3 501(c)(18)(D)
Fees for services.......29, 30 Form 1041: contributions.............. 9
Financial counseling fees: (See HEstates and trusts.......... 2 9 Accrued leave payment at time
also Retirement planning of retirement or Health:Form 1041, Schedule K-1:
services).................... 5 resignation................ 4 Flexible spendingBeneficiary’s share of income,
Fitness programs: Back pay awards............ 3 arrangement.............. 4deductions, credits,
Employer-provided.......... 5 etc....................... 2 9Bonuses or awards.......... 3 Insurance................... 4
Page 36 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 37 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Health: (Cont.) Option on insurance........ 1 9MP
Reimbursement Recovery amounts ......... 2 0Manufacturer incentive Parking fees:
arrangement.............. 4 Savings bond.............. 3 1 payments ................. 3 1Employer-paid or
Savings account............ 4 State and local government reimbursed............... 7Meals:
obligations............... 3 1Help (See Tax help) Employer-paid or Partner and partnership
Interference with businessHighly compensated reimbursed............... 6 income .................... 1 5
operations:employees: Nutrition Program for the Patents:
Damages as income........ 2 9Excess contributions to elective Elderly................... 2 8Infringement damages...... 2 9
deferrals................. 1 0International organizations, Medical: Royalties.................. 1 5
employees of ............. 1 3Historic preservation Care reimbursements....... 1 7Peace Corps ................ 1 4
grants..................... 3 0Interview expenses.......... 3 1 Savings accounts.......... 3 1Pensions:
Hobby losses ............... 3 0Investment counseling fees: Medicare: Clergy..................... 1 3
(See also Retirement planning Advantage MSAs ........... 3 1Holiday gifts................. 5 Disability pensions......... 1 6
services).................... 5 Benefits................... 2 8Inherited pensions.......... 3 0Holocaust victims
Tax paid by employer........ 4Investment income......14, 15 Military.................... 1 4restitution................. 3 0
Medicare tax (See Social securityIRAs (See Individual retirement Personal property:Home, sale of............... 3 2
and Medicare taxes)arrangements (IRAs)) Rental income andHost or hostess............. 1 9
Military (See Armed forces) expense ................. 1 4Iron ore..................... 1 5Hotels:
Sale of..................... 3 2Minerals:Itemized deductions:No-additional-cost
Royalties from............. 1 5Personal representatives (SeeLimited.................... 2 4services.................. 7
Fiduciaries)Recoveries............20, 21 Miscellaneous:Housing (See Lodging)
Compensation .............. 3Prepaid income .............. 2
Income .................... 1 7Price reduced afterJI Missing children, photographs purchase .................. 1 9Job interview expenses..... 3 1Illegal income............... 3 1 of .......................... 2Prizes and awards.........3 ,  3 1Joint returns:Important changes and More information (See Tax help) Achievement awards ........ 3Social security benefits orreminders: Employee awards orMortgage:railroad retirementAstronauts.................. 2 bonuses ................. 3 1Assistance payment........ 2 8payments ................ 3 2Deferred compensation: Length-of-service awards.... 3Discounted loan............ 1 8Jury duty pay............... 3 1Nonqualified plans........ 2 Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarInterest refund............. 2 0
Disaster mitigation........... 2 prizes................... 3 1Relief...................... 1 8
Elective deferrals............ 1 K Safety achievement......... 3Motor vehicle,Employer-owned life Scholarship prizes.......... 3 2Kickbacks ................... 3 1employer-provided......... 8insurance................. 2 Profit-sharing plan.......... 1 6Moving expenses:Foreign income, reporting Public assistanceReimbursements .........3 ,  3 1Lo f ........................ 2 benefits................... 2 7MSAs (Medical savingsLabor unions:Roth contributions........... 2 Public Health Service........ 1 6accounts) ................. 3 1Convention expenses,Terrorist attacks, assistance or Public safety officers killed inreimbursed.............. 3 3payments due to.......... 2 line of duty................ 2 6Dues ...................... 3 2Incentive stock options N Public transportation passes,Strike and lockout(ISOs)..................... 1 1 National Health Service Corps employer-provided......... 7benefits.................. 3 2Income: Scholarship Program ...... 7 Publications (See Tax help)Unemployment benefits paidAssigned ................... 2 National Oceanic andfrom..................... 2 7 Pulitzer prize................ 3 1Business and AtmosphericLast day of tax year, income Punitive damages........... 2 9investment...........14, 15 Administration............ 1 6received on................ 2Constructive receipt of....... 2 National Senior ServiceLeave (See Accrued leaveEstate and trust............ 2 9 Corps ..................... 1 4Qpayment)Foreign employers......... 1 3 No-additional-cost Qualified tuition programLength-of-service awards.... 3Illegal...................... 3 1 services.................... 7 (QTP) ..................... 3 1Miscellaneous.............. 1 7Life insurance: No-fault car insurance:Other...................... 2 8Employer-owned ........... 1 9 Disability benefits under.... 1 7Partnership................ 1 5 Proceeds .................. 1 9 RNobel prize.................. 3 1Prepaid..................... 2 Surrender of policy for Raffles...................... 3 0Nonrecourse debt........... 1 8S corporation.............. 1 5 cash..................... 1 9 Railroads:Nonstatutory stockIndian fishing rights......... 3 1Loans: (See also Retirement annuities........ 3 2options ................... 1 0Mortgage) ................. 1 8Individual retirement Retirement benefits......... 3 2Nontaxable income........... 2Below-market.............. 2 8arrangements (IRAs): Sick pay................... 1 7
Not-for-profit activities...... 2 8Student.................... 1 8Deduction.................. 3 2 Unemployment compensation
Notary fees.................. 3 0Inherited IRA............... 3 0Lockout benefits............ 3 2 benefits.................. 2 6
Notes received forInheritance.................. 3 0Lodging: Real estate:
services.................... 3I R A........................ 3 0Campus lodging............. 7 Qualified real property business
Property not substantially Clergy ..................... 1 3Nutrition Program for the debt, cancellation of...... 1 9
vested................... 1 3Employer-paid or Elderly.................... 2 8Rebates:
reimbursed............... 6Injury benefits............15-17 Cash ...................... 2 8
Faculty lodging.............. 7Insurance: Utility...................... 3 3OHurricane-related lodging.... 6Credit card................. 2 9 Recovery of amountsOil:In-kind lodging.............. 6Health...................... 4 previously deducted...... 2 0Royalties from............. 1 5Replacement housingLife (See Life insurance) Itemized deductions....20, 21
payments ................ 2 8Old-age, survivors, andLong-term care (See Long-term Non-itemized
disability insurance benefitsLong-term carecare insurance) deductions............... 2 6
(OASDI) ................... 2 8insurance ...............4 ,  1 6Interest: Unused tax credits, refiguring
Options, stock..........10, 11Lotteries and raffles......... 3 0Canceled debt including.... 1 8 o f ....................... 2 6
Outplacement services....... 4Frozen deposits............ 3 1Lump-sum distributions: Worksheet of itemized
Mortgage refunds.......... 2 0 Survivor benefits........... 2 6Overseas work ............... 2 deductions............... 2 3
Publication 525 (2006) Page 37

Page 38 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Refunds: Scholarships and Surviving spouse: Tuition program, qualified
Federal income tax......... 2 0 fellowships................ 3 2 Life insurance proceeds paid (QTP) ..................... 3 1
Mortgage interest.......... 2 0 t o ....................... 1 9Self-employed persons: Tuition reduction ............. 7
State tax................... 2 0U.S. citizens working for foreignSurvivor benefits............ 2 6
Rehabilitative program employers in U.S. treated Upayments ................. 1 4 a s....................... 1 3T UnemploymentReimbursements: Senior Companion Tables and figures: compensation ............. 2 6Business expenses.......... 3 Program .................. 1 4Group-term life insurance Unions (See Labor unions)Casualty losses............ 2 8Service Corps of Retired (Table 1)................. 6Unlawful discrimination suits:Meals and lodging........... 6 Executives (SCORE) ...... 1 4 Standard deduction (Tables Deduction for costs......... 2 9Medical expenses.......... 1 7Severance pay ............... 4 2-4)..................... 2 3Moving expenses........3 ,  3 1Outplacement services...... 4 Tax benefit rule............. 2 0Related party transactions: VSick pay...................... 4Tax Counseling for theStock option transfer........ 1 0 VA payments ................ 3 2Sickness and injury Elderly.................... 1 4Religious order Valuation:benefits...............15, 17 Tax help..................... 3 3members .................. 1 3 Fringe benefits.............. 8SIMPLE plans ................ 8Tax-sheltered annuity plansRental income and expenses: Stock options.............. 1 0Limit for deferrals under...... 8 (403(b) plans).............. 8Personal property rental.... 1 4 Vehicle:Smallpox vaccine Limit for..................... 8Reporting of................ 1 4 Commuter highway.......... 7injuries.................... 3 2Taxpayer Advocate.......... 3 3Repayments ................. 3 3 Employer-provided.......... 8Social security and Medicare Terminal illness............. 2 0Repossession ............... 2 8 Veterans’ benefits........... 1 4taxes: Terrorist attacks: Disability compensation..... 1 6Restricted property......12, 13 Foreign employers, U.S. Disability payments for injuriesViatical settlements......... 2 0Retired Senior Volunteer citizens working for in from..................... 1 6Program (RSVP) ........... 1 4 U.S...................... 1 3 Volunteer work.............. 1 4Victims of, tax relief.......... 2Paid by employer............ 4 Tax counseling (VolunteerRetirement planning Thrift Savings Plan........... 8 Income Tax Assistanceservices..................5 ,  7Social security benefits..... 3 2Title VII, Civil Rights Act of Program) ................ 1 4Retirement plans: (See also Standard deduction: 1964: Volunteers in Service toPensions)................2 ,  1 4Recoveries and............ 2 3 Back pay and damages for America (VISTA).......... 1 4Contributions.............8 ,  1 0Tables (2005-2003)...... 2 3 emotional distressElective deferrals (See Elective State employees: under.................... 2 9deferrals) Unemployment benefits paid WTour guides, free toursRewards .................... 3 2 t o ....................... 2 7 W-2 form (See Form W-2)for ........................ 3 0Roth contributions........... 9 State or local governments: Welfare benefits............. 2 7Trade Act of 1974:Interest on obligations of.... 3 1Royalties.................... 1 5 Trade readjustment allowancesWinter energy payments.... 2 8State or local taxes: under.................... 2 7Withholding:Refunds ................... 2 0S Transferable property....... 1 2 Barter exchangeStock appreciation rights..... 4 transactions............. 1 8S corporations.............. 1 5 Transit passes............... 7Stock options...........10, 11 UnemploymentSafety achievement Travel agencies:Stockholder debts........... 1 8 compensation............ 2 7awards ..................... 3 Free tour to organizer of group
Stolen property............. 3 2 Work-training programs..... 2 7of tourists................ 3 0Salary reduction simplified
Strike benefits............... 3 2 Workers’ compensation..... 1 7employee pension plans (See Travel and transportation
Student loans:SARSEPs) expenses: Working condition
Cancellation of debt........ 1 8 Free tours from travel benefits.................... 7Sale of home................ 3 2
Substantial risk of agencies ................ 3 0Worksheets:Sales contracts:
forfeiture.................. 1 2Fringe benefits.............. 7 Group-term life insuranceCancellation of............. 2 8
Reimbursements ............ 3Substantially vested (Worksheet 1)...........5 ,  6SARSEPs .................... 8 School children, transportingproperty................... 1 2 Recoveries of itemizedExcess contributions........ 1 0 o f ....................... 3 2deductions (WorksheetSuggestions forSavings bonds .............. 3 1 Trusts: 2 ) ....................... 2 3publication................. 2Savings incentive match plans Grantor trusts.............. 2 9Supplemental security incomefor employees (See SIMPLE ■Income .................... 2 9(SSI) payments............ 3 2plans)
TTY/TDD information........ 3 3Supplemental unemployment
benefits................... 2 7
Page 38 Publication 525 (2006)

Page 39 of 39 of Publication 525 13:21 -  9-NOV-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2006
Highlights of 2005 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service—How
to Get Help With Unresolved Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IRS
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Publication 525 (2006) Page 39