Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P463.SGM (27-Dec-2006) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
What’s New ..................... 2Department
Reminder ...................... 2of the
Travel,Treasury Introduction ..................... 2
Internal
1. Travel ....................... 3Revenue Entertainment, Traveling Away From Home ........ 3Service
Tax Home ................. 3
Tax Home Different FromGift, and Car Family Home ............ 3
Temporary Assignment or Job ...... 4
What Travel Expenses AreExpenses
Deductible? ................ 4
Meals .................... 5
Travel in the United States ...... 6
Travel Outside the UnitedFor use in preparing
States ................. 7
Luxury Water Travel .......... 8
2006 Returns Conventions ............... 9
2. Entertainment .................. 9
Directly-Related Test ............ 10
Associated Test ................ 10
50% Limit .................... 11
Exceptions to the 50% Limit ..... 11
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Deductible? ............. 12
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Not Deductible? .......... 13
3. Gifts ........................ 13
4. Transportation ................. 14
Car Expenses ................. 15
Standard Mileage Rate ........ 15
Actual Car Expenses ......... 16
Leasing a Car .............. 24
Disposition of a Car ............. 25
5. Recordkeeping ................. 25
How To Prove Expenses .......... 26
What Are Adequate
Records? .............. 26
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? .............. 27
Separating and Combining
Expenses .............. 27
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts ...... 28
Examples of Records ......... 28
6. How To Report ................. 28
Where To Report ............... 28
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer .............. 28
Reimbursements ............... 29
Accountable Plans ........... 29
Nonaccountable Plans ........ 32
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients ..... 32
Completing Forms 2106 and
2106-EZ .................. 33
Special Rules .............. 34
Get forms and other information Illustrated Examples .......... 35
faster and easier by: 7. How To Get Tax Help ............ 40
Appendices ..................... 41Internet • www.irs.gov
Index .......................... 56

Page 2 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Who should use this publication. You Comments and suggestions. We welcome
should read this publication if you are an em- your comments about this publication and yourWhat’s New
ployee or a sole proprietor who has busi- suggestions for future editions.
ness-related travel, entertainment, gift, or You can write to us at the following address:Standard mileage rate. For 2006, the stan- transportation expenses.dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your
car for business use is 441/2 cents per mile. Users of employer-provided vehicles. If Internal Revenue ServiceCar expenses and use of the standard mile- an employer-provided vehicle was available for Individual Forms and Publications Branchage rate are explained in chapter 4. your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener- SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ially, your employer must include the value of the 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406Meal expenses when subject to “hours of use or availability in your income as pay. How- Washington, DC 20224service” limits. Generally, you can deduct ever, there are exceptions if the use of the vehi-only 50% of your business-related meal ex- cle qualifies as a working condition fringe benefitpenses while traveling away from home for busi- (such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal use We respond to many letters by telephone.ness purposes. You can deduct a higher vehicle).percentage if the meals take place during or Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
A working condition fringe benefit is anyincident to the Department of Transportation’s clude your daytime phone number, including the
property or service provided to you by your em-“hours of service” limits. (These limits apply to area code, in your correspondence.
ployer for which you could deduct the cost as ancertain workers who are under certain federal You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Theregulations.) The percentage is 75% for 2006. employee business expense if you had paid for asterisk must be included in the address.)Business meal expenses are covered in chapter it. Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-1. A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
that is not likely to be used more than minimally ally to each email, we do appreciate yourGulf Opportunity (GO) Zone special depreci-
for personal purposes because of its design. feedback and will consider your comments asation allowance. In 2006, you can take a spe-
See Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles  undercial depreciation allowance equal to 50% of your we revise our tax products.
Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4.car’s basis if your car is qualified Gulf Opportu- Ordering forms and publications. Visitnity (GO) Zone property. However, the maxi- For information on how to report your car www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andmum amount of depreciation you can deduct for expenses that your employer did not provide or publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theyour car in 2006 is limited to $2,960. See Gulf reimburse you for (such as when you pay for gas address below and receive a response within 10Opportunity (GO) Zone Special Depreciation Al- and maintenance for a car your employer pro- business days after your request is received.lowance in chapter 4. vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employer
in chapter 6.
National Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903Who does not need to use this publication.Reminder Bloomington, IL 61702-8903Partnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ-
ers who reimburse their employees for businessPhotographs of missing children. The Inter- expenses should refer to their tax form instruc- Tax questions. If you have a tax question,nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the tions and chapter 13 of Publication 535, Busi- visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. WeNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- ness Expenses, for information on deducting cannot answer tax questions sent to either of thedren. Photographs of missing children selected travel, meals, entertainment, and transportation above addresses.by the Center may appear in this publication on expenses.pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
Useful ItemsIf you are an employee, you will not need tohelp bring these children home by looking at the
read this publication if all of the following arephotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST You may want to see:
true.(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Publication• You fully accounted to your employer for
your work-related expenses. ❏ 225 Farmer’s Tax Guide
• You received full reimbursement for your ❏ 529 Miscellaneous DeductionsIntroduction
expenses. ❏ 535 Business ExpensesYou may be able to deduct the ordinary and
• Your employer required you to return anynecessary business-related expenses you have ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertyexcess reimbursement and you did so.for:
❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates• There is no amount shown with a code “L”• Travel,
in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and Form (and Instructions)• Entertainment, Tax Statement.
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized• Gifts, or If you meet all of these conditions, there is no Deductionsneed to show the expenses or the reimburse-• Transportation.
❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Lossments on your return. If you would like moreAn ordinary expense is one that is common and From Businessinformation on reimbursements and accountingaccepted in your field of trade, business, or to your employer, see chapter 6. ❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profitprofession. A necessary expense is one that is
From Businesshelpful and appropriate for your business. An If you meet these conditions and yourexpense does not have to be required to be ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Lossemployer included reimbursements onconsidered necessary. From Farmingyour Form W-2 in error, ask your em-
TIP
This publication explains: ployer for a corrected Form W-2. ❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses
• What expenses are deductible, Volunteers. If you perform services as a ❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee
volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may• How to report them on your return, Business Expenses
be able to deduct some of your costs as a• What records you need to prove your ex- ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortizationcharitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-penses, and See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help, forpenses in Giving Services in Publication 526,
information about getting these publications andCharitable Contributions, for information on the• How to treat any expense reimbursements
forms.expenses you can deduct.you may receive.
Page 2 Publication 463 (2006)

Page 3 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a 1. You perform part of your business in the
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- area of your main home and use that
nent duty assignment overseas, you are not home for lodging while doing business in
1. traveling away from home. You cannot deduct the area.
your expenses for meals and lodging. You can- 2. You have living expenses at your mainnot deduct these expenses even if you have to home that you duplicate because yourmaintain a home in the United States for your
business requires you to be away from thatfamily members who are not allowed to accom-Travel home.pany you overseas. If you are transferred from
one permanent duty station to another, you may 3. You have not abandoned the area in whichIf you temporarily travel away from your tax have deductible moving expenses, which are both your historical place of lodging andhome, you can use this chapter to determine if explained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses. your claimed main home are located; youyou have deductible travel expenses. A naval officer assigned to permanent duty have a member or members of your familyThis chapter discusses: aboard a ship that has regular eating and living living at your main home; or you often usefacilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel• Traveling away from home, that home for lodging.expense purposes.
• Temporary assignment or job, and If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home
is the home where you regularly live. If youTax Home• What travel expenses are deductible. satisfy only two factors, you may have a tax
It also discusses the standard meal allowance, home depending on all the facts and circum-To determine whether you are traveling away
rules for travel inside and outside the United stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are anfrom home, you must first determine the location
States, luxury water travel, and deductible con- itinerant; your tax home is wherever you workof your tax home.
vention expenses. Generally, your tax home is your regular and you cannot deduct travel expenses.
place of business or post of duty, regardless of
Travel expenses defined. For tax purposes, Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-where you maintain your family home. It in-
travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary ton in an apartment you rent. You have workedcludes the entire city or general area in which
expenses of traveling away from home for your your business or work is located. for your employer in Boston for a number ofbusiness, profession, or job. If you have more than one regular place of years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month
An ordinary expense is one that is common business, your tax home is your main place of executive training program. You do not expect to
and accepted in your field of trade, business, or business. See Main place of business or work, return to work in Boston after you complete your
profession. A necessary expense is one that is later. training.
helpful and appropriate for your business. An If you do not have a regular or a main place During your training, you do not do any workexpense does not have to be required to be of business because of the nature of your work, in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andconsidered necessary. then your tax home may be the place where you on-the-job training throughout the United States.regularly live. See No main place of business orYou will find examples of deductible travel You keep your apartment in Boston and return towork, later.expenses in Table 1-1, later. it frequently. You use your apartment to conduct If you do not have a regular place of busi- your personal business. You also keep up yourness or post of duty and there is no place where community contacts in Boston. When you com-you regularly live, you are considered an itiner- plete your training, you are transferred to Losant (a transient) and your tax home is wherever Angeles.Traveling Away From you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim a
You do not satisfy factor (1) because you didtravel expense deduction because you areHome not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-never considered to be traveling away from
cause you had duplicate living expenses. Youhome.You are traveling away from home if: also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-
don your apartment in Boston as your main• Your duties require you to be away from Main place of business or work. If you have home, you kept your community contacts, andthe general area of your tax home (defined more than one place of work, consider the fol- you frequently returned to live in your apartment.later) substantially longer than an ordinary lowing when determining which one is your main You have a tax home in Boston.day’s work, and place of business or work.
• You need to sleep or rest to meet the • The total time you ordinarily spend in each Example 2. You are an outside salesperson
demands of your work while away from place. with a sales territory covering several states.home. Your employer’s main office is in Newark, but• The level of your business activity in each
you do not conduct any business there. YourThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merely place.
work assignments are temporary, and you havenapping in your car. You do not have to be away
• Whether your income from each place is no way of knowing where your future assign-from your tax home for a whole day or from dusk
significant or insignificant.to dawn as long as your relief from duty is long ments will be located. You have a room in your
enough to get necessary sleep or rest. married sister’s house in Dayton. You stay there
for one or two weekends a year, but you do noExample. You live in Cincinnati where you
Example 1. You are a railroad conductor. work in the area. You do not pay your sister forhave a seasonal job for 8 months each year and
You leave your home terminal on a regularly earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in the use of the room.
scheduled round-trip run between two cities and Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000. You do not satisfy any of the three factorsreturn home 16 hours later. During the run, you Cincinnati is your main place of work because listed earlier. You are an itinerant and have nohave 6 hours off at your turnaround point where you spend most of your time there and earn tax home.you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get most of your income there.
necessary sleep before starting the return trip.
Tax Home Different FromYou are considered to be away from home. No main place of business or work. You Family Homemay have a tax home even if you do not have aExample 2. You are a truck driver. You regular or main place of work. Your tax home If you (and your family) do not live at your taxleave your terminal and return to it later the may be the home where you regularly live. home (defined earlier), you cannot deduct thesame day. You get an hour off at your turn-
cost of traveling between your tax home andaround point to eat. Because you are not off to Factors used to determine tax home. If
your family home. You also cannot deduct theget necessary sleep and the brief time off is not you do not have a regular or main place of
cost of meals and lodging while at your taxan adequate rest period, you are not traveling business or work, use the following three factors
away from home. to determine where your tax home is. home. See Example 1 that follows.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception for federal crime investigations orIf you are working temporarily in the same Going home on days off. If you go back to
prosecutions. If you are a federal employee your tax home from a temporary assignment oncity where you and your family live, you may be
participating in a federal crime investigation or your days off, you are not considered away fromconsidered as traveling away from home. See
prosecution, you are not subject to the one-year home while you are in your hometown. YouExample 2, below.
rule. This means you may be able to deduct cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-
travel expenses even if you are away from yourExample 1. You are a truck driver and you ing there. However, you can deduct your travel
tax home for more than one year.and your family live in Tucson. You are em- expenses, including meals and lodging, while
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in traveling between your temporary place of workFor you to qualify, the Attorney General (or
and your tax home. You can claim these ex-Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return his or her designee) must certify that you are
penses up to the amount it would have cost youto your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one traveling:
to stay at your temporary place of work.night there before returning home. You cannot • For the federal government, If you keep your hotel room during your visitdeduct any expenses you have for meals and
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel• In a temporary duty status, andlodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from
room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is • To investigate or prosecute, or provide penses of returning home up to the amount youyour tax home. support services for the investigation or would have spent for meals had you stayed atprosecution of a federal crime. your temporary place of work.Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-
You can deduct your otherwise allowable travelburgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The Probationary work period. If you take a jobexpenses throughout the period of certification.rest of the year you work for the same employer that requires you to move, with the understand-in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants ing that you will keep the job if your work isDetermining temporary or indefinite. Youand sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the satisfactory during a probationary period, the jobmust determine whether your assignment issame whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti- is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourtemporary or indefinite when you start work. Ifmore. expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-you expect an assignment or job to last for oneBecause you spend most of your working bationary period.year or less, it is temporary unless there aretime and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,
facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.that city is your tax home. You cannot deduct
An assignment or job that is initially temporaryany expenses you have for meals and lodging may become indefinite due to changed circum-there. However, when you return to work in What Travel Expensesstances. A series of assignments to the samePittsburgh, you are away from your tax home location, all for short periods but that togethereven though you stay at your family home. You Are Deductible?cover a long period, may be considered an in-can deduct the cost of your roundtrip between definite assignment.Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct Once you have determined that you are travel-The following examples illustrate whether anyour part of your family’s living expenses for ing away from your tax home, you can determineassignment or job is temporary or indefinite.meals and lodging while you are living and work- what travel expenses are deductible.ing in Pittsburgh. You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-Example 1. You are a construction worker.
penses you have when you travel away fromYou live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You
home on business. The type of expense you canare a member of a trade union in Los Angeles
deduct depends on the facts and your circum-that helps you get work in the Los Angeles area.
Temporary stances.Because of a shortage of work, you took a job on
Table 1-1 summarizes travel expenses youa construction project in Fresno. Your job wasAssignment or Job may be able to deduct. You may have otherscheduled to end in 8 months. The job actually
deductible travel expenses that are not coveredlasted 10 months.You may regularly work at your tax home and there, depending on the facts and your circum-You realistically expected the job in Fresnoalso work at another location. It may not be stances.to last 8 months. The job actually did last lesspractical to return to your tax home from this than 1 year. The job is temporary and your tax When you travel away from home onother location at the end of each work day. home is still in Los Angeles. business, you should keep records of
all the expenses you have and anyRECORDS
Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign- Example 2. The facts are the same as in advances you receive from your employer. Youment. If your assignment or job away from Example 1, except that you realistically ex- can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otheryour main place of work is temporary, your tax pected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. The written record to keep track of your expenses.home does not change. You are considered to job actually was completed in 10 months. The types of expenses you need to record,be away from home for the whole period you are Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you along with supporting documentation, are de-away from your main place of work. You can realistically expected the work to last longer than scribed in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).deduct your travel expenses if they otherwise 1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary year. You cannot deduct any travel expenses Separating costs. If you have one expenseassignment in a single location is one that is you had in Fresno because Fresno became your that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,realistically expected to last (and does in fact tax home. and other services (such as lodging or transpor-last) for one year or less. tation), you must allocate that expense between
However, if your assignment or job is indefi- Example 3. The facts are the same as in the cost of meals and entertainment and the cost
nite, the location of the assignment or job be- Example 1, except that you realistically ex- of other services. You must have a reasonable
comes your new tax home and you cannot pected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. After basis for making this allocation. For example,
deduct your travel expenses while there. An 8 months, however, you were asked to remain you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-
assignment or job in a single location is consid- for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15 cludes one or more meals in its room charge.
ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last months).
Travel expenses for another individual. If afor more than one year, whether or not it actually Initially, you realistically expected the job in
spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withlasts for more than one year. Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, due
you (or your employee) on a business trip or to aIf your assignment is indefinite, you must to changed circumstances occurring after 8
business convention, you generally cannot de-include in your income any amounts you receive months, it was no longer realistic for you to
duct his or her travel expenses.from your employer for living expenses, even if expect that the job in Fresno would last for one
they are called travel allowances and you ac- year or less. You can only deduct your travel Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-
count to your employer for them. You may be expenses for the first 8 months. You cannot penses of someone who goes with you if that
able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new deduct any travel expenses you had after that person:
tax home as a moving expense. See Publication time because Fresno became your tax home
521 for more information. when the job became indefinite. 1. Is your employee,
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
50% limit on meals. You can figure yourTable 1-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
meals expense using either of the following
methods.This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home
for business purposes. • Actual cost.
• The standard meal allowance.IF you have
expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of... Both of these methods are explained below. But,
regardless of the method you use, you generallytransportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed costbusiness destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are
riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your of your meals.
cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise If you are reimbursed for the cost of yourShips (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits. meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on
taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you between: whether your employer’s reimbursement plan
bus, and airport 1) The airport or station and your hotel, and was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are
limousine 2) The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether
business meeting place, or your temporary work location. the unreimbursed meal expense is for business
travel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your regular cusses the 50% limit in more detail, and chaptershipping and temporary work locations.
6 discusses accountable and nonaccountable
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on plans.
business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car
while away from home on business, you can deduct only the
Actual Cost
business-use portion of the expenses.
You can use the actual cost of your meals tolodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long figure the amount of your expense before reim-enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform your bursement and application of the 50% deductionduties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, and limit. If you use this method, you must keeprelated tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits. records of your actual cost.
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes business Standard Meal Allowancecommunication by fax machine or other communication devices.
Generally, you can use the “standard meal al-tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. lowance” method as an alternative to the actual
other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your cost method. It allows you to use a set amount
business travel. These expenses might include transportation to or for your daily meals and incidental expenses
from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, computer rental (M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-
fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer. tual costs. The set amount varies depending on
where and when you travel. In this publication,
“standard meal allowance” refers to the federal
2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount of
travel, and single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the standard meal allowance . If you use the stan-
dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the ords to prove the time, place, and businessbut only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he usestravel expenses. purpose of your travel. See the recordkeepingpublic transportation, he can deduct only his
rules for travel in chapter 5.fare.Business associate. If a business associ-
Incidental expenses. The term “incidental ex-ate travels with you and meets the conditions in
Meals penses” means:(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel
expenses you have for that person. A business • Fees and tips given to porters, baggageYou can deduct the cost of meals in either of theassociate is someone with whom you could rea- carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewardsfollowing situations.sonably expect to actively conduct business. A or stewardesses and others on ships, andbusiness associate can be a current or prospec- • It is necessary for you to stop for substan- hotel servants in foreign countries,
tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, tial sleep or rest to properly perform your • Transportation between places of lodgingemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi- duties while traveling away from home on or business and places where meals aresor. business. taken, if suitable meals can be obtained at
Bona fide business purpose. A bona fide • The meal is business-related entertain- the temporary duty site, and
business purpose exists if you can prove a real ment. • Mailing costs associated with filing travelbusiness purpose for the individual’s presence.
vouchers and payment of em-Business-related entertainment is discussed inIncidental services, such as typing notes or as-
ployer-sponsored charge card billings.chapter 2. The following discussion deals onlysisting in entertaining customers, are not
with meals that are not business-related enter-enough to make the expenses deductible. Incidental expenses do not include expenses for
tainment. laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephoneLavish or extravagant. You cannot deductness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is calls.
expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-not Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally types
gant. An expense is not considered lavish ornotes, performs similar services, and accompa- Incidental expenses only method. You can
extravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsnies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- use an optional method (instead of actual cost)
and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-formance of these services does not establish for deducting incidental expenses only. The
lowed merely because they are more than athat her presence on the trip is necessary to the amount of the deduction is $3 a day for inciden-
fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-conduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses are tal expenses paid or incurred for travel away
not deductible. taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. from home in 2006. You can use this method
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Standard meal allowance for areas outsideonly if you did not pay or incur any meal ex- Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at
the continental United States. The standardpenses. You cannot use this method on any day 8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amount
that you use the standard meal allowance. This meal allowance rates do not apply to travel in to cover her expenses and included it with her
method is subject to the proration rules for par- Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outside wages.
tial days. See Travel for days you depart and the continental United States. The federal per Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days of
return, later in this chapter. diem rates for these locations are published the standard meal allowance for Washington,
monthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al- DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andFederal employees should refer to the
lowances for Foreign Areas. Friday (the days she departed and returned),Federal Travel Regulations at www.
and the full daily rate for Thursday.gsa.gov. Click on “Federal Travel Reg-CAUTION
!
You can access foreign per diem rates
ulation (FTR)” for changes affecting claims for Under Method 2 , Jen could also use anyat www.state.gov/m/a/als/prdm.
reimbursement of these expenses. method that she applies consistently and that is
in accordance with reasonable business prac-50% limit may apply. If you use the standard tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of themeal allowance method for meal expenses and Your employer may have these rates standard meal allowance even though a federalyou are not reimbursed or you are reimbursed available, or you can purchase the employee would have to use Method 1 and beunder a nonaccountable plan, you can generally publication from the: limited to only 21/2 days.deduct only 50% of the standard meal allow- Superintendent of Documentsance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta- U.S. Government Printing Office Travel in the United Statesble plan and you are deducting amounts that are P.O. Box 371954more than your reimbursements, you can de- Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954 The following discussion applies to travel in theduct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50%
United States. For this purpose, the Unitedlimit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and You can also order it by calling the States includes the 50 states and the District ofaccountable and nonaccountable plans are dis- Government Printing Office at Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-cussed in chapter 6. 1-202-512-1800 (not a toll-free num- penses depends on how much of your trip wasber).There is no optional standard lodging business related and on how much of your tripamount similar to the standard meal occurred within the United States. See Part ofSpecial rate for transportation workers.allowance. Your allowable lodging ex-CAUTION
!
Trip Outside the United States, later.You can use a special standard meal allowancepense deduction is your actual cost. if you work in the transportation industry. You
are in the transportation industry if your work:Who can use the standard meal allowance.
Trip Primarily for BusinessYou can use the standard meal allowance • Directly involves moving people or goodswhether you are an employee or self-employed, by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or You can deduct all of your travel expenses ifand whether or not you are reimbursed for your truck, and your trip was entirely business related. If yourtraveling expenses. trip was primarily for business and, while at your• Regularly requires you to travel away fromUse of the standard meal allowance for other business destination, you extended your stay forhome and, during any single trip, usuallytravel. You can use the standard meal allow- a vacation, made a personal side trip, or hadinvolves travel to areas eligible for differ-ance to figure your meal expenses when you other personal activities, you can deduct yourent standard meal allowance rates.travel in connection with investment and other business-related travel expenses. These ex-income-producing property. You can also use it If this applies to you, you can claim a standard penses include the travel costs of getting to andto figure your meal expenses when you travel for meal allowance of $52 a day ($58 for travel from your business destination and any busi-qualifying educational purposes. You cannot outside the continental United States) from Jan- ness-related expenses at your business desti-use the standard meal allowance to figure the uary 1, 2006, through December 31, 2006. nation.cost of your meals when you travel for medical
Using the special rate for transportation work-or charitable purposes. Example. You work in Atlanta and take aers eliminates the need for you to determine theAmount of standard meal allowance. The business trip to New Orleans. On your waystandard meal allowance for every area wherestandard meal allowance is the federal M&IE home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to userate. For travel in 2006, the rate for most small You spend $1,070 for the 9 days you are awaythe special rate for any trip, you must use thelocalities in the United States is $39 a day from from home for travel, meals, lodging, and otherspecial rate (and not use the regular standardJanuary 1, 2006, through December 31, 2006. travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-meal allowance rates) for all trips you take thatMost major cities and many other localities in bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, andyear.the United States are designated as high-cost your total cost would have been $920. You can
areas, qualifying for higher standard meal al- deduct $920 for your trip, including the cost ofTravel for days you depart and return. Forlowances. These rates are listed in Publication round-trip transportation to and from New Orle-both the day you depart for and the day you1542, which is available on the Internet at www. ans. The deduction for your meals is subject toreturn from a business trip, you must prorate theirs.gov. the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.standard meal allowance (figure a reducedYou can also find this information (or- amount for each day). You can do so by one ofganized by state) on the Internet at two methods. Trip Primarily forwww.gsa.gov . Click on “Per Diem
Personal Reasons• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan-Rates,” then select “2006” for the period January
1, 2006 – September 30, 2006, and select dard meal allowance.
If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,“2007” for the period October 1, 2006 – Decem- • Method 2: You can prorate using any such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is aber 31, 2006. However, you can apply the rates method that you consistently apply and nondeductible personal expense. However, youin effect before October 1, 2006, for expenses of that is in accordance with reasonable busi- can deduct any expenses you have while at yourall travel within the United States for 2006 in- ness practice. destination that are directly related to your busi-stead of the updated rates. You must consist-
ness.ently use either the rates for the first 9 months of
2006 or the updated rates for the period of Octo- A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be aExample. Jen is employed in New Orleans
ber 1, 2006, through December 31, 2006. vacation even if the promoter advertises that it isas a convention planner. In March, her employer
primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, toIf you travel to more than one location in one
dental business activities during a trip, such asattend a planning seminar. She left her home inday, use the rate in effect for the area where you
viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingNew Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday andstop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-
with general subjects, will not change what isarrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. Aftertation industry, however, see Special rate for
really a vacation into a business trip.spending two nights there, she flew back to Newtransportation workers, later.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business activities, your trip is considered en- Seattle. You spent one day flying in each direc-Part of Trip Outside
tirely for business if you meet at least one of the tion.the United States
following four exceptions. Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of your
If part of your trip is outside the United States, total time abroad was for nonbusiness activities,Exception 1 - No substantial control.use the rules described later in this chapter you can deduct as travel expenses what it wouldYour trip is considered entirely for business ifunder Travel Outside the United States for that have cost you to make the trip if you had notyou did not have substantial control over arrang-part of the trip. For the part of your trip that is engaged in any nonbusiness activity. Theing the trip. The fact that you control the timing ofinside the United States, use the rules for travel amount you can deduct is the cost of theyour trip does not, by itself, mean that you havein the United States. Travel outside the United round-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-substantial control over arranging your trip.States does not include travel from one point in ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other relatedYou do not have substantial control overthe United States to another point in the United expenses.your trip if you:States. The following discussion can help you Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-determine whether your trip was entirely within • Are an employee who was reimbursed or eration. Your trip is considered entirely forthe United States. paid a travel expense allowance, business if you can establish that a personal
vacation was not a major consideration, even if• Are not related to your employer, andPublic transportation. If you travel by public
you have substantial control over arranging thetransportation, any place in the United States • Are not a managing executive. trip.where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
point in the United States. Once the vehicle “Related to your employer” is defined later inleaves the last scheduled stop in the United chapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances. Travel Primarily for BusinessStates on its way to a point outside the United A “managing executive” is an employee whoStates, you apply the rules under Travel Outside If you travel outside the United States primarilyhas the authority and responsibility, without be-the United States. for business but spend some of your time oning subject to the veto of another, to decide on
other activities, you generally cannot deduct allthe need for the business travel.Example. You fly from New York to Puerto of your travel expenses. You can only deduct theA self-employed person generally has sub-Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return business portion of your cost of getting to andstantial control over arranging business trips.to New York nonstop. The flight from New York from your destination. You must allocate theto Miami is in the United States, so only the flight Exception 2 - Outside United States no costs between your business and other activitiesfrom Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United more than a week. Your trip is considered to determine your deductible amount. SeeStates. Because there are no scheduled stops entirely for business if you were outside the Travel allocation rules, later.between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the United States for a week or less, combining
return trip is outside the United States. You do not have to allocate your travelbusiness and nonbusiness activities. One week
expenses if you meet one of the fourmeans seven consecutive days. In counting thePrivate car. Travel by private car in the United exceptions listed earlier under Travel
TIP
days, do not count the day you leave the UnitedStates is travel between points in the United considered entirely for business. In those cases,States, but do count the day you return to theStates, even though you are on your way to a you can deduct the total cost of getting to andUnited States.destination outside the United States. from your destination.
Example. You traveled to Brussels primarilyExample. You travel by car from Denver to Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside thefor business. You left Denver on Tuesday andMexico City and return. Your travel from Denver United States was primarily for business, youflew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew fromto the border and from the border back to Den- must allocate your travel time on a day-to-dayNew York to Brussels, arriving the next morning.ver is travel in the United States, and the rules in basis between business days and nonbusinessOn Thursday and Friday, you had business dis-this section apply. The rules under Travel days. The days you depart from and return to thecussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, youOutside the United States apply to your trip from United States are both counted as days outsidewere sightseeing. You flew back to New York,the border to Mexico City and back to the border. the United States.arriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday,
To figure the deductible amount of youryou flew back to Denver.
Travel Outside round-trip travel expenses, use the followingAlthough you were away from your home in
fraction. The numerator (top number) is the totalthe United States Denver for more than a week, you were not
number of business days outside the Unitedoutside the United States for more than a week.
If any part of your business travel is outside the States. The denominator (bottom number) is theThis is because the day you depart does not
United States, some of your deductions for the total number of travel days outside the Unitedcount as a day outside the United States.
cost of getting to and from your destination may States.You can deduct your cost of the round-tripbe limited. For this purpose, the United States flight between Denver and Brussels. You can Counting business days. Your businessincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum- also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels for days include transportation days, days yourbia. Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi- presence was required, days you spent on busi-How much of your travel expenses you can ness. However, you cannot deduct the cost of ness, and certain weekends and holidays.deduct depends in part upon how much of your your stay in Brussels from Saturday throughtrip outside the United States was business re- Transportation day. Count as a businessTuesday because those days were spent onlated. day any day you spend traveling to or from anonbusiness activities.
business destination. However, if because of aException 3 - Less than 25% of time on nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a directpersonal activities. Your trip is consideredTravel Entirely for Business or route, your business days are the days it wouldentirely for business if:Considered Entirely for Business take you to travel a reasonably direct route to
your business destination. Extra days for side• You were outside the United States forYou can deduct all your travel expenses of get- trips or nonbusiness activities cannot bemore than a week, andting to and from your business destination if your counted as business days.trip is entirely for business or considered entirely • You spent less than 25% of the total time
for business. Presence required. Count as a businessyou were outside the United States on
day any day your presence is required at anonbusiness activities.
Travel entirely for business. If you travel particular place for a specific business purpose.For this purpose, count both the day your tripoutside the United States and you spend the Count it as a business day even if you spendbegan and the day it ended.entire time on business activities, you can de- most of the day on nonbusiness activities.
duct all of your travel expenses.
Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo, Day spent on business. If your principal
Travel considered entirely for business. where you spent 14 days on business and 5 activity during working hours is pursuit of your
Even if you did not spend your entire time on days on personal matters. You then flew back to trade or business, count the day as  a business
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
day. Also, count as a business day any day you You paid $450 to fly from New York to Paris, expense. If you spend some time atten ding brief
are prevented from working because of circum- professional seminars or a continuing education$200 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $500 to fly
stances beyond your control. program, you can deduct your registration feesfrom Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfare
and other expenses you have that are directlyfrom New York to Dublin would have been $850.Certain weekends and holidays. Count related to your business.You figure the deductible part of your airweekends, holidays, and other necessary
travel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of thestandby days as business days if they fall be- Example. The university from which youround-trip fare and other expenses you wouldtween business days. But if they follow your graduated has a continuing education programhave had in traveling directly between New Yorkbusiness meetings or activity and you remain at for members of its alumni association. This pro-and Dublin ($850 × 7/18 = $331) from your totalyour business destination for nonbusiness or gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-personal reasons, do not count them as busi- expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to tries where academic exercises andness days. Dublin and back to New York ($450 + $200 + conferences are set up to acquaint individuals in$500 = $1,150). most occupations with selected facilities in sev-Example 1. Your tax home is New York Your deductible air travel expense is $819 eral regions of the world. However, none of theCity. You travel to Quebec, where you have a ($1,150 − $331). conferences are directed toward specific occu-business appointment on Friday. You have an- pations or professions. It is up to each partici-other appointment on the following Monday. Be- pant to seek out specialists and organizationalNonbusiness activity at, near, or beyondcause your presence was required on both settings appropriate to his or her occupationalbusiness destination. If you had a vacationFriday and Monday, they are business days. interests.or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyondBecause the weekend is between business Three-hour sessions are held each day overyour business destination, you must allocatedays, Saturday and Sunday are counted as a 5-day period at each of the selected overseasbusiness days. This is true even though you use part of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness facilities where participants can meet with indi-the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or activity. vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-other nonbusiness activity. The part you must allocate is the amount it posed of a variety of activities including
would have cost you to travel between the point workshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-Example 2. If, in Example 1, you had no where travel outside the United States begins velopment, and exercises. Professional confer-business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed until and your business destination and a return to ence directors schedule and conduct theMonday before starting home, Saturday and the point where travel outside the United States sessions. Participants can choose those ses-Sunday would be nonbusiness days. ends. sions they wish to attend.
You can participate in this program since youYou determine the nonbusiness portion ofNonbusiness activity on the way to or from are a member of the alumni association. Youthat expense by multiplying it by a fraction. Theyour business destination. If you stopped and your family take one of the trips. You spendnumerator of the fraction is the number of non-for a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei- about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.business days during your travel outside thether on the way from the United States to your The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-United States and the denominator is the totalbusiness destination, or on the way back to the ing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1number of days you spend outside the UnitedUnited States from your business destination, week.States.you must allocate part of your travel expenses to Your travel expenses for the trip are notthe nonbusiness activity. None of your travel expenses for nonbusi- deductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-
ness activities at, near, or beyond your businessThe part you must allocate is the amount it tion. However, registration fees and any other
destination are deductible.would have cost you to travel between the point incidental expenses you have for the five
where travel outside the United States begins planned sessions you attended that are directly
Example. Assume that the dates are theand your nonbusiness destination and a return related and beneficial to your business are de-
same as in the previous example but that in-to the point where travel outside the United ductible business expenses. These expenses
stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you flyStates ends. should be specifically stated in your records to
to Venice, Italy, for a vacation. ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-You determine the nonbusiness portion of
ness expenses.You cannot deduct any part of the cost ofthat expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The
your trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris.numerator of the fraction is the number of non-
In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfarebusiness days during your travel outside the Luxury Water Travel
and other expenses from New York to Paris andUnited States and the denominator is the total
If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or otherback to New York.number of days you spend outside the United
form of luxury water transportation for businessStates. You can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip plane purposes, there is a daily limit on the amountfare and other travel expenses from New York to you can deduct. The limit is twice the highestExample. You live in New York. On May 4 Paris, plus your meals (subject to the 50% limit), federal per diem rate allowable at the time ofyou flew to Paris to attend a business confer- lodging, and any other business expenses you your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem isence that began on May 5. The conference had in Paris. (Assume these expenses total the amount paid to federal government employ-ended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew $900). If the round-trip plane fare and other ees for daily living expenses when they travelto Dublin where you visited with friends until the travel-related expenses (such as food during the away from home, but in the United States, forafternoon of May 21, when you flew directly trip) are $800 from New York to Paris, you can business purposes.)home to New York. The primary purpose for the deduct travel costs of $489 ( 11/18 × $800), plustrip was to attend the conference. Daily limit on luxury water travel. The high-the full $900 for the expenses you had in Paris.
If you had not stopped in Dublin, you would est federal per diem rate allowed and the daily
have arrived home the evening of May 14. You limit for luxury water travel in 2006 is shown inOther methods. You can use another methoddid not meet any of the exceptions that would the following table.
of counting business days if you establish that itallow you to consider your travel entirely for
more clearly reflects the time spent on otherbusiness. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are
than business activities outside the Unitedbusiness days and May 15 through May 21 (7
States.days) are nonbusiness days.
You can deduct the cost of your meals (sub-
ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other busi- Travel Primarily for Personalness-related travel expenses while in Paris. Reasons
You cannot deduct your expenses while in
If you travel outside the United States primarilyDublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it
for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-would have cost you to travel round-trip between
New York and Dublin. tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Highest Daily Limit Your appointment or election as a dele- • Other relevant factors you may present.
2006 Federal on Luxury gate does not, in itself, determine
Dates Per Diem Water Travel whether you can deduct travel ex-CAUTION
!
Cruise Shipspenses. You can deduct your travel expensesJan. 1 –  March 31 $344 $688
only if your attendance is connected to your own You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of yourApril 1 –  April 30 265 530 trade or business. expenses of attending conventions, seminars,May 1 –  June 30 276 552 or similar meetings held on cruise ships. All
July 1 –  August 31 266 532 Convention agenda. The convention agenda ships that sail are considered cruise ships.
or program generally shows the purpose of theSept. 1 –  Sept. 30 346 692 You can deduct these expenses only if all of
convention. You can show your attendance at the following requirements are met.Oct. 1 –  Nov. 30 338 676 the convention benefits your trade or business
Dec. 1 –  Dec. 31 365 730 1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di-by comparing the agenda with the official duties
and responsibilities of your position. The agenda rectly related to your trade or business.
does not have to deal specifically with your offi-Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveled 2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered incial duties and responsibilities; it will be enoughby ocean liner from New York to London, Eng- the United States.if the agenda is so related to your position that itland, on business in May. Her expense for the
shows your attendance was for business pur- 3. All of the cruise ship’s ports of call are in6-day cruise was $3,900. Caroline’s deduction
poses. the United States or in possessions of thefor the cruise cannot exceed $3,312 (6 days ×
United States.$552 daily limit).
4. You attach to your return a written state-Conventions Held OutsideMeals and entertainment. If your expenses ment signed by you that includes informa-the North American Areafor luxury water travel include separately stated tion about:amounts for meals or entertainment, those You cannot deduct expenses for attending aamounts are subject to the 50% limit on meals a. The total days of the trip (not includingconvention, seminar, or similar meeting heldand entertainment before you apply the daily the days of transportation to and fromoutside the North American area unless:limit. For a discussion of the 50% limit, see the cruise ship port),chapter 2. • The meeting is directly related to your b. The number of hours each day that youtrade or business, and
devoted to scheduled business activi-Example. In the previous example, Caro-
• It is as reasonable to hold the meeting ties, andline’s luxury water travel had a total cost of
outside the North American area as in it.$3,900. Of that amount, $1,700 was separately c. A program of the scheduled businessstated as meals and entertainment. Caroline, If the meeting meets these requirements, you activities of the meeting.who is self-employed, is not reimbursed for any also must satisfy the rules for deducting ex-
of her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de- penses for business trips in general, discussed 5. You attach to your return a written state-ductible travel expenses as follows. earlier under Travel Outside the United States. ment signed by an officer of the organiza-
tion or group sponsoring the meeting thatMeals and entertainment ...... $1,700 North American area. The North American includes:50% limit ................ × .50 area includes the following locations.Allowable meals & entertainment $  850 a. A schedule of the business activities ofOther travel expenses ....... +  2,200 American Samoa Johnston Island each day of the meeting, andAllowable cost before the daily limit .... $3,050 Antigua and Barbuda Kingman Reef
b. The number of hours you attended theBaker Island Marshall IslandsDaily limit for May 2006 ...... $5 5 2
Barbados MexicoTimes number of days ....... × 6 scheduled business activities.
Bermuda MicronesiaMaximum luxury water travel deduction $3,312
Canada Midway IslandsAmount of allowable deduction ..... $3,050 Costa Rica Northern Mariana
Dominica IslandsCaroline’s deduction for her cruise is limited to
Dominican Republic Palau$3,050, even though the limit on luxury water
Grenada Palmyratravel is higher. Guam Puerto Rico
Not separately stated. If your meal or en- Guyana Saint Lucia
Honduras Trinidad and Tobagotertainment charges are not separately stated or 2.
Howland Island USAare not clearly identifiable, you do not have to
Jamaica U.S. Virgin Islandsallocate any portion of the total charge to meals
Jarvis Island Wake Islandor entertainment.
Entertainment
The North American area also includes U.S.
Exceptions islands, cays, and reefs that are possessions of You may be able to deduct business-related
the United States and not part of the fifty states entertainment expenses you have for entertain-The daily limit on luxury water travel (discussed or the District of Columbia. ing a client, customer, or employee. The rulesearlier) does not apply to expenses you have to
and definitions are summarized in Table 2-1.attend a convention, seminar, or meeting on Reasonableness test. The following factors You can deduct entertainment expensesboard a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships  under are taken into account to determine if it was only if they are both ordinary and necessary andConventions Held Outside the North American reasonable to hold the meeting outside the meet one of the following tests.Area. North American area.
• Directly-related test.• The purpose of the meeting and the activi-Conventions • Associated test.ties taking place at the meeting.
You can deduct your travel expenses when you Both of these tests are explained later.• The purposes and activities of the spon-attend a convention if you can show that your soring organizations or groups. An ordinary expense is one that is commonattendance benefits your trade or business. You
and accepted in your field of trade, business, or• The homes of the active members of thecannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-
profession. A necessary expense is one that issponsoring organizations and the placesily.
helpful and appropriate for your business. Anat which other meetings of the sponsoringIf the convention is for investment, political,
expense does not have to be required to beorganizations or groups have been or willsocial, or other purposes unrelated to your trade
be held. considered necessary.or business, you cannot deduct the expenses.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2–1  When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible? • A meeting or discussion at a nightclub,
theater, or sporting event.
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, • A meeting or discussion during what iscustomer, or employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or
essentially a social gathering, such as athe associated test.
cocktail party.
Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide • A meeting with a group that includes per-entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes meals sons who are not business associates atprovided to a customer or client. places such as cocktail lounges, country• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacationfield of business, trade, or profession. resorts.• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate,
Tests to be met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, Associated Test
and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment Even if your expenses do not meet the di-
period, and rectly-related test, they may meet the associ-You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some ated test.other specific business benefit. To meet the associated test for entertain-
ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedAssociated test
meals), you must show that the entertainment is:• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Associated with the active conduct of your• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion. trade or business, and
• Directly before or after a substantial busi-Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment ness discussion (defined later).expense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the
circumstances. Associated with trade or business. Gener-
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed ally, an expense is associated with the active
entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit). conduct of your trade or business if you can
show that you had a clear business purpose for
having the expense. The purpose may be to get
new business or to encourage the continuationThe amount you can deduct for enter- You do not have to show that busi-
of an existing business relationship.tainment expenses may be limited. ness income or other business benefit
Generally, you can deduct only 50% of actually resulted from each entertain-
CAUTION
! TIP
Substantial business discussion. Whetheryour unreimbursed entertainment expenses. ment expense.
a business discussion is substantial depends onThis limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.
the facts of each case. A business discussionClear business setting. If the entertainment will not be considered substantial unless youtakes place in a clear business setting and is for can show that you actively engaged in the dis-your business or work, the expenses are consid- cussion, meeting, negotiation, or other business
ered directly related to your business or work.Directly-Related Test transaction to get income or some other specific
The following situations are examples of enter- business benefit.
To meet the directly-related test for entertain- tainment in a clear business setting. The meeting does not have to be for any
ment expenses (including entertainment-related specified length of time, but you must show that• Entertainment in a hospitality room at ameals), you must show that: the business discussion was substantial in rela-convention where business goodwill is
tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-• The main purpose of the combined busi- created through the display or discussion
sary that you devote more time to business thanness and entertainment was the active of business products. to entertainment. You do not have to discussconduct of business, • Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate business during the meal or entertainment.• You did engage in business with the per- on the sale of your products (such as a Meetings at conventions. You are consid-son during the entertainment period, and restaurant owner providing an occasional ered to have a substantial business discussion iffree meal to a loyal customer).• You had more than a general expectation you attend meetings at a convention or similar
of getting income or some other specific • Entertainment of a clear business nature event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-
business benefit at some future time. occurring under circumstances where sored and conducted by a business or profes-
there is no meaningful personal or social sional organization. However, your reason forBusiness is generally not considered to be the attending the convention or meeting must be torelationship between you and the personsmain purpose when business and entertainment further your trade or business. The organizationentertained. An example is entertainmentare combined on hunting or fishing trips, or on that sponsors the convention or meeting mustof business and civic leaders at the open-yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you show schedule a program of business activities that ising of a new hotel or play when the pur-that business was the main purpose, you gener- the main activity of the convention or meeting.pose is to get business publicity ratherally cannot deduct the expenses for the use of than to create or maintain the goodwill ofan entertainment facility. See Entertainment fa- Directly before or after business discussion.the persons entertained.cilities under What Entertainment Expenses Are If the entertainment is held on the same day as
Not Deductible? later in this chapter. the business discussion, it is considered to be
Expenses not considered directly related.You must consider all the facts, including the held directly before or after the business discus-
Entertainment expenses generally are not con-nature of the business transacted and the rea- sion.
sidered directly related if you are not there or insons for conducting business during the enter- If the entertainment and the business discus-
situations where there are substantial distrac-tainment. It is not necessary to devote more time sion are not held on the same day, you must
tions that generally prevent you from activelyto business than to entertainment. However, if consider the facts of each case to see if the
conducting business. The following are exam-the business discussion is only incidental to the associated test is met. Among the facts to con-
ples of situations where there are substantialentertainment, the entertainment expenses do sider are the place, date, and duration of the
distractions.not meet the directly-related test. business discussion. If you or your business
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Application of 50% limit. The 50% limit on
meal and entertainment expenses applies if the
expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal
and entertainment expenses that are not busi-
ness related. It applies to meal and entertain-
ment expenses you have for the production of
income, including rental or royalty income. It
also applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
have to determine the amount of meal and en-
tertainment expenses that would be deductible
under the other rules discussed in this publica-
tion.
Example 1. You spend $200 for a busi-
ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not
allowable because it is lavish and extravagant,
the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit.
Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (50% ×
$90).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $80 (50% × $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit. Your
meal or entertainment expense is not subject to
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
the 50% limit if the expense meets one of theassociates are from out of town, you must also Figure A summarizes the general rules following exceptions.consider the dates of arrival and departure, and explained in this section.
1 - Employee’s reimbursed expenses. Ifthe reasons the entertainment and the discus- The 50% limit applies to business meals or you are an employee, you are not subject to thesion did not take place on the same day. entertainment expenses you have while: 50% limit on expenses for which your employer
• Traveling away from home (whether eat- reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-Example. A group of business associates
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.ing alone or with others) on business,comes from out of town to your place of busi-
ness to hold a substantial business discussion. 2 - Self-employed. If you are• Entertaining customers at your place ofIf you entertain those business guests on the self-employed, your deductible meal and enter-business, a restaurant, or other location,evening before the business discussion, or on tainment expenses are not subject to the 50%orthe evening of the day following the business limit if all of the following requirements are met.
discussion, the entertainment generally is con- • Attending a business convention or recep-
• You have these expenses as an indepen-sidered to be held directly before or after the tion, business meeting, or business lunch- dent contractor.discussion. The expense meets the associated eon at a club.
test. • Your customer or client reimburses you or
gives you an allowance for these ex-Included expenses. Expenses subject to the penses in connection with services you50% limit include: perform.
• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal50% Limit • You provide adequate records of these ex-or entertainment activity, penses to your customer or client. (SeeIn general, you can deduct only 50% of your chapter 5.)• Cover charges for admission to a night-business-related meal and entertainment ex- club,penses. (If you are subject to the Department of In this case, your client or customer is subject• Rent paid for a room in which you hold aTransportation’s “hours of service” limits, you to the 50% limit on the expenses.
can deduct a higher percentage. See Individuals dinner or cocktail party, and
subject to “hours of service” limits, later.) Example. You are a self-employed attorney• Amounts paid for parking at a sportsThe 50% limit applies to employees or their who adequately accounts for meal and enter-arena.employers, and to self-employed persons (in- tainment expenses to a client who reimburses
However, the cost of transportation to and fromcluding independent contractors) or their clients, you for these expenses. You are not subject to
a business meal or a business-related entertain-depending on whether the expenses are reim- the directly-related or associated test, nor are
bursed. ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit. you subject to the 50% limit. If the client can
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct the expenses, the client is subject to the Entertainment. Entertainment includes any part of the expense for each person participat-
activity generally considered to provide enter- ing, allocate the expense to each participant on50% limit.
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples a pro rata basis.If you (the contractor) have expenses for
include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-meals and entertainment related to providing
Example. You entertain a group of individu-cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; atservices for a client but do not adequately ac-
als that includes yourself, three business pros-sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-count for and seek reimbursement from the cli- pects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of theing, vacation, and similar trips.ent for those expenses, you are subject to the expense qualifies as a business entertainmentEntertainment also may include meeting per-directly-related or associated test and to the expense. You cannot deduct the expenses forsonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such50% limit. the seven social guests because those costs areas providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to
3 - Advertising expenses. You are not sub- nonbusiness expenses.customers or their families.
ject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, enter- Trade association meetings. You can de-A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter-tainment, or recreational facilities to the general duct entertainment expenses that are directlytainment includes the cost of a meal you providepublic as a means of advertising or promoting related to and necessary for attending businessto a customer or client, whether the meal is agoodwill in the community. For example, neither meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-part of other entertainment or by itself. A mealthe expense of sponsoring a television or radio nizations if the expenses of your attendance areexpense includes the cost of food, beverages,show nor the expense of distributing free food related to your active trade or business. Thesetaxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-and beverages to the general public is subject to organizations include business leagues, cham-tainment-related meal, you or your employeethe 50% limit. bers of commerce, real estate boards, trademust be present when the food or beverages are
associations, and professional associations.provided.4 - Sale of meals or entertainment. You
are not subject to the 50% limit if you actually Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannotYou cannot claim the cost of your meal
sell meals, entertainment, goods and services, deduct more than the face value of an entertain-both as an entertainment expense and
or use of facilities to the public. For example, if ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. Foras a travel expense.CAUTION
!
you run a nightclub, your expense for the enter- example, you cannot deduct service fees you
tainment you furnish to your customers, such as Meals sold in the normal course of your pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
a floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit. business are not considered entertain- over the face value of the tickets you pay to
ment. scalpers.
TIP
5 - Charitable sports event. You are not
subject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package Exception for events that benefit charita-Deduction may depend on your type ofdeal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita- ble organizations. Different rules apply whenbusiness. Your kind of business may deter-ble sports event. For the conditions the sports the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits amine if a particular activity is considered enter-event must meet, see Exception for events that charitable organization. You can take into ac-tainment. For example, if you are a dress count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itbenefit charitable organizations under What En- designer and have a fashion show to introduce is more than the face value, if all of the followingtertainment Expenses Are Deductible?, later. your new designs to store buyers, the show conditions apply.generally is not considered entertainment. ThisIndividuals subject to “hours of service” lim- is because fashion shows are typical in your • The event’s main purpose is to benefit aits. You can deduct a higher percentage of business. But, if you are an appliance distributor qualified charitable organization.your meal expenses while traveling away from and hold a fashion show for the spouses of your • The entire net proceeds go to the charity.your tax home if the meals take place during or retailers, the show generally is considered en-
incident to any period subject to the Department tertainment. • The event uses volunteers to perform sub-
of Transportation’s “hours of service” limits. The stantially all the event’s work.
percentage is 75% for 2006. Separating costs. If you have one expense
that includes the costs of entertainment, andIndividuals subject to the Department of The 50% limit on entertainment doesother services (such as lodging or transporta-Transportation’s “hours of service” limits include not apply to any expense for a packagetion), you must allocate that expense betweenthe following persons. deal that includes a ticket to such a
TIP
the cost of entertainment and the cost of other• Certain air transportation workers (such as charitable sports event.services. You must have a reasonable basis forpilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and making this allocation. For example, you mustcontrol tower operators) who are under Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golfallocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-
Federal Aviation Administration regula- tournament organized by the local volunteer firetainment in its lounge on the same bill with your
tions. company. All net proceeds will be used to buyroom charge.
new fire equipment. The volunteers will run the• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers Taking turns paying for meals or entertain- tournament. You can deduct the entire cost ofwho are under Department of Transporta- ment. If a group of business acquaintances the tickets as a business expense if they other-tion regulations. take turns picking up each others’ meal or enter- wise qualify as an entertainment expense.
tainment checks without regard to whether any• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-
business purposes are served, no member of Example 2.  You purchase tickets to a col-neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-
the group can deduct any part of the expense. lege football game through a ticket broker. Afterers, and control operations personnel)
having a business discussion, you take a clientwho are under Federal Railroad Adminis- Lavish or extravagant expenses. You can- to the game. Net proceeds from the game go totration regulations. not deduct expenses for entertainment that are colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.
lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid-• Certain merchant mariners who are under However, since the colleges also pay individuals
ered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonableCoast Guard regulations. to perform services, such as coaching and
considering the facts and circumstances. Ex- recruiting, you can only use the face value of the
penses will not be disallowed just because they tickets in determining your business deduction.
are more than a fixed dollar amount or take
Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes. Ifplace at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs,
you rent a skybox or other private luxury box forWhat Entertainment or resorts.
more than one event at the same sports arena,
Allocating between business and nonbusi- you generally cannot deduct more than the priceExpenses
ness. If you entertain business and nonbusi- of a nonluxury box seat ticket.
Are Deductible? ness individuals at the same event, you must To determine whether a skybox has been
divide your entertainment expenses between rented for more than one event, count each
This section explains different types of entertain- business and nonbusiness. You can deduct only game or other performance as one event. For
ment expenses that you may be able to deduct. the business part. If you cannot establish the example, renting a skybox for a series of playoff
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
games is considered renting it for more than one • Hotel clubs, and
event. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,
• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-along with any rentals by related parties, are
3.cumstances generally considered to beconsidered in making this determination.
conducive to business discussions.Related parties include:
• Family members (spouses, ancestors, and
Entertainment facilities. Generally, you can- Giftslineal descendants),
not deduct any expense for the use of an enter-
• Parties who have made a reciprocal ar- tainment facility. This includes expenses for If you give gifts in the course of your trade orrangement involving the sharing of depreciation and operating costs such as rent, business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.skyboxes, This chapter explains the limits and rules forutilities, maintenance, and protection.
• Related corporations, deducting the costs of gifts.An entertainment facility is any property you
• A partnership and its principal partners, own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples
$25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25and include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, for business gifts you give directly or indirectly toswimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car,• A corporation and a partnership with com- each person during your tax year. A gift to aairplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in amon ownership. company that is intended for the eventual per-
vacation resort. sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a
limited class of people will be considered anExample. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seat Out-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct
indirect gift to that particular person or to theskybox at Team Stadium for three baseball out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and
individuals within that class of people who re-games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seats beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that ceive the gift.at each event is $30 a seat. You can deduct you provided during entertainment at a facility. If you give a gift to a member of a customer’s(subject to the 50% limit) $900 ((10 seats × $30 These are not expenses for the use of an enter- family, the gift is generally considered to be aneach) × 3 events). tainment facility. However, these expenses are indirect gift to the customer. This rule does notFood and beverages in skybox seats. If subject to the directly-related and associated apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-expenses for food and beverages are separately tests and to the 50% limit, all discussed earlier. ness connection with that family member andstated, you can deduct these expenses in addi- the gift is not intended for the customer’s even-tion to the amounts allowable for the skybox, tual use.Expenses for spouses. You generally cannotsubject to the requirements and limits that apply. If you and your spouse both give gifts, both ofdeduct the cost of entertainment for your spouseThe amounts separately stated for food and you are treated as one taxpayer. It does notor for the spouse of a customer. However, youbeverages must be reasonable. You cannot in- matter whether you have separate businesses,flate the charges for food and beverages to can deduct these costs if you can show that you are separately employed, or whether each ofavoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals. had a clear business purpose, rather than a you has an independent connection with the
personal or social purpose, for providing the recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
entertainment. ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
payer.
Example. You entertain a customer. TheWhat Entertainment
cost is an ordinary and necessary business ex- Example. Bob Jones sells products to Local
Expenses Are Not Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave Localpense and is allowed under the entertainment
Company three cheese packages to thank themrules. The customer’s spouse joins you because
Deductible? for their business. They paid $80 for each pack-it is impractical to entertain the customer without
age, or $240 total. Three of Local Company’sthe spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter-This section explains different types of entertain- executives took the packages home for theirtaining the customer’s spouse. If your spousement expenses that you generally may not be families’ use. Bob and Jan have no independentjoins the party because the customer’s spouseable to deduct. business relationship with any of the executives’is present, the cost of the entertainment for your other family members. They can deduct a total
spouse is also deductible. of $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the cheese packages.Club dues and membership fees. You can-
not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for
membership in any club organized for: Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such asGift or entertainment. Any item that might be
engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
• Business,
and mailing, are generally not included in deter-ally will be considered entertainment. However,• Pleasure, mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
limit.• Recreation, or ages that you intend the customer to use at a
A cost is incidental only if it does not addlater date, treat it as a gift.• Other social purpose. substantial value to the gift. For example, the
If you give a customer tickets to a theater cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-This rule applies to any membership organiza- performance or sporting event and you do not go ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket fortion if one of its principal purposes is either:
with the customer to the performance or event, packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the
• To conduct entertainment activities for value of the basket is substantial compared toyou have a choice. You can treat the tickets as
members or their guests, or the value of the fruit.either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to
• To provide members or their guests with your advantage.
access to entertainment facilities, dis- Exceptions. The following items are not con-You can change your treatment of the ticketscussed later. sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. at a later date by filing an amended return.
Generally, an amended return must be filed 1. An item that costs $4 or less and:The purposes and activities of a club, not its within 3 years from the date the original returnname, will determine whether or not you can a. Has your name clearly and permanentlywas filed or within 2 years from the time the taxdeduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid imprinted on the gift, andwas paid, whichever is later.to:
b. Is one of a number of identical itemsIf you go with the customer to the event, you• Country clubs, you widely distribute.must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
• Golf and athletic clubs, ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case, Examples include pens, desk sets, and
to treat the tickets as a gift.• Airline clubs, plastic bags and cases.
Chapter 3 Gifts Page 13

Page 14 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Getting from one workplace to another in
the course of your business or profession
when you are traveling within the city or
general area that is your tax home. Tax
home is defined in chapter 1.
• Visiting clients or customers.
• Going to a business meeting away from
your regular workplace.
• Getting from your home to a temporary
workplace when you have one or more
regular places of work. These temporary
workplaces can be either within the area
of your tax home or outside that area.
Transportation expenses do not include ex-
penses you have while traveling away from
home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-
penses which are discussed in chapter 1. How-
ever, if you use your car while traveling away
from home overnight, use the rules in this chap-
ter to figure your car expense deduction. See
Car Expenses, later.
Illustration of transportation expenses.
Figure B illustrates the rules that apply for de-
ducting transportation expenses when you have
a regular or main job away from your home. You
may want to refer to it when deciding whether
you can deduct your transportation expenses.
Temporary work location. If you have one or
more regular work locations away from your
home and you commute to a temporary work
location in the same trade or business, you can
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo-
rary unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
or if there is no realistic expectation that the
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never ded
ucti
ble
o nad a y
off from
regular or m
ainj o b
Deductibleif y
ouhavea
regularo
rm
ainjob
ata
notherl o
cation Always deductible
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home. )
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
If employment at a work location initially is
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional  If you go with the customer to the event, you realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-material to be used on the business prem- but at some later date the employment is realisti-
ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,ises of the recipient. cally expected to last more than 1 year, that
to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense. employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that
would indicate otherwise) until your expectationGift or entertainment. Any item that might be
changes. It will not be treated as temporary afterconsidered either a gift or entertainment gener-
the date you determine it will last more than 1ally will be considered entertainment. However,
year.if you give a customer packaged food or bever- If the temporary work location is beyond theages that you intend the customer to use at a general area of your regular place of work and4.later date, treat it as a gift. you stay overnight, you are traveling away from
home. You may have deductible travel ex-If you give a customer tickets to a theater
penses as discussed in chapter 1.performance or sporting event and you do not go
with the customer to the performance or event, No regular place of work. If you have noTransportation
you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain- metropolitan area where you live, you can de-This chapter discusses expenses you can de- duct daily transportation costs between homement expense, whichever is to your advantage. duct for business transportation when you are and a temporary work site outside that metropol-not traveling away from home as defined inYou can change your treatment of the tickets itan area.chapter 1. These expenses include the cost ofat a later date by filing an amended return. Generally, a metropolitan area includes thetransportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and theGenerally, an amended return must be filed area within the city limits and the suburbs thatcost of driving and maintaining your car.within 3 years from the date the original return are considered part of that metropolitan area.
was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax Transportation expenses include the ordi- You cannot deduct daily transportation costs
was paid, whichever is later. nary and necessary costs of all of the following. between your home and temporary work sites
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde- Advertising display on car. Putting display
ductible commuting expenses. material that advertises your business on your Car Expenses
car does not change the use of your car from
Two places of work. If you work at two places personal use to business use. If you use this car If you use your car for business purposes, youin one day, whether or not for the same em- for commuting or other personal uses, you still ordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener-ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting cannot deduct your expenses for those uses. ally can use one of the two following methods tofrom one workplace to the other. However, if for figure your deductible expenses.Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost ofsome personal reason you do not go directly
using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not • Standard mileage rate.from one location to the other, you cannot de-
include payments you receive from the passen-duct more than the amount it would have cost • Actual car expenses.gers in your income. These payments are con-you to go directly from the first location to the
sidered reimbursements of your expenses.second. If you use actual expenses to figure your de-However, if you operate a car pool for a profit,Transportation expenses you have in going duction for a car you lease, there are rules thatyou must include payments from passengers inbetween home and a part-time job on a day off affect the amount of your lease payments thatfrom your main job are commuting expenses. your income. You can then deduct your car you can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later.You cannot deduct them. expenses (using the rules in this publication). In this publication, “car” includes a van,
pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of “car”Hauling tools or instruments. HaulingArmed Forces reservists. A meeting of an for depreciation purposes, see Car definedtools or instruments in your car while commutingArmed Forces reserve unit is a second place of under Actual Car Expenses, later.to and from work does not make your car ex-business if the meeting is held on a day on which
penses deductible. However, you can deductyou work at your regular job. You can deduct the You may be entitled to a tax credit forany additional costs you have for hauling tools orexpense of getting from one workplace to the an electric vehicle, or an alternativeinstruments (such as for renting a trailer you towother as just discussed under Two places of motor vehicle that you place in service
TIP
with your car).work. during the year. The vehicle must meet certainYou usually cannot deduct the expense if the Union members’ trips from a union hall. If requirements, and you do not have to use it inreserve meeting is held on a day on which you you get your work assignments at a union hall your business to qualify for the credit. However,do not work at your regular job. In this case, your and then go to your place of work, the costs of you must reduce your basis for depreciation oftransportation generally is a nondeductible com- getting from the union hall to your place of work the electric vehicle or alternative motor vehiclemuting expense. However, you can deduct your by the amount of the credit you claim. See De-are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-transportation expenses if the location of the preciation Deduction, later, under Actual Carthough you need the union to get your workmeeting is temporary and you have one or more Expenses.assignments, you are employed where youregular places of work.  For more information on alternative motor vehi-work, not where the union hall is located.If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol- cles, see Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicleitan area but not at any specific location and the Credit. For more information on electric vehi-Office in the home. If you have an office inreserve meeting is held at a temporary location cles, see Form 8834, Qualified Electric Vehicleyour home that qualifies as a principal place ofoutside that metropolitan area, you can deduct Credit.business, you can deduct your daily transporta-your transportation expenses.
tion costs between your home and another workIf you travel away from home overnight to Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural maillocation in the same trade or business. (Seeattend a guard or reserve meeting, you can carrier, you may be able to treat the qualifiedPublication 587, Business Use of Your Home,deduct your travel expenses. These expenses reimbursement you received as your allowablefor information on determining if your home of-are discussed in chapter 1. expense. Because the qualified reimbursementfice qualifies as a principal place of business.)If you travel more than 100 miles away from is treated as paid under an accountable plan,
home in connection with your performance of your employer should not include the reimburse-Examples of deductible transportation. Theservices as a member of the reserves, you may ment in your income.following examples show when you can deductbe able to deduct some of your reserve-related If your vehicle expenses are more than the
transportation expenses based on the locationtravel costs as an adjustment to gross income amount of your reimbursement, you can deduct
of your work and your home.rather than as an itemized deduction. For more the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-
information, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav- duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You mustExample 1. You regularly work in an officeeling More Than 100 Miles From Home  under complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form
in the city where you live. Your employer sendsSpecial Rules, in chapter 6. 1040.
you to a one-week training session at a different A “qualified reimbursement” is the reim-Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct office in the same city. You travel directly from bursement you receive that meets both of thethe costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, your home to the training location and return following conditions.or of driving a car between your home and your each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily
• It is given as an equipment maintenancemain or regular place of work. These costs are round-trip transportation between your home
allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.personal commuting expenses. You cannot de- and the training location.
Postal Service.duct commuting expenses no matter how far
your home is from your regular place of work. Example 2. Your principal place of business • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if is in your home. You can deduct the cost of lective bargaining agreement. Any lateryou work during the commuting trip. round-trip transportation between your qualify- agreement cannot increase the qualified
ing home office and your client’s or customer’s reimbursement amount by more than theExample. You had a telephone installed in place of business. rate of inflation.your car. You sometimes use that telephone to
See your employer for information on your reim-make business calls while commuting to and Example 3. You have no regular office, and
bursement.from work. Sometimes business associates ride you do not have an office in your home. In this
with you to and from work, and you have a case, the location of your first business contact If you are a rural mail carrier and re-business discussion in the car. These activities is considered your office. Transportation ex- ceived a qualified reimbursement, youdo not change the trip from personal to busi- penses between your home and this first contact cannot use the standard mileage rate.ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex- CAUTION
!
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-penses. portation expenses between your last business
contact and your home are also nondeductibleParking fees. Fees you pay to park your car Standard Mileage Rate
commuting expenses. Although you cannot de-at your place of business are nondeductible
duct the costs of these trips, you can deduct thecommuting expenses. You can, however, de- You may be able to use the standard mileage
costs of going from one client or customer toduct business-related parking fees when visiting rate to figure the deductible costs of operating
another.a customer or client. your car for business purposes. For 2006, the
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
standard mileage rate for the cost of operating You are not using five or more cars for busi- fees that you pay to park your car at your place
your car for business use is 441/2 cents per mile. ness at the same time if you alternate using (use of work are nondeductible commuting ex-
at different times) the cars for business. penses.)If you use the standard mileage rate for The following examples illustrate the rulesa year, you cannot deduct your actual Sale, trade-in, or other disposition. If youfor when you can and cannot use the standardcar expenses for that year. You cannot sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car,CAUTION
!
mileage rate for five or more cars.deduct depreciation, lease payments, mainte- you may have a gain or loss on the transaction
nance and repairs, gasoline (including gasoline or an adjustment to the basis of your new car.Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, ownstaxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle registration See Disposition of a Car, later.three cars and two vans that she alternatesfees. See Choosing the standard mileage rate using for calling on her customers. She can useand Standard mileage rate not allowed, later. Actual Car Expensesthe standard mileage rate for the business mile-
You generally can use the standard mileage age of the three cars and the two vans because If you do not use the standard mileage rate, yourate whether or not you are reimbursed and she does not use them at the same time. may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.whether or not any reimbursement is more or
less than the amount figured using the standard Example 2. Tony and his employees use If you qualify to use both methods, youmileage rate. See chapter 6 for more information his four pickup trucks in his landscaping busi- may want to figure your deduction bothon reimbursements. ness. During the year, he traded in two of his old ways to see which gives you a larger
TIP
trucks for two newer ones. Tony can use the deduction.Choosing the standard mileage rate. If you standard mileage rate for the business mileage Actual car expenses include:want to use the standard mileage rate for a car of all six of the trucks he owned during the year.
you own, you must choose to use it in the first Depreciation Lease Registrationyear the car is available for use in your business. Example 3. Chris owns a repair shop and Licenses payments fees
Then in later years, you can choose to use either an insurance business. He and his employees Gas Insurance Repairs
the standard mileage rate or actual expenses. Oil Garage rent Tiresuse his two pickup trucks and van for the repair
If you want to use the standard mileage rate Tolls Parking feesshop. Chris alternates using his two cars for the
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire insurance business. No one else uses the cars If you have fully depreciated a car that youlease period. For leases that began on or before for business purposes. Chris can use the stan- still use in your business, you can continue toDecember 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate dard mileage rate for the business use of the claim your other actual car expenses. Continuemust be used for the entire portion of the lease pickup trucks, van, and the cars because he to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5.period (including renewals) that is after 1997. never has more than four vehicles used for busi-
Business and personal use. If you use yourYou must make the choice to use the stan- ness at the same time.
car for both business and personal purposes,dard mileage rate by the due date (including
you must divide your expenses between busi-extensions) of your return. You cannot revoke Example 4. Maureen owns a car and four
ness and personal use. You can divide yourthe choice. However, in later years, you can vans that are used in her housecleaning busi-
expense based on the miles driven for eachswitch from the standard mileage rate to the ness. Her employees use the vans and she uses
purpose.actual expenses method. If you change to the the car to travel to various customers. Maureen
actual expenses method in a later year, but cannot use the standard mileage rate for the car
Example. You are a sales representativebefore your car is fully depreciated, you have to or the vans. This is because all five vehicles are
for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000estimate the remaining useful life of the car and used in Maureen’s business at the same time.
miles during the year: 12,000 miles for businessuse straight line depreciation. She must use actual expenses for all vehicles.
and 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claimFor more information about depreciation in- Interest. If you are an employee, you cannot only 60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of oper-cluded in the standard mileage rate, see Excep- deduct any interest paid on a car loan. This ating your car as a business expense.tion under Methods of depreciation  under applies even if you use the car 100% for busi-Depreciation Deduction, later. Employer-provided vehicle. If you use a ve-ness as an employee.
hicle provided by your employer for businessHowever, if you are self-employed and useStandard mileage rate not allowed. You purposes, you can deduct your actual un-your car in your business, you can deduct thatcannot use the standard mileage rate if you: reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use thepart of the interest expense that represents your
• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi), standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided bybusiness use of the car. For example, if you use
Your Employer in chapter 6.your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60%• Use five or more cars at the same time (as
of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You Interest on car loans. If you are an employee,in fleet operations),
cannot deduct the rest of the interest expense. you cannot deduct any interest paid on a car• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the loan. This interest is treated as personal interestIf you use a home equity loan tocar using any method other than straight and is not deductible. If you are self-employedpurchase your car, you may be able toline, for example, MACRS (as discussed and use your car in that business, see Interest,deduct the interest. See Publication
TIP
later under Depreciation Deduction), earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate.936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, for
• Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis- more information. Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em-cussed later) on the car, ployee, you can deduct personal property taxesPersonal property taxes. If you itemize your paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter• Claimed the special depreciation allow- deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Formance on the car, deduct on line 7 state and local personal prop- 1040).erty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take this• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997
deduction even if you use the standard mileage Sales taxes. You cannot deduct sales taxesfor a car you leased, or
rate or if you do not use the car for business. on your car even if you use your car 100% for• Are a rural mail carrier who received a If you are self-employed and use your car in business. Sales taxes on your car are part ofqualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail your business, you can deduct the business part your car’s basis and are recovered through de-carriers under Car Expenses, earlier.) of state and local personal property taxes on preciation, discussed later.
motor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ,Five or more cars. If you own or lease five At the time this publication went toor Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize youror more cars that are used for business at the print, Congress was considering legis-deductions, you can include the remainder ofsame time, you cannot use the standard mile- lation that would extend the deductionCAUTION
!
your state and local personal property taxes onage rate for the business use of any car. How- for state and local general sales taxes (affectingthe car on Schedule A (Form 1040).ever, you may be able to deduct your actual basis) that expired at the end of 2005. To find
expenses for operating each of the cars in your Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using out if this legislation was enacted, and for more
business. See Actual Car Expenses,  later, for the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any details, go to www.irs.gov, click on More Forms
information on how to figure your deduction. business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parking and Publications , and then on What’s Hot in
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
forms and publications, or see Publication 553, Electric car. For purposes of depreciation, If the cost of your qualifying section 179
Highlights of 2006 Tax Changes. property placed in service in 2006 is overthe term “electric car” refers to passenger auto-
$430,000, you must reduce the $108,000 dollarmobiles designed to be propelled primarily by
limit (but not below zero) by the amount of costelectricity and built by an original equipmentFines and collateral. You cannot deduct fines
over $430,000. If the cost of your section 179manufacturer.you pay or collateral you forfeit for traffic viola-
property placed in service during 2006 istions. More information. See Depreciation De- $538,000 or more, you cannot take a sectionduction, later, for more information on how toCasualty and theft losses. If your car is dam- 179 deduction.depreciate your vehicle.aged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able to The total amount you can deduct under sec-
deduct part of the loss that is not covered by tion 179 each year after you apply the limits
insurance. See Publication 547, Casualties, Di- listed above cannot be more than the taxableSection 179 Deductionsasters, and Thefts, for information on deducting income from the active conduct of any trade or
a loss on your car. business during the year.The section 179 deduction allows you to treat
If you are married and file a joint return, youpart or all of the business cost of a car as aDepreciation and section 179 deductions. and your spouse are treated as one taxpayer incurrent expense rather than taking depreciationGenerally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and determining any reduction to the dollar limit,deductions over a number of years.improvements, is a capital expense. Because regardless of which of you purchased the prop-the benefits last longer than one year, you gen- The limit on total section 179 and de- erty or placed it in service.erally cannot deduct a capital expense. How- preciation deductions (discussed later) If you and your spouse file separate returns,ever, you can recover this cost through the may reduce or eliminate any benefit
TIP
you are treated as one taxpayer for the dollarsection 179 deduction (the deduction allowed by from claiming the section 179 deduction. limit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after anysection 179 of the Internal Revenue Code) and You can claim the section 179 deduction reduction) between you.depreciation deductions. Depreciation allows only in the year you place the car in service. For For more information on the above sectionyou to recover the cost over more than one year this purpose, a car is placed in service when it is 179 deduction limits, see Publication 946.by deducting part of it each year. The section ready and available for a specific use, whether in
179 deduction and the depreciation deduction Limit for sport utility and certain other ve-a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, a
are discussed later. hicles. For sport utility and certain other vehi-personal activity, or for the production of in-
Generally, there are limits on these deduc- cles placed in service in 2006, the portion of thecome. Even if you are not using the property, it is
tions. Special rules apply if you use your car vehicle’s cost taken into account in figuring yourin service when it is ready and available for its50% or less in your work or business. section 179 deduction is limited to $25,000. Thisspecific use.You can claim a section 179 deduction and rule applies to any 4-wheeled vehicle primarilyA car first used for personal purposes cannotuse a depreciation method other than straight designed or used to carry passengers over pub-qualify for the deduction in a later year when itsline only if you do not use the standard mileage lic streets, roads, or highways, that is not subjectuse changes to business.rate to figure your business-related car ex- to any of the passenger automobile limits ex-
penses in the year you first place a car in serv- plained under Depreciation Limits,  later, andExample. In 2005 you bought a new car andice. that is rated at no more than 14,000 poundsplaced it in service for personal purposes. ThisIf you claim either a section 179 deduction or gross vehicle weight. However, the $25,000 limityear, you began to use it for business. Changinguse a depreciation method other than straight does not apply to any vehicle:its use to business use does not qualify the costline in the year you first place a car in service, • Designed to have a seating capacity ofof your car for a section 179 deduction this year.you cannot use the standard mileage rate on more than nine persons behind theHowever, you can claim a depreciation deduc-that car in any future year. driver’s seat,tion for the business use of the car. See Depreci-
ation Deduction, later.Car defined. For depreciation purposes, a car • Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6
is any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck or feet in interior length that is an open areaMore than 50% business use requirement.van) that is made primarily for use on public or is designed for use as an open area butYou must use the property more than 50% forstreets, roads, and highways. Its unloaded gross is enclosed by a cap and is not readilybusiness to claim any section 179 deduction. Ifvehicle weight (gross vehicle weight in the case accessible directly from the passengeryou used the property more than 50% for busi-of a truck or van) must not be more than 6,000 compartment, orness, multiply the cost of the property by thepounds. A car includes any part, component, or • That has an integral enclosure, fully en-percentage of business use. The result is theother item that is physically attached to it or is closing the driver compartment and loadcost of the property that can qualify for the sec-usually included in the purchase price. carrying device, does not have seatingtion 179 deduction.A car does not include: rearward of the driver’s seat, and has no
• An ambulance, hearse, or combination body section protruding more than 30 in-Example. Peter purchased a car in April
ambulance-hearse used directly in a busi- ches ahead of the leading edge of the2006 for $19,500 and he used it 60% for busi-
ness, windshield.ness. The total cost of Peter’s car that qualifies
for the section 179 deduction is $11,700• A vehicle used directly in the business of Limit on total section 179 and depreciation($19,500 cost × 60% business use). But seetransporting persons or property for pay or deductions. Generally, the total amount ofLimit on total section 179 and depreciation de-hire, or section 179 and depreciation deductions thatductions, discussed later.• A truck or van that is a qualified nonper- you can claim for a qualified car that you placed
sonal use vehicle. in service in 2006 is $2,960. The limit is reducedLimits. There are limits on: if your business use of the car is less than 100%.
Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles. • The amount of the section 179 deduction, See Depreciation Limits, later, for more informa-
These are vehicles that by their nature are not tion.• The section 179 deduction for sport utilitylikely to be used more than a minimal amount for and certain other vehicles, andpersonal purposes. They include trucks and Example. In the earlier example under
vans that have been specially modified so that • The total amount of the section 179 de- More than 50% business use requirement, Peter
they are not likely to be used more than a mini- duction plus the depreciation deduction had a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes of
mal amount for personal purposes, such as by (discussed later) you can claim for a quali- the section 179 deduction) of $11,700. How-
installation of permanent shelving and painting fied property. ever, Peter’s total section 179 and depreciation
the vehicle to display advertising or the com- deduction is limited to $1,776 ($2,960 limit x
Limit on the amount of the section 179pany’s name. Delivery trucks with seating only 60% business use).
deduction. For 2006, the total amount youfor the driver, or only for the driver plus a folding
can choose to deduct under section 179 gener-jump seat are qualified nonpersonal use vehi- Cost of car. For purposes of the section 179
cles. ally cannot be more than $108,000. deduction, the cost of the car does not include
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any amount figured by reference to any other section 179 deduction and any allowable depre- car is placed in service. Dan reports  $2,960 as
property held by you at any time. For example, if ciation (unless you establish the amount actually depreciation for his car in 2 006. See Deprecia-
you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car to allowed). For information on the disposition of a tion Limits later.
use in your business, your cost for purposes of car, see Disposition of a Car, later. Claiming the GO Zone special depreci-the section 179 deduction does not include your ation allowance may result in a largeradjusted basis in the car you trade in for the new depreciation deduction in the year theCAUTION
!
Gulf Opportunity (GO) Zonecar. Your cost includes only the cash you paid. car is placed in service, but subsequent yearSpecial Depreciation AllowanceBasis of car for depreciation. The amount depreciation deductions may be smaller than if
of the section 179 deduction reduces your basis you had not claimed the GO Zone special depre-You may be able to claim the special deprecia-
in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc- ciation allowance.tion allowance for your car if it qualifies as Gulf
tion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc- Opportunity (GO) Zone property and was placed
tion from the cost of your car. The resulting in service in 2006. The allowance is an addi-
amount is the basis in your car that you use to Depreciation Deductiontional depreciation deduction of 50% of the car’s
figure your depreciation deduction. depreciable basis (after any section 179 deduc-
If you use actual car expenses to figure yourtion, but before figuring your regular deprecia-When to choose. If you want to take the sec- deduction for a car you own and use in yourtion deduction under MACRS). The GO Zonetion 179 deduction, you must make the choice in business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-special depreciation allowance applies only forthe tax year you both purchase the car and place tion: that is, you can deduct a certain amountthe first year the car is placed in service. Toit in service for business or work. each year as a recovery of your cost or otherqualify for the allowance more than 50% of the
basis in your car.use of the car must be in the active conduct ofHow to choose. Employees use Form 2106 to You generally need to know the followingyour trade or business.make this choice and report the section 179 things about the car you intend to depreciate.See Publication 4492, Information for Tax-deduction. All others use Form 4562. payers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and • Your basis in the car.File the appropriate form with either of the Wilma, for the definition of the GO Zone.following. • The date you place the car in service.Your combined section 179 deduction, GO
• Your original tax return filed for the year Zone special depreciation allowance, and regu- • The method of depreciation and recovery
the property was placed in service lar MACRS depreciation deduction is limited to period you will use.
(whether or not you file it timely). the maximum allowable depreciation deduction
for cars ($2,960), trucks and vans ($3,260), or• An amended return filed within the time Basis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-electric cars ($8,980). See Depreciation Limits,prescribed by law. An election made on an ation is generally its cost. This includes anylater in this chapter.amended return must specify the item of amount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-You can elect not to claim the GO Zonesection 179 property to which the election erty, or services.special depreciation allowance for your car. Ifapplies and the part of the cost of each Generally, you figure depreciation using youryou make this election for your car, it applies tosuch item to be taken into account. The basis. However, in some situations (such as useall property in the same class placed in serviceamended return must also include any re- of the straight line method) you will use yourduring the year.sulting adjustments to taxable income. adjusted basis (your basis reduced by deprecia-
tion allowed or allowable in earlier years). ForQualified GO Zone car. To be a qualified GO
one of these situations see Exception underZone car, the car must meet all of the followingYou must keep records that show the
Methods of depreciation, later.tests.specific identification of each piece of
If you change the use of a car from personalqualifying section 179 property. TheseCAUTION
!
• You purchased the car on or after August to business, your basis for depreciation is therecords must show how you acquired the prop- 28, 2005, but only if no binding written lesser of the fair market value or your adjustederty, the person you acquired it from, and when contract to acquire the car existed before basis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-you placed it in service. August 28, 2005, tional rules concerning basis are discussed later
in this chapter under Unadjusted basis.Revoking an election. An election (or any • You placed the car in service in your trade
specification made in the election) to take a or business in 2006, Placed in service. You generally place a carsection 179 deduction for 2006 can be revoked
• Substantially all of the use of the car is in in service when it is available for use in yourwithout IRS approval by filing an amended re-
the GO Zone, and work or business, in an income-producing activ-turn. The amended return must be filed within
ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation beginsthe time prescribed by law. The amended return • The original use of the car in the GO Zone when the car is placed in service for use in yourmust also include any resulting adjustment to began with you after August 28, 2005. work or business or for the production of income.taxable income. Once made, the revocation is Used cars can be qualified GO Zone prop- For purposes of computing depreciation, ifirrevocable. erty if not previously used within the GO you first start using the car only for personal useZone. Also, additional capital expendituresReduction in business use. To be eligible to and later convert it to business use, you placeyou incurred after August 25, 2005, to re-claim the section 179 deduction, you must use the car in service on the date of conversion.condition or rebuild your car meet the orig-your car more than 50% for business or work in inal use test if the original use of the car in Car placed in service and disposed of inthe year you acquired it. If your business use of the GO Zone began with you. the same year. If you place a car in servicethe car is 50% or less in a later tax year during and dispose of it in the same tax year, youthe recovery period, you have to recapture (in- cannot claim any depreciation deduction for thatExample. Dan purchased a new car forclude in income) in that later year any excess car.$13,500 in June 2006, and used it 100% in hisdepreciation. Any section 179 deduction
business. The car qualifies as GO Zone prop-claimed on the car is included in calculating the Methods of depreciation. Generally, you fig-erty. Dan’s unadjusted basis is $13,500. Danexcess depreciation. For information on this cal- ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-chooses not to claim any section 179 deductionculation, see Excess depreciation later in this celerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS).but he does choose to claim the GO Zone spe-chapter under Car Used 50% or Less for Busi- MACRS is discussed later in this chapter.cial depreciation allowance. Dan figures his spe-ness.
cial allowance as $6,750 ($13,500 x 50%) Exception. If you used the standard mile-
Dispositions. If you dispose of a car on which Dan chooses the MACRS 200% declining age rate in the first year of business use and
you had claimed the section 179 deduction, the balance method but does not need to figure his change to the actual expenses metho d in a later
amount of that deduction is treated as a depreci- regular depreciation deduction under MACRS year, you cannot depreciate your car  under the
ation deduction for recapture purposes. You (discussed later) because his special allowance MACRS rules. You must use straight li ne depre-
treat any gain on the disposition of the property ($6,750) exceeds the maximum depreciation ciation over the estimated remaining useful life
as ordinary income up to the amount of the deduction allowed ($2,960) for the first year the of the car.
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To figure depreciation under the straight line you figure the percentage of business use for for the year (plus any section 179 d eduction,
method, you must reduce your basis in the car the year as follows. special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-
(but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for all tion on any improvements) cannot be more than
1. Determine the percentage of business usemiles for which you used the standard mileage the depreciation limit that applies for that year.for the period following the change. Do thisrate. The rate per mile varies depending on the See Depreciation Limits, later.by dividing business miles by total milesyear(s) you used the standard mileage rate. For
driven during that period.the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustment Car trade-in. If you traded one car (the “old
when you used the standard mileage rate under car”) in on another car (the “new car”) in 2006,2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction.
Disposition of a Car, later. The numerator (top number) is the number there are two ways you can treat the transaction.
This reduction of basis is in addition to those of months the car is used for business and
1. You can elect to treat the transaction as abasis adjustments described later under Unad- the denominator (bottom number) is 12.
tax-free disposition of the old car and thejusted basis. You must use your adjusted basis
purchase of the new car. If you make thisin your car to figure your depreciation deduction. Example. You use a car only for personalFor additional information on the straight line election, you treat the old car as disposedpurposes during the first 6 months of the year.method of depreciation, see Publication 946. of at the time of the trade-in. The deprecia-During the last 6 months of the year, you drive ble basis of the new car is the adjustedthe car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000More-than-50%-use test. Generally, you basis of the old car (figured as if 100% ofmiles are for business. This gives you a busi-must use your car more than 50% for qualified the car’s use had been for business pur-ness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000)business use (defined next) during the year to poses) plus any additional amount youfor that period. Your business use for the year isuse MACRS. You must meet this paid for the new car. You then figure your40% (80% × 6/12).more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov- depreciation deduction for the new car be-
ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car. ginning with the date you placed it in serv-Limits. The amount you can claim for section
If your business use is 50% or less, you must ice. You make this election by completing179 and depreciation deductions may be limited.
use the straight line method to depreciate your Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This methodThe maximum amount you can claim depends
car. This is explained later under Car Used 50% on the year in which you placed your car in is explained later, beginning at Effect of
or Less for Business. service. You have to reduce the maximum trade-in on basis.
amount if you did not use the car exclusively for 2. If you do not make the election describedQualified business use. A qualified business business. See Depreciation Limits, later. in (1), you must figure depreciation sepa-use is any use in your trade or business. It does
Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted rately for the remaining basis of the old carnot include use for the production of income
basis (often referred to as your basis or your and for any additional amount you paid for(investment use). However, you do combine
basis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia-your business and investment use to compute the new car. You must apply two deprecia-
tion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex-your depreciation deduction for the tax year. tion limits (see Depreciation Limits, later).
plained later under Modified Accelerated Cost The limit that applies to the remaining ba-Use of your car by another person. Do not Recovery System (MACRS). Your unadjusted sis of the old car generally is the amounttreat any use of your car by another person as basis for figuring depreciation is your original that would have been allowed had you notuse in your trade or business unless that use basis increased or decreased by certain traded in the old car. The limit that appliesmeets one of the following conditions. amounts. to the additional amount you paid for the
To figure your unadjusted basis, begin with• It is directly connected with your business. new car generally is the limit that applies
your car’s original basis, which generally is its for the tax year, reduced by the deprecia-• It is properly reported by you as income to cost. Cost includes sales taxes (see Sales taxes tion allowance for the remaining basis ofthe other person (and, if you have to, you earlier), destination charges, and dealer prepa- the old car. You must use Form 4562, De-withhold tax on the income). ration. Increase your basis by any substantial preciation and Amortization, to compute
improvements you make to your car, such as• It results in a payment of fair market rent. your depreciation deduction. You cannot
adding air conditioning or a new engine. De-This includes any payment to you for the use Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This
crease your basis by any deductible casualtyuse of your car. method is explained in Publication 946.loss, section 179 deduction, special deprecia-
If you elect to use the method described intion allowance, diesel fuel tax credit, gas guzzlerBusiness use changes. If you used your car (1), you must do so on a timely filed tax returntax, clean fuel vehicle deduction, alternative mo-more than 50% in qualified business use in the (including extensions). Otherwise, you must usetor vehicle credit, and qualified electric vehicleyear you placed it in service, but 50% or less in a the method described in (2).credit.later year (including the year of disposition), you See Form 8910 for information on the alter- Effect of trade-in on basis. The discussionhave to change to the straight line method of native motor vehicle credit and Form 8834 for that follows applies to trade-ins of cars in 2006,depreciation. See Qualified business use 50% information on the qualified electric vehicle where the election was made to treat the trans-or less in a later year under Car Used 50% or credit. action as a tax-free disposition of the old car andLess for Business, later.
the purchase of the new car. For information onIf your business use later falls to 50%Property does not cease to be used or less, you may have to recapture how to figure depreciation for cars involved in amore than 50% in qualified business (include in your income) any excess like-kind exchange (trade-in) in 2006, for whichCAUTION
!
use by reason of a transfer at death.
TIP
depreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for the election was not made, see Publication 946
Business, later, for more information. and Temporary Regulations section
Use for more than one purpose. If you use 1.168(i)-6T(d)(3).If you acquired the car by gift or inheritance,your car for more than one purpose during the see Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor- Traded car used only for business. If youtax year, you must allocate the use to the vari- mation on your basis in the car. trade in a car that you used only in your businessous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile-
for another car that will be used only in yourImprovements. A major improvement to aage. Figure the percentage of qualified business
business, your original basis in the new car iscar is treated as a new item of 5-year recoveryuse by dividing the number of miles you drive
your adjusted basis in the old car, plus anyproperty. It is treated as placed in service in theyour car for business purposes during the year
additional amount you pay for the new car.year the improvement is made. It does not mat-by the total number of miles you drive the car
ter how old the car is when the improvement isduring the year for any purpose.
Example 1. Paul trades in a car that has anadded. Follow the same steps for depreciating
adjusted basis of $5,000 for a new car. In addi-Change from personal to business use. If the improvement as you would for depreciating
tion, he pays cash of $20,000 for the new car.you change the use of a car from 100% personal the original cost of the car. However, you must
His original basis of the new car is $25,000 (hisuse to business use during the tax year, you treat the improvement and the car as a whole
$5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus themay not have mileage records for the time when applying the limits on the depreciation
before the change to business use. In this case, deductions. Your car’s depreciation deduction $20,000 cash paid). Paul’s unadjus ted basis is
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$25,000 unless he claims the section 179 de- use of the car had been business and in- On January 3, 2006, Rob traded in this car
duction, or has other increases or decreases to vestment use, over and paid an additional $10,000 for his new car.
his original basis, discussed under Unadjusted Rob figures the unadjusted basis for his new car2. The total of the amounts actually allowablebasis, earlier. as shown next.as depreciation during those years.
Cost of old car $21,000Example 2. In October 2003, Marcia pur- For information about figuring depreciation, see
Less: Total depreciation allowed:chased a car for $26,000 and placed it in service Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System
2005 — 14,400 mi. × .17 $2,448for 100% use in her business. Marcia did not (MACRS), which follows Example 2, later.
2004 — 12,000 mi. × .16 1,920claim a section 179 deduction but she did claim 2003 — 9,600 mi. × .16 1,536 − 5,904Example 1. In March, Mark traded his 2002the special depreciation allowance. Marcia’s un- Adjusted basis of old carvan (placed in service in June 2002) for a newadjusted basis for the car was $15,290 ($26,000 before trade-in adjustment $15,0962006 model. He used the old van 75% for busi-− $10,710 (50% special depreciation allowance,
ness and he used the new van 75% for businessup to the maximum amount allowed)). For 2003 Trade-in adjustment:
in 2006. Mark claimed actual expenses (includ-through 2005, Marcia figured her depreciation Depreciation at 100% business use:
ing $12,756 depreciation expense) for the busi-deduction using the MACRS depreciation chart 2005 — 18,000 mi. × .17 $3,060
2004 — 16,000 mi. × .16 2,560ness use of the old van since 2002. He did notfor those years.
2003 — 15,000 mi. × .16 2,400claim a section 179 deduction for the old or theIn September 2006, Marcia traded that car in Total $8,020new van.and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be used Less: Actual depreciation
Mark paid $19,500 for the 2002 van in June allowed − 5,904100% in her business. Marcia is allowed
2002. He paid an additional $12,500 when he Excess of 100% over actual $2,116one-half of the MACRS depreciation amount
acquired the 2006 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 offigured for 2006 for her old car. (See Disposition Less: Lesser of excess amount
the depreciation deduction amount (which is in-of a Car, later.) ($2,116) or adjusted basis
cluded in the $12,756 depreciation expense to- of old car ($15,096) − 2,116
Marcia figures her basis in the new car as tal) for his old van for 2006, the year of
follows. Unadjusted basis of part of new cardisposition, as explained later under Disposition
that can be treated as newlyof a Car. Mark does not claim the special depre-Cost of old car $26,000 purchased MACRS property $12,980ciation allowance.Less total depreciation allowed:
2006 — ($15,290 × .1152) × 1/2 Mark figures the unadjusted basis for depre- Additional basis (cash paid) for new
(Limit: $1,775) $ 881 ciating his new van as shown next. car that is treated as newly
2005 — ($15,290 × .192) purchased MACRS property  $10,000
(Limit: $2,950) 2,936 Cost of old van $19,500
2004 — ($15,290 × .32) Less: Total depreciation allowed on
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System(Limit: $4,900) 4,893 the business cost of old van
2003 — ($26,000 × .50)1 (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-from 2002 – 2006 −12,756
($15,290 × .20) Adjusted basis of old van before covery System (MACRS) is the name given to
(Limit: $10,710) 10,710 trade-in adjustment $ 6,744 the tax rules for getting back (recovering)Total depreciation allowed – 19,420 through depreciation deductions the cost ofTrade-in adjustment: property used in a trade or business or to pro-Adjusted basis of old car and basis of Depreciation at 100% business use: duce income.part of new car that can be treated as 2006 — ($13,650 × .1152) × 1/2
newly purchased MACRS property $ 6,580 The maximum amount you can deduct is(Limit: $1,775) $  786
2005 — (13,650 × .1152) limited, depending on the year you placed your
Additional basis (cash paid) for new (Limit: $1,775) 1,572 car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.car that is treated as newly purchased 2004 — (13,650 × .192)
MACRS property +14,200 Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are(Limit: $2,950) 2,621
2003 — (13,650 × .32) classified as 5-year property. You actually de-
Total basis of new car $20,780 (Limit: $4,900) 4,368 preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a
2002 — (19,500 × .30)1
period of 6 calendar years. This is because your1 50% special depreciation allowance ($26,000 × 50% = ($13,650 x .20) car is generally treated as placed in service in$13,000). Unadjusted basis of the car: ($26,000 − (Limit: $7,660) 7,660$10,710 = $15,290). Regular depreciation: ($15,290 × the middle of the year and you claim deprecia-Total $17,007.20 = $3,058). Total depreciation ($13,000 + $3,058 = tion for one-half of both the first year and theLess: Actual depreciation$16,058) cannot exceed first year limit ($10,710).
sixth year.allowed −12,756
Excess of 100% over actual $ 4,251Traded car used partly in business. If you At the time this publication went to
trade in a car that you used partly in your busi- Less: Lesser of excess amount print, Congress was considering legis-
($4,251) or adjusted basisness for a new car that you will use in your lation that would extend the provisionCAUTION
!
of old van ($6,744) − 4,251business, you must make a “trade-in” adjust- for faster recovery periods for certain Indian
ment for the personal use of the old car. This reservation property that expired at the end ofUnadjusted basis of part of new vanadjustment has the effect of reducing your basis 2005. To find out if this legislation was enacted,that can be treated as newlyin your old car, but not below zero, for purposes and for more details, go to www.irs.gov, click onpurchased MACRS property $ 2,493of figuring your depreciation deduction for the More Forms and Publications , and then on
new car. (This adjustment is not used, however, Additional basis (cash paid) for new What’s Hot in forms and publications , or see
when you determine the gain or loss on the later van that is treated as newly Publication 553, Highlights of 2006 Taxdisposition of the new car. See Publication 544, purchased MACRS property $12,500 Changes.Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets, for in-
formation on how to report the disposition of Depreciation methods. You can use one
your car.) of the following methods to depreciate your car.Example 2. Rob paid $21,000 for a new car
that he placed in service in 2003. He used itTo figure the unadjusted basis of your new • The 200% declining balance method
partly for business in 2003 (9,600 businesscar for depreciation, first add to your adjusted (200% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodmiles of 15,000 total miles), 2004 (12,000 busi-basis in the old car any additional amount you that switches to the straight line methodness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 2005pay for the new car. Then subtract from that total when that method provides an equal or(14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used thethe excess, if any, of: greater deduction.standard mileage rate in those years to claim the
• The 150% declining balance method1. The total of the amounts that would have business use of his car. (See Depreciation ad-
(150% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodbeen allowable as depreciation during the justment when you used the standard mileage
that switches to the straight line methodtax years before the trade if 100% of the rate under Disposition of a Car, later.)
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Maximumwhen that method provides an equal or In future years, do not use the chart in
Depreciation Deductionthis edition of the publication. Instead,greater deduction.
for Carsuse the chart in the publication or the
TIP
• The straight line method (SL) over a form instructions for those future years.5-year recovery period. Date 4th &
Placed 1st 2nd 3rd LaterDisposition of car during recovery period.
In Service Year Year Year YearsIf you dispose of the car before the end of theIf you use Table 4-1 (discussed later recovery period, you are generally allowed a half 2006 $ 2,960 $4,800 $2,850 $1,775under MACRS depreciation chart ) to year of depreciation in the year of dispositiondetermine your depreciation rate for 2005 2,960 4,700 2,850 1,675
TIP
unless you purchased the car during the last2006, you do not need to determine in what year 2004 10,610 1 4,800 2,850 1,675quarter of a year. See Depreciation deductionusing the straight line method provides an equal for the year of disposition under Disposition of a 5/06/2003 – 10,710 2 4,900 2,950 1,775or greater deduction. This is because the chart
12/31/2003Car, later, for information on how to figure thehas the switch to the straight line method built depreciation allowed in the year of disposition. 1/01/2003 – 7,660 3 4,900 2,950 1,775into its rates.
5/05/2003How to use the 2006 chart. To figure yourBefore choosing a method, you may wish to
depreciation deduction for 2006, find the per- 2001 – 2002 7,660 3 4,900 2,950 1,775consider the following facts.
centage in the column of the chart based on the 2000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775• Using the straight line method provides date that you first placed the car in service andequal yearly deductions throughout the re- 1999 3,060 5,000 2,950 1,775the depreciation method that you are using. Mul-covery period. tiply the unadjusted basis of your car (defined 1998 3,160 5,000 2,950 1,775
earlier) by that percentage to determine the• Using the declining balance methods pro- 1997 3,160 5,000 3,050 1,775amount of your depreciation deduction. If youvides greater deductions during the earlier
1995 – 1996 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775prefer to figure your depreciation deduction with-recovery years with the deductions gener-
out the help of the chart, see Publication 946. 1$2,960 if the car is not qualified property or if you electally getting smaller each year.
not to claim the special depreciation allowance.
Your deduction cannot be more than
2$7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $3,060 ifthe maximum depreciation limit forMACRS depreciation chart. A 2006 MACRS the car is not qualified property or if you elect not to
cars. See Depreciation Limits, later.Depreciation Chart and instructions are included claim any special depreciation allowance.
CAUTION
!
in this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this table will 3$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the car
make it easy for you to figure the 2006 deprecia- is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim theExample. Phil bought a used truck in Febru-
special depreciation allowance.tion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap- ary 2005 to use exclusively in his landscapepears in the Instructions for Form 2106. business. He paid $9,200 for the truck with no Trucks and vans. For 2006, the maximumtrade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de-You may have to use the tables in depreciation deductions for trucks and vans andduction, the truck did not qualify for any specialPublication 946 instead of using this passenger vehicles such as minivans and sportdepreciation allowance, and he chose to use theMACRS Depreciation Chart.CAUTION
!
utility vehicles that are built on a truck chassis200% DB method to get the largest depreciation are generally higher than those for cars. ForYou must use the Depreciation Tables  in deduction in the early years. trucks and vans placed in service before 2003,Publication 946 rather than the 2006 MACRS Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart in use the Maximum Depreciation Deduction forDepreciation Chart in this publication if any one 2005 to find his percentage. The unadjusted Cars table.of the following three conditions applies to you. basis of his truck equals its cost because Phil
Maximumused it exclusively for business. He multiplied1. You file your return on a fiscal year basis. Depreciation Deductionthe unadjusted basis of his truck, $9,200, by the
for Trucks and Vans2. You file your return for a short tax year percentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2005
(less than 12 months). depreciation deduction of $1,840. Date 4th &In 2006, Phil used the truck for personal3. During the year, all of the following condi-  Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Laterpurposes when he repaired his father’s cabin. In Service Year Year Year Yearstions apply. His records show that the business use of his
2005 – 2006 $ 3,260 $5,200 $3,150 $1,875truck was 90% in 2006. Phil used Table 4-1 toa. You placed some property in service
find his percentage. Reading down the first col- 2004 10,910 1 5,300 3,150 1,875from January through September.
umn for the date placed in service and across to 2003 11,010 2,3 5,400 3,250 1,975b. You placed some property in service the 200% DB column, he locates his percent-from October through December. 1If the special depreciation allowance does not apply orage, 32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of you make the election not to claim the special
his truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost × 90% businessc. Your basis in the property you placed in depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,260.
use), by 32% to figure his 2006 depreciationservice from October through Decem- 2If the special depreciation allowance does not apply or
deduction of $2,650.ber (excluding nonresidential real prop- you make the election not to claim the special
depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,360.erty, residential rental property, and
property placed in service and disposed 3If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/03, the truck
Depreciation Limits or van is qualified property, and you claim the specialof in the same year) was more than
depreciation allowance for the truck or van, the40% of your total bases in all property
maximum deduction is $7,960.There are limits on the amount you can deductyou placed in service during the year. for depreciation of your car, truck or van, or
Exceptions for clean-fuel cars. There areelectric car. The section 179 deduction is treated
Depreciation in future years. If you use two exceptions to the depreciation limits foras depreciation for purposes of the limits. The
the percentages from the chart, you generally cars. They are effective after August 5, 1997, formaximum amount you can deduct each year
must continue to use them for the entire recov- cars that run on clean fuel. The exceptions fol-depends on the year you place the car in serv-
ery period of your car. However, you cannot low.ice. These limits are shown in the following ta-
continue to use the chart if your basis in your car bles. • Amounts you pay for retrofit parts andis adjusted because of a casualty. In that case, components to modify a car to run onfor the year of the adjustment and the remaining clean fuel are not subject to the deprecia-recovery period, figure the depreciation without tion limit on cars. Only the cost of the carthe chart using your adjusted basis in the car at before modification is subject to the limit.the end of the year of the adjustment and over
the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the • If you place a car in service after August 5,
Deduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 4 1997, that was produced to run on elec-
of Publication 946. tricity, your depreciation limit is increased.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4-1.
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below
to find the depreciation method and percentage to use for your
2005 return. If your car was placed in service before 1987, see
the depreciation chart in the Form 2106 instructions.
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the
car in service. Then select the depreciation method and
percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2006, you must use the same
method you used on last year’s return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line
method. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business. )
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in
the chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for
2006. (Also see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the
same year, you may have to use the Jan. 1—Sept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1—Dec. 31 percentage for your car.
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of t hat year
and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in  service
after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the enti re
year, use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of
Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2006 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2006, both used 100% in
your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30, 2006, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the
$20,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in
service during the year (40% /H11003 ($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
Date Placed In Service 200% Declining
Balance (200% DB)1
150% Declining
Balance (150% DB)
1
Straight Line
(SL)
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2006
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2006
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2005
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2005
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2004
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2004
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2003
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2003
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2002
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2002
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2001
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2001
Prior to 2001
200 DB 5.0%
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
20.0
38.0
32.0
22.8
19.2
13.68
11.52
10.94
11.52
9.58
5.76
150 DB 3.75%
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
15.0
28.88
25.5
20.21
17.85
16.4
16.66
16.41
16.66
14.35
8.33
SL 2.5%
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
10.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
17.5
10.0
(b)(a) (c)
You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to c laim depreciation. See
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
2006 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2006.)
If you made the election under Notice 2001-70 to use the higher percentage rate for vehicles placed in service January 1 throug h September 30, 2001,
use the percentage rate shown for vehicles placed in service January 1 through September 30, 2001.
2
CAUTION
3
1
2
3
The amounts are shown in the following 3$9,180 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect1/01/2003 – 22,880 3 14,600 8,750 5,225
table. not to claim the special depreciation allowance.5/05/2003
4$9,280 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the car2002 22,980 3 14,700 8,750 5,325Maximum is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim the
Depreciation Deduction for special depreciation allowance.2001 23,080 4 14,800 8,850 5,325
Electric Cars Placed in Service 2000 9,280 14,800 8,850 5,325After August 5, 1997 The examples throughout this chapter1999 9,280 14,900 8,950 5,325
illustrate gas-fueled cars.Date 4th & 1998 9,380 15,000 8,950 5,425 Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later CAUTION
!
In Service Year Year Year Years 1997 9,480 15,100 9,050 5,425
Car used less than full year. The deprecia-1$8,880 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect2006 $ 8,980 $14,400 $8,650 $5,225
tion limits are not reduced if you use a car fornot to claim the special depreciation allowance.
2005 8,880 14,200 8,450 5,125 less than a full year. This means that you do not2$22,880 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $9,080 if
reduce the limit when you either place a car in2004 31,830 1 14,300 8,550 5,125 the car is not qualified property or if you elect not to
claim any special depreciation allowance. service or dispose of a car during the year.5/06/2003 – 32,030 2 14,600 8,750  5,225
However, the depreciation limits are reduced if12/31/2003
you do not use the car exclusively for business
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and investment purposes. See Reduction for the maximum $108,000 amount) multiplied by Bob continued to use the car 100% for busi-
personal use, later. his business use ($10,000 × 80%). ness in 2006. He can claim a depreciation de-
Jack then figures that his section 179 deduc- duction of $1,775 (the maximum allowed for
Example. Marie purchased a car in June tion for 2006 is limited to $2,368 (80% of each subsequent year) for the year. If he contin-
2006 for $20,000 to use exclusively in her busi- $2,960). He then has an unadjusted basis of ues to use the car 100% for business in 2007
ness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc- $5,632 (($10,000 × 80%) − $2,368) for determin- and later years, Bob can deduct the lesser of
tion and she chooses the 200% DB method of ing his depreciation deduction. Since he has $1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis in
depreciation. already reached the maximum limit for 2006, each of those years until his deductions total the
Marie’s MACRS depreciation (using the rate Jack will use the unadjusted basis to figure his $13,490 unrecovered basis ($15,265 − $1,775
from Table 4-1) is $4,000 ($20,000 × 20%). depreciation deduction for 2007. claimed in 2006).
However, the maximum amount she can deduct If Bob’s business use of the car was less
Deductions in years after the recovery pe-for depreciation is $2,960. (See the Maximum than 100% during any year, his depreciation
riod. If the depreciation limits apply to yourDepreciation Deduction for Cars table earlier.) deduction would be less than the maximum
car, you may have unrecovered basis in your car amount allowable for that year. However, in de-
at the end of the recovery period. If you continueReduction for personal use. The deprecia- termining his unrecovered basis in the car, he
to use your car for business, you can deduct thattion limits are reduced based on your percent- would still reduce his original basis by the maxi-
unrecovered basis (subject to depreciation lim-age of personal use. If you use a car less than mum amount allowable. Bob’s unrecovered ba-
its) after the recovery period ends.100% in your business or work, you must deter- sis at the beginning of 2006 would be $15,265
mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi- ($31,500 – $16,235) in this example. This isUnrecovered basis. This is your cost orplying the limit amount by the percentage of true even if his actual depreciation deduction forother basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuelbusiness and investment use during the tax any year was less than the maximum amountvehicle deduction, alternative motor vehicleyear. shown.credit, electric vehicle credit, and depreciation
and section 179 deductions that would haveExample. In April 2006, Karl, an outside been allowable if you had used the car 100% fordental supply salesman, purchased a new car Car Used 50% or Lessbusiness and investment use.for $25,400 to make sales calls in a territory that for BusinessThe recovery period. For 5-year property,extends 200 miles around his home base. He
your recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part If you use your car 50% or less for qualifieduses his car 85% for his business. Karl does not
year’s depreciation is allowed in the first calen- business use (defined earlier under Deprecia-claim the section 179 deduction and he chooses
dar year, a full year’s depreciation is allowed in tion Deduction ) either in the year the car isthe 200% DB method to figure his depreciation
each of the next 4 calendar years, and a part placed in service or in a later year, special rulesdeduction.
year’s depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen- apply. The rules that apply in these two situa-In 2006, Karl figures his MACRS deprecia-
dar year. tions are explained in the following paragraphs.tion deduction to be $4,318 (($25,400 x 85%) x
Under MACRS, your recovery period is the (For this purpose, “car” was defined earlier20%). However, Karl’s deduction is limited to
same whether you use declining balance or under Actual Car Expenses and includes certain$2,516. This is the depreciation limit ($2,960)
straight line depreciation. You determine your trucks and vans and electric cars.)multiplied by the business use percentage
unrecovered basis in the 7th year after you(85%).
Qualified business use 50% or less in yearplaced the car in service.Karl continues to use his car 85% for busi-
placed in service. If you use your car 50% orness. Depreciation in the next four years contin- How to treat unrecovered basis. If you less for qualified business use (defined earlierues to be subject to deduction limits. Karl figures continue to use your car for business after the under Depreciation Deduction) in the year thehis depreciation limits for those years as follows. recovery period, you can claim a depreciation car is placed in service, the following rules apply.deduction in each succeeding tax year until youYear Limit x Business Use Depreciation • You cannot take the section 179 deduc-recover your full basis in the car. The maximum
2007 $4,800 × 85% $4,080 tion.amount you can deduct each year is determined
2008 2,850 × 85% 2,423 by the date you placed the car in service and • You must figure depreciation using the2009, 2010 1,775 × 85% 1,509 your business-use percentage. For example, no straight line method over a 5-year recov-deduction is allowed for a year you use your carIn 2011, using the rate from Table 4-1, Karl’s ery period. You must continue to use the100% for personal purposes.MACRS deduction is $1,244 (($25,400 × 85%) × straight line method even if your percent-5.76%). Since that amount is less than the de- age of business use increases to moreExample. In May 2000, Bob bought andpreciation limit of $1,509 ($1,775 × 85%), Karl’s than 50% in a later year.placed in service a car that he used exclusivelydepreciation deduction for 2011 is $1,244.
in his business. The car cost $31,500. Bob didIf Karl continues to use his car for business Instead of making the computation yourself,not claim a section 179 deduction for the car. Heafter 2011, he can continue to claim a deprecia- you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find thecontinued to use the car 100% in his businesstion deduction for his unrecovered basis. How- percentage to use.throughout the recovery period (2000 throughever, he cannot deduct more than $1,775
2005). For those years, Bob used Table 4-1 andmultiplied by his business use percentage. See Example. On May 22, 2006, Dan bought athe Maximum Depreciation Deduction for CarsDeductions in years after the recovery period, car for $17,500. He used it 40% for his consult-table (as explained earlier) to compute his de-later. ing business. Because he did not use the carpreciation deductions as shown in the following more than 50% for business, Dan cannot takeSection 179 deduction. The section 179 de- table. any section 179 deduction and he must use theduction is treated as a depreciation deduction. If straight line method over a 5-year recovery pe-MACRS MACRS Maximum Deprec.you place a car that is not a truck, van, or electric riod to recover the cost of his car.Year % Amount Deduction Allowedvehicle in service in 2006, use it only for busi- Dan deducts $700 in 2006. This is the lesserness, and choose the section 179 deduction, the 2000 20.00 $ 6,300 $ 3,060 $ 3,060 of:2001 32.00 10,080 4,900 4,900combined section 179 and depreciation deduc-
2002 19.20 6,048 2,950 2,950tion for that car for 2006 is limited to $2,960. 1. $700 (($17,500 cost × 40% business use)
2003 11.52 3,629 1,775 1,775 × 10% recovery percentage (from column2004 11.52 3,629 1,775 1,775Example. On September 4, 2006, Jack (c), Table 4-1)), or2005 5.76 1,814 1,775 1,775bought a used car for $10,000 and placed it in Total $31,500 $16,235 $16,235 2. $1,184 ($2,960 maximum limit × 40% busi-service. He used it 80% for his business and he
ness use).chooses to take a section 179 deduction for the At the end of 2005, Bob had an unrecovered
car. basis in the car of $15,265. This was the
Before applying the limit, Jack figures his $31,500 original basis of his car less the Qualified business use 50% or less in a later
maximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000. $16,235 depreciation deductions allowed during year. If you use your car more than 50% in
This is the cost of his qualifying property (up to the recovery period. qualified business use in the tax year it is placed
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Total depreciation claimed: $15,958in service but the business use drops to 50% or Year Lease Began Fair Market Value*(MACRS 200% DB method)less in a later year, you can no longer use an
2005 – 2006 $15,200Minus total depreciation allowable:accelerated depreciation method for that car. (Straight line method) 2004 17,500For the year the business use drops to 50% 2003 — 50% of $20,500, plus 2003  18,000or less and all later years in the recovery period, 10% of $10,250 ...... $10,710 1999 – 2002  15,500you must use the straight line depreciation (Limit: $10,710) 1997 – 1998 15,800
method over a 5-year recovery period. In addi- 2004 — 20% of $10,250 .... 2,050 1995 – 1996 15,500
tion, for the year your business use drops to (Limit: $4,900) 1994 14,600
50% or less, you must recapture (include in your 2005 — 20% of $10,250 .... 2,050 14,810 1993 14,300
(Limit: $2,950) 1992 13,700gross income) any excess depreciation (dis-
Excess depreciation $1,148 1991 13,400cussed later). You also increase the adjusted
1987 – 1990 12,800basis of your car by the same amount. In 2006, using Form 4797, you figure and
report the $1,148 excess depreciation you must *For 2006, the fair market value for trucks and vans isExample. In June 2003, you purchased a $16,700 and for electric cars it is $45,000.include in your gross income. Your adjustedcar for exclusive use in your business. You met basis in the car is also increased by $1,148.the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 years Your 2006 depreciation deduction is $533 Fair market value. Fair market value is theof the recovery period (2003 through 2005) but ($20,500 (unadjusted basis) × 30% (business price at which the property would change handsfailed to meet it in the fourth year (2006). You use percentage) × 20% (from column (c) of Ta- between a buyer and a seller, neither having todetermine your depreciation for 2006 using 20% ble 4-1 on the line for Jan. 1— Sept. 30, 2003) buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl-(from column (c) of Table 4-1). You also will limited to $533 ($1,775 x 30% business use)). edge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similarhave to determine and include in your gross property around the same date may be helpful inincome any excess depreciation, discussed figuring the fair market value of the property.Leasing a Carnext. Figure the fair market value on the first day of
If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in the lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car isExcess depreciation. You must include
your business, you can use the standard mile- specified in the lease agreement, use thatany excess depreciation in your gross income
age rate or actual expenses to figure your de- amount as the fair market value.and add it to your car’s adjusted basis for the
ductible expense. This section explains how tofirst tax year in which you do not use the car
Figuring the inclusion amount. Inclusionfigure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, ormore than 50% in qualified business use. Use
amounts are listed in Appendix A  for cars, invan.Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-
Appendix B for trucks and vans, and in Appendixure and report the excess depreciation in your Deductible payments. You can deduct the C for electric cars leased after August 5, 1997. Ifgross income. part of each lease payment that is for the use of the fair market value of the car is $100,000 orExcess depreciation is: the car in your business. You cannot deduct any less, use the appropriate appendix (depending
part of a lease payment that is for personal use on the year you first placed the car in service) to1. The amount of the depreciation deductions of the car, such as commuting. determine the inclusion amount. If the fair mar-allowable for the car (including any section You must spread any advance payments ket value is more than $100,000, see the Reve-179 deduction claimed and any special de- over the entire lease period. You cannot deduct nue Procedure(s) identified in the footnote of thepreciation allowance claimed) for tax years any payments you make to buy a car, even if the appendices for the inclusion amount. Revenuein which you used the car more than 50% payments are called lease payments. Procedures are available at most IRS officesin qualified business use, minus If you lease a car for 30 days or more, you and many local libraries. You can also find them2. The amount of the depreciation deductions may have to reduce your lease payment deduc- on the Internet at www.irs.gov.that would have been allowable for those tion by an “inclusion amount.” For each tax year during which you lease theyears if you had not used the car more car for business, determine your inclusionthan 50% in qualified business use for the amount by following these three steps.year you placed it in service. This means Inclusion Amounts
the amount of depreciation figured using 1. Locate the appendix that applies to you.If you lease a car that you use in your businessthe straight line method. To find the inclusion amount, do the follow-for a lease term of 30 days or more, you may ing.have to include an inclusion amount in yourExample. On September 25, 2003, you income for each tax year you lease the car. To a. Find the line that includes the fair mar-bought a car for $20,500 and placed it in service. do this, you do not add an amount to income. ket value of the car on the first day ofYou did not claim the section 179 deduction but Instead, you reduce your deduction for your the lease term.you did claim the 50% special depreciation al- lease payment. (This reduction has an effectlowance. You used the car exclusively in quali- b. Go across the line to the column for thesimilar to the limit on the depreciation deductionfied business use for 2003, 2004, and 2005. For tax year in which the car is used underyou would have on the car if you owned it.)those years, you figured the special depreciation the lease to find the dollar amount. ForThe inclusion amount is a percentage of partallowance and you used the appropriate the last tax year of the lease, use theof the fair market value of the leased car multi-MACRS Depreciation Chart  to figure deprecia- dollar amount for the preceding year.plied by the percentage of business and invest-tion deductions totaling $15,958 ($10,710 for ment use of the car for the tax year. It is prorated2003, $3,280 for 2004, and $1,968 for 2005) 2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) forfor the number of days of the lease term in theunder the 200% DB method. the number of days of the lease term in-tax year.During 2006, you used the car 30% for busi- cluded in the tax year.The inclusion amount applies to each taxness and 70% for personal purposes. Since you year that you lease the car if the fair market 3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) bydid not meet the more-than-50%-use test, you value (defined next) of the car when the lease the percentage of business and investmentmust switch from the 200% DB depreciation began was more than the amounts shown in the use for the tax year. This is your inclusionmethod to the straight line depreciation method following table. amount.for 2006, and include in gross income for 2006
your excess depreciation determined as follows.
Example. On January 17, 2005, you leased
a car for 3 years and placed it in service for use
in your business. The car had a fair market value
of $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. You
use the car 75% for business and 25% for per-
sonal purposes during each year of the lease.
Assuming you continue to use the car 75% for
business, you use Appendix A-5 to arrive at the
Page 24 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 25 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
following inclusion amounts for each year of the 2003, 16,700 miles in 2004, 15,100 miles in
2005, and 14,900 miles in 2006. Your deprecia-lease: Disposition of a Car
tion is figured as follows.
Tax Dollar Business Inclusion If you dispose of your car, you may have ayear amount Proration use amount Year Miles x Rate Depreciationtaxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion of
2005 $ 81 349/365 75% $ 58 2001 14,100 × .15 $ 2,115any gain that is due to depreciation (including
2006 179 365/365 75% 134 2002 16,300 × .15 2,445any section 179 or clean-fuel vehicle deduction)2007 265 365/365 75% 199 2003 15,600 × .16 2,496that you claimed on the car will be treated as2008 265 16/366 75% 9 2004 16,700 × .16 2,672ordinary income. However, you may not have to 2005 15,100 × .17 2,567recognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the carFor each year of the lease that you deduct lease 2006 14,900 × .17 2,533because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in.payments, you must reduce your deduction by Total depreciation $14,828
This section gives some general informationthe inclusion amount computed for that year.
At the end of 2006, your adjusted basis in the carabout dispositions of cars. For information on
is $7,672 ($22,500 − $14,828).Leased car changed from business to per- how to report the disposition of your car, see
sonal use. If you lease a car for business use Publication 544. Depreciation deduction for the year of dispo-
and, in a later year, change it to personal use, sition. If you deduct actual car expenses andCasualty or theft. For a casualty or theft, afollow the rules explained earlier under Figuring you dispose of your car before the end of itsgain results when you receive insurance or otherthe inclusion amount. For the tax year in which recovery period, you are allowed a reduced de-reimbursement that is more than your adjustedyou stop using the car for business, use the preciation deduction for the year of disposition.basis in your car. If you then spend all of thedollar amount for the previous tax year. Prorate To figure the reduced depreciation deductionproceeds to acquire replacement property (athe dollar amount for the number of days in the for a car disposed of in 2006, first determine thenew car or repairs to the old car) within a speci-lease term that fall within the tax year. depreciation deduction for the full year usingfied period of time, you do not recognize any
Table 4-1.gain. Your basis in the replacement property isExample. On August 16, 2005, Will leased If you used a Date Placed in Service line forits cost minus any gain that is not recognized.an electric car with a fair market value of Jan. 1—Sept. 30, you can deduct one-half ofSee Publication 547 for more information.$58,600 for 3 years. He used the car exclusively the depreciation amount figured for the full year.
in his own data processing business. On No- Trade-in. When you trade in an old car for a Figure your depreciation deduction for the full
vember 5, 2006, Will closed his business and new one, the transaction is considered a year using the rules explained in this chapter
went to work for a company where he is not like-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is and deduct 50% of that amount with your other
required to use a car for business. Using Appen- recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of actual car expenses.
Publication 544.) In a trade-in situation, yourdix C-5, Will computed his inclusion amount for If you used a Date Placed in Service line for
basis in the new property is generally your ad-2005 and 2006 as shown in the following table Oct. 1—Dec. 31, you can deduct a percentage
justed basis in the old property plus any addi-and reduced his deductions for lease payments of the depreciation amount figured for the full
tional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis,by those amounts. year. The percentage you use is determined by
earlier.) the month you disposed of the car. Figure your
Tax Dollar Business Inclusion depreciation deduction for the full year using theDepreciation adjustment when you used theyear amount Proration use amount rules explained in this chapter and multiply thestandard mileage rate. If you used the stan-2005 $ 60 138/365 100% $ 23 result by the percentage from the following tabledard mileage rate for the business use of your2006 142 309/365 100% 120 for the month that you disposed of the car.car, depreciation was included in that rate. The
rate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan- Month PercentageLeased car changed from personal to busi- dard mileage rate is shown in the chart that
ness use. If you lease a car for personal use Jan., Feb., March ............ 12.5%follows. You must reduce your basis in your car
April, May, June ............. 37.5%and, in a later year, change it to business use, (but not below zero) by the amount of this depre-
July, Aug., Sept. ............. 62.5%you must determine the car’s fair market value ciation. Oct., Nov., Dec. ............. 87.5%on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu- These rates do not apply for any year insion amount using the rules explained earlier which the actual expenses method Do not use this table if you are a fiscalunder Figuring the inclusion amount. Use the was used. year filer. See Sale or Other Disposi-
TIP
fair market value on the date of conversion. tion Before the Recovery Period EndsCAUTION
!
Depreciation in chapter 4 of Publication 946.Example. In March 2004, Janice leased a Year(s) Rate per Milecar for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,
2005 – 2006 $.172006, she started working as a self-employed 2003 – 2004 .16advertising consultant and started using the 2001 – 2002 .15leased car for business purposes. Her records 2000 .14show that her business use for June 1 through 1994 – 1999 .12
December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusion 1992 – 1993 .11 1/2
5.amount for 2006, Janice obtained an appraisal 1989 – 1991 .11
from an independent car leasing company that 1988 .10 1/2
1987 .10showed the fair market value of her 2004 car on
1986 .09June 1, 2006, was $21,650. Using Appendix
Recordkeeping1983 – 1985 .08A-6, Janice computed her inclusion amount for
1982 .07 1/22006 as shown in the following table. 1980 – 1981 .07 If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
Tax Dollar Business Inclusion portation expenses, you must be able to proveFor tax years after 1989, the depreciationyear amount Proration use amount (substantiate) certain elements of expense. Thisrates apply to all business miles. For tax years chapter discusses the records you need to keep2006 $45 214/365 60% $16 before 1990, the depreciation rates apply to the to prove these expenses.first 15,000 miles.
Reporting inclusion amounts.    For informa- If you keep timely and accurate rec-
tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employees Example. In 2001, you bought a car for ex- ords, you will have support to show the
should see Car rentals under Completing Forms clusive use in your business. The car cost IRS if your tax return is ever examined.RECORDS
2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprietors $22,500. From 2001 through 2006, you used the You will also have proof of expenses that your
should see the instructions for Schedule C standard mileage rate to figure your car expense employer may require if you are reimbursed
(Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc- deduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles in under an accountable plan. These plans are
tions for Schedule F (Form 1040). 2001, 16,300 miles in 2002, 15,600 miles in discussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements.
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 25

Page 26 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-What Are Adequate
dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if itHow To Prove Records? shows the amount, date, place, and essential
character of the expense.Expenses You should keep the proof you need in an ac- For example, a hotel receipt is enough tocount book, diary, statement of expense, or sim- support expenses for business travel if it has allTable 5-1 is a summary of records you need to ilar record. You should also keep documentary of the following information.prove each expense discussed in this publica- evidence that, together with your record, will
tion. You must be able to prove the elements support each element of an expense. • The name and location of the hotel.listed across the top portion of the chart. You
Documentary evidence. You generally must • The dates you stayed there.prove them by having the information and re-
have documentary evidence, such as receipts,ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed in • Separate amounts for charges such ascanceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-the first column. lodging, meals, and telephone calls.penses.You cannot deduct amounts that you
Exception. Documentary evidence is not A restaurant receipt is enough to prove anapproximate or estimate.
needed if any of the following conditions apply. expense for a business meal if it has all of theCAUTION
!
following information.• You have meals or lodging expenses
while traveling away from home for which • The name and location of the restaurant.You should keep adequate records to prove
you account to your employer under anyour expenses or have sufficient evidence that • The number of people served.accountable plan, and you use a per diemwill support your own statement. You must gen-
allowance method that includes meals • The date and amount of the expense.erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-
and/or lodging. (Accountable plans andered adequate. This is because written evidence If a charge is made for items other than food andper diem allowances are discussed inis more reliable than oral evidence alone. How- beverages, the receipt must show that this is thechapter 6.)ever, if you prepare a record in a computer case.memory device with the aid of a logging pro- • Your expense, other than lodging, is less Canceled check. A canceled check, to-gram, it is considered an adequate record. than $75. gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-
• You have a transportation expense for tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check
which a receipt is not readily available. by itself does not prove a business expense
Table 5-1. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have
expenses
for...
Travel
Entertainment
Gifts
Transportation
Amount Time
Place or
Description
Business Purpose and
Business Relationship
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Cost of each separate expense
for travel, lodging, and meals.
Incidental expenses may be
totaled in reasonable categories
such as taxis, daily meals for
traveler, etc.
Dates you
left and
returned for
each trip
and number
of days
spent on
business.
Destination or area
of your travel
(name of city, town,
or other
designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
Incidental expenses such as
taxis, telephones, etc., may be
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of
entertainment.
(Also see
Business
Purpose.)
Name and address
or location of place
of entertainment.
Type of
entertainment if not
otherwise apparent.
(Also see Business
Purpose.)
Cost of the gift. Date of the
gift.
Description of the
gift.
Date of the
expense.
For car
expenses,
the date of
the use of
the car.
Your business
destination.
Cost of each separate expense.
For car expenses, the cost of
the car and any improvements,
the date you started using it for
business, the mileage for each
business use, and the total miles
for the year.
Purpose:
 Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 N/A
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or other
designations) about the recipients that
shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that
you or your employee was present if the
entertainment was a business meal.
For entertainment, the nature of the
business discussion or activity. If the
entertainment was directly before or after a
business discussion: the date, place, nature,
and duration of the business discussion,
and the identities of the persons who took
part in both the business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
Relationship: N/A
Page 26 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 27 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
without other evidence to show that it was for a If the element is the description of a gift, or the Separating expenses. Each separate pay-
business purpose. cost, time, place, or date of an expense, the ment is generally considered a separate ex-
supporting evidence must be either direct evi- pense. For example, if you entertain a customer
Duplicate information. You do not have to dence or documentary evidence. Direct evi- or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the
record information in your account book or other dence can be written statements, or the oral dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-
record that duplicates information shown on a testimony of your guests or other witnesses set- ets are two separate expenses. You must record
receipt as long as your records and receipts ting forth detailed information about the element. them separately in your records.
complement each other in an orderly manner. Documentary evidence can be receipts, paid Season or series tickets. If you buy sea-You do not have to record amounts your bills, or similar evidence. son or series tickets for business use, you mustemployer pays directly for any ticket or other If the element is either the business relation- treat each ticket in the series as a separate item.travel item. However, if you charge these items ship of your guests or the business purpose of To determine the cost of individual tickets, divideto your employer, through a credit card or other- the amount spent, the supporting evidence can the total cost (but not more than face value) bywise, you must keep a record of the amounts be circumstantial, rather than direct. For exam- the number of games or performances in theyou spend. ple, the nature of your work, such as making series. You must keep records to show whetherdeliveries, provides circumstantial evidence ofTimely-kept records. You should record the you use each ticket as a gift or entertainment.the use of your car for business purposes. In-elements of an expense or of a business use at Also, you must be able to prove the cost ofvoices of deliveries establish when you used theor near the time of the expense or use and nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox orcar for business.support it with sufficient documentary evidence. other private luxury box for more than one event.
A timely-kept record has more value than a See Entertainment tickets in chapter 2.Sampling. You can keep an adequate recordstatement prepared later when generally there is for parts of a tax year and use that record to Combining items. You can make one dailya lack of accurate recall. prove the amount of business or investment use entry in your record for reasonable categories ofYou do not need to write down the elements for the entire year. You must demonstrate by expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneof every expense on the day of the expense. If other evidence that the periods for which an calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealsyou maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac- adequate record is kept are representative of should be in a separate category. You can in-counts for use during the week, the log is consid- the use throughout the tax year. clude tips for meal-related services with theered a timely-kept record. costs of the meals.If you give your employer, client, or customer Example. You use your car to visit the of- Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-an expense account statement, it can also be fices of clients, meet with suppliers and other ing the course of a single event are considered aconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true if subcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to single expense. For example, if during entertain-you copy it from your account book, diary, state- clients. There is no other business use of the ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forment of expense, or similar record. car, but you and your family use the car for each serving of refreshments, the total expense
personal purposes. You keep adequate records for the refreshments is treated as a single ex-Proving business purpose. You must gener-
during the first week of each month that show pense.ally provide a written statement of the business
that 75% of the use of the car is for business.purpose of an expense. However, the degree of Car expenses. You can account for severalInvoices and bills show that your business useproof varies according to the circumstances in uses of your car that can be considered part of acontinues at the same rate during the latereach case. If the business purpose of an ex- single use, such as a round trip or uninterruptedweeks of each month. Your weekly records arepense is clear from the surrounding circum- business use, with a single record. Minimal per-representative of the use of the car each monthstances, then you do not need to give a written sonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the wayand are sufficient evidence to support the per-explanation. between two business stops, is not an interrup-centage of business use for the year. tion of business use.Example. If you are a sales representative
Exceptional circumstances. You can satisfywho calls on customers on an established sales Example. You make deliveries at severalthe substantiation requirements with other evi-route, you do not have to give a written explana- different locations on a route that begins anddence if, because of the nature of the situation intion of the business purpose for traveling that ends at your employer’s business premises andwhich an expense is made, you cannot get aroute. You can satisfy the requirements by re- that includes a stop at the business premisesreceipt. This applies if all the following are true.cording the length of the delivery route once, the between two deliveries. You can account fordate of each trip at or near the time of the trips, • You were unable to obtain evidence for an these using a single record of miles driven.and the total miles you drove the car during the element of the expense or use that com-
Gift expenses. You do not always have totax year. You could also establish the date of pletely satisfies the requirements ex-
record the name of each recipient of a gift. Aeach trip with a receipt, record of delivery, or plained earlier under What Are Adequate
general listing will be enough if it is evident thatother documentary evidence. Records.
you are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limit
Confidential information. You do not need to • You are unable to obtain evidence for an on the amount you can deduct for gifts to any
put confidential information relating to an ele- element that completely satisfies the two one person. For example, if you buy a large
ment of a deductible expense (such as the rules listed earlier under What if I Have number of tickets to local high school basketball
place, business purpose, or business relation- Incomplete Records. games and give one or two tickets to each of
ship) in your account book, diary, or other re- many customers, it is usually enough to record a• You have presented other evidence for thecord. However, you do have to record the general description of the recipients.element that is the best proof possibleinformation elsewhere at or near the time of the under the circumstances. Allocating total cost. If you can prove theexpense and have it available to fully prove that
total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-element of the expense.
not prove how much it cost for each person whoDestroyed records. If you cannot produce a
participated in the event, you may have to allo-receipt because of reasons beyond your control,What If I Have Incomplete cate the total cost among you and your guestsyou can prove a deduction by reconstructingRecords? on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishyour records or expenses. Reasons beyond
the number of persons who participated in theyour control include fire, flood, and other casu-If you do not have complete records to prove an event.alty.element of an expense, then you must prove the An allocation would be needed, for example,element with: if you did not have a business relationship withSeparating and Combining all of your guests. See Allocating between busi-• Your own written or oral statement con-
Expenses ness and nonbusiness in chapter 2.taining specific information about the ele-
ment, and This section explains when expenses must be If your return is examined. If your return is
• Other supporting evidence that is sufficient kept separate and when expenses can be com- examined, you may have to provide additi onal
to establish the element. bined. information to the IRS. This information could be
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 27

Page 28 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or with illustrations of how to report travel, enter- • You were not reimbursed by your em-
reliability of information contained in your rec- tainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 2106 ployer for your expenses (amount s in-
ords, statements, testimony, or documentary and 2106-EZ. cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not
evidence before a deduction is allowed. considered reimbursements).
• If you claim car expenses, you use the
How Long To Keep standard mileage rate.
Where To ReportRecords and Receipts
For more information on how to report your
This section provides general information onYou must keep records as long as they may be expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see
where to report the expenses discussed in thisneeded for the administration of any provision of Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later.
publication.the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse-means you must keep records that support your ments (or the reimbursements were all includeddeduction (or an item of income) for 3 years from Self-employed. You must report your income in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only businessthe date you file the income tax return on which and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form expense you are claiming is for gifts, and thethe deduction is claimed. A return filed early is 1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- Special Rules discussed later do not apply toconsidered filed on the due date. For a more ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not you, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.complete explanation of how long to keep rec- use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your deductibleords, get Publication 583, Starting a Business If you claim car or truck expenses, you must gifts directly on line 20 of Schedule A (Formand Keeping Records. provide certain information on the use of your 1040).You must keep records of the business use vehicle. You provide this information on Sched-
of your car for each year of the recovery period. Statutory employees. If you received aule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Form 4562.
See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 under Form W-2 and the “Statutory employee” box inIf you file Schedule C:Depreciation Deduction. box 13 was checked, report your income and
• Report your travel expenses, except expenses related to that income on Schedule C
meals, on line 24a,Reimbursed for expenses. Employees who or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form
give their records and documentation to their 2106 or 2106-EZ.• Report your deductible meals (actual costemployers and are reimbursed for their ex- Statutory employees include full-time life in-or standard meal allowance) and enter-penses generally do not have to keep copies of surance salespersons, certain agent or commis-tainment on line 24b,this information. However, you may have to sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain
• Report your gift expenses and transporta-prove your expenses if any of the following con- homeworkers.
tion expenses, other than car expenses,ditions apply.  If you are entitled to a reimbursementon line 27, and• You claim deductions for expenses that from your employer but you do not
• Report your car expenses on line 9. Com-are more than reimbursements. claim it, you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
!
plete Part IV of the form unless you have for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-• Your expenses are reimbursed under a to file Form 4562 for depreciation or amor- bursement applies.nonaccountable plan. tization.
• Your employer does not use adequate ac- Reimbursement for personal expenses. IfIf you file Schedule C-EZ, report the total of allcounting procedures to verify expense ac- your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-business expenses on line 2. You can only in-counts. ible personal expenses, such as for vacationclude 50% of your meals and entertainment in trips, your employer must report the reimburse-• You are related to your employer as de- that total. If you include car expenses, you must ment as wage income in box 1 of your Formfined under Per Diem and Car Allowances, also complete Part III of the form. W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.later. If you file Schedule F:
Reimbursements, adequate accounting, and Income-producing property. If you have• Report your car expenses on line 12. At-nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapter travel or transportation expenses related to in-tach Form 4562 and provide information6. come-producing property, report your deducti-on the use of your car in Part V of Form ble expenses on the form appropriate for that4562. activity.Examples of Records
For example, if you have rental real estate• Report all other business expenses dis-
Examples of records that show the information income and expenses, report your expenses oncussed in this publication on line 34. You
you need to keep for different types of expenses Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss.can only include 50% of your meals and
are included in this publication as Table 6-2 and See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-entertainment on that line.
Table 6-3. They are part of the illustrated exam- erty, for more information on the rental of realSee your forms instructions for more informationples shown at the end of chapter 6. estate. If you have deductible invest-on how to complete your tax return. ment-related transportation expenses, report
them on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22.Both self-employed and an employee. If
you are both self-employed and an employee,
Vehicle Provided byyou must keep separate records for each busi-
Your Employerness activity. Report your business expenses for
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F
6. If your employer provides you with a car, you(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your
may be able to deduct the actual expenses ofbusiness expenses for your work as an em-
operating that car for business purposes. Theployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed
amount you can deduct depends on the amountnext.How To Report that your employer included in your income and
the business and personal miles you drove dur-Employees. If you are an employee, you gen-This chapter explains where and how to report ing the year. You cannot use the standard mile-erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct yourthe expenses discussed in this publication. It age rate.travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-discusses reimbursements and how to treat penses. However, you can use the shorter Formthem under accountable and nonaccountable Value reported on Form W-2. Your employer2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all ofplans. It also explains rules for independent con- can figure and report either the actual value ofthe following conditions.tractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certain your personal use of the car or the value of the
performing artists, Armed Forces reservists, and • You are an employee deducting expenses car as if you used it only for personal purposes
certain disabled employees. The chapter ends attributable to your job. (100% income inclusion). Your employer must
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
separately state the amount if 100% of the an- when you are away from home on business. Form W-2. If your expenses equal your rei m-
nual lease value was included in your income. If bursement, you do not complete Form 2106.(The term “incidental expenses” is defined in
you are unsure of the amount included in your You have no deduction since your expenseschapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) A
Form W-2, ask your employer. and reimbursement are equal.car allowance is an amount your employer gives
you for the business use of your car.Full value included in your income. You can If your employer included reimburse-
Your employer should tell you what methoddeduct the value of the business use of an em- ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and
of reimbursement is used and what records youployer-provided car if your employer reported you meet all the rules for accountable
TIP
must provide.100% of the value of the car in your income. On plans, ask your employer for a corrected Form
your 2006 Form W-2, the amount of the value W-2.
Employers. If you are an employer and youwill be included in box 1, Wages, tips, other
Accountable plan rules not met. Evenreimburse employee business expenses, howcompensation, and box 12.
though you are reimbursed under an accounta-you treat this reimbursement on your em-To claim your expenses, complete Part II,
ble plan, some of your expenses may not meetployee’s Form W-2 depends in part on whetherSections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter your
all the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet allyou have an accountable plan. Reimburse-actual expenses on line 23 of Section C and
the rules for accountable plans are treated asments treated as paid under an accountableinclude the entire value of the em-
having been reimbursed under a nonaccount-plan, as explained next, are not reported as pay.ployer-provided car on line 25. Complete the
able plan (discussed later).Reimbursements treated as paid under nonac-rest of the form.
countable plans, as explained later, are reported Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-Less than full value included in your income. as pay. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em- penses. You may be reimbursed under yourIf less than the full annual lease value of the car ployer’s Tax Guide, for information on employee employer’s accountable plan for expenses re-was included on your Form W-2, this means that pay. lated to that employer’s business, some of whichyour Form W-2 only includes the value of your
are deductible as employee business expensespersonal use of the car. Do not enter this value
and some of which are not deductible. The reim-Accountable Planson your Form 2106; it is not deductible.
bursements you receive for the nondeductibleIf you paid any actual costs (that your em- To be an accountable plan, your employer’s expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountableployer did not provide or reimburse you for) to reimbursement or allowance arrangement must plans, and they are treated as paid under aoperate the car, you can deduct the business include all of the following rules. nonaccountable plan.portion of those costs. Examples of costs that
you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com- 1. Your expenses must have a business con- Example. Your employer’s plan reimbursesplete Part II, Sections A and C, of Form 2106. nection — that is, you must have paid or you for travel expenses while away from homeEnter your actual costs on line 23 of Section C incurred deductible expenses while per- on business and also for meals when you workand leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of the forming services as an employee of your late at the office, even though you are not awayform. employer. from home. The part of the arrangement that
reimburses you for the nondeductible meals2. You must adequately account to your em-
when you work late at the office is treated asployer for these expenses within a reason-
paid under a nonaccountable plan.able period of time.Reimbursements
The employer makes the decision3. You must return any excess reimburse-This section explains what to do when you re- whether to reimburse employeesment or allowance within a reasonable pe-ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any of under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP
riod of time.the employee business expenses discussed in countable plan. If you are an employee who
“Adequate accounting” and “returning ex-this publication. receives payments under a nonaccountable
If you received an advance, allowance, or cess reimbursements” are discussed later. plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-
reimbursement for your expenses, how you re- ments under an accountable plan by voluntarilyAn excess reimbursement or allowance is
port this amount and your expenses depends on accounting to your employer for the expensesany amount you are paid that is more than the
whether the reimbursement was paid to you and voluntarily returning excess reimburse-business-related expenses that you adequately
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable ments to the employer.accounted for to your employer.
plan. The definition of reasonable period of timeThis section explains the two types of plans, depends on the facts and circumstances of yourhow per diem and car allowances simplify prov- Adequate Accountingsituation. However, regardless of the facts anding the amount of your expenses, and the tax circumstances of your situation, actions that One of the rules for an accountable plan is thattreatment of your reimbursements and ex- take place within the times specified in the fol- you must adequately account to your employerpenses. It also covers rules for independent lowing list will be treated as taking place within a for your expenses. You adequately account bycontractors. reasonable period of time. giving your employer a statement of expense,No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed • You receive an advance within 30 days of an account book, a diary, or a similar record inor given an allowance for your expenses if you the time you have an expense. which you entered each expense at or near theare paid a salary or commission with the under- time you had it, along with documentary evi-• You adequately account for your ex-standing that you will pay your own expenses. In dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage,penses within 60 days after they were paidthis situation, you have no reimbursement or and other employee business expenses. (Seeor incurred.allowance arrangement, and you do not have to Table 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need toread this section on reimbursements. Instead, • You return any excess reimbursement enter in your record and documents you need tosee Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later, within 120 days after the expense was prove certain expenses.) A per diem or car al-for information on completing your tax return. paid or incurred. lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A quirement under certain conditions. See Per• You are given a periodic statement (atreimbursement or other expense allowance ar- diem and Car Allowances, later.least quarterly) that asks you to either re-rangement is a system or plan that an employer You must account for all amounts you re-turn or adequately account for outstandinguses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex- ceived from your employer during the year asadvances and you comply within 120 dayspenses, advances, reimbursements, and advances, reimbursements, or allowances. Thisof the statement.amounts charged to the employer for employee includes amounts you charged to your employer
business expenses. Arrangements include per by credit card or other method. You must give
Employee meets accountable plan rules. Ifdiem and car allowances. your employer the same type of records and
you meet the three rules for accountable plans,A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of supporting information that you would have to
your employer should not include any reim-daily reimbursement your employer gives you give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deduction
bursements in your income in box 1 of yourfor your lodging, meals, and incidental expenses on your return. You must pay back the amount of
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any reimbursement or other expense allowance b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). and December for all employees. Employers
for which you do not adequately account or that who did not use the high-low method during the
is more than the amount for which you ac- first 9 months of 2006 cannot begin to use itFor per diem amounts, use the rate incounted. before 2007. See Revenue Procedure 2006-41effect for the area where you stop for for more information. Also see Publication 1542sleep or rest.
TIP
(available on the Internet at www.irs.gov).
Per Diem and Car Allowances Regular federal per diem rate. The regular Prorating the standard meal allowance onfederal per diem rate is the highest amount thatIf your employer reimburses you for your ex- partial days of travel. The standard meal al-the federal government will pay to its employeespenses using a per diem or a car allowance, you lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If youfor lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (orcan generally use the allowance as proof for the travel for part of a day, such as on the days youmeals and incidental expenses only) while theyamount of your expenses. A per diem or car depart and return, you must prorate the full-dayare traveling away from home in a particularallowance satisfies the adequate accounting re- M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-area. The rates are different for different loca-quirements for the amount of your expenses ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate ortions. Your employer should have these ratesonly if all of the following conditions apply. the high-low rate.available. (Employers can get Publication 1542, You can use either of the following methods• Your employer reasonably limits payments which gives the rates in the continental United to figure the federal M&IE for that day.of your expenses to those that are ordi- States for the current year. Publication 1542 is
nary and necessary in the conduct of the available on the Internet at www.irs.gov.) 1. Method 1:trade or business. The standard meal allowance. The stan- a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the• The allowance is similar in form to and not dard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) is standard meal allowance amount formore than the federal rate (defined later). the federal rate for meals and incidental ex- that day.penses (M&IE). The rate for most small localities• You prove the time (dates), place, and in the United States is $39 a day from January 1, b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of thebusiness purpose of your expenses to through December 31, 2006. Most major cities standard meal allowance amount foryour employer (as explained in Table 5-1) and many other localities qualify for higher rates. the preceding day.within a reasonable period of time. The rates for localities within the continental
• You are not related to your employer (as United States are listed in Publication 1542. You 2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-
defined next). If you are related to your can also find this information on the Internet at lowance using any method that you con-
employer, you must be able to prove your www.gsa.gov. sistently apply and that is in accordance
expenses to the IRS even if you have al- You receive an allowance only for meals and with reasonable business practice. For ex-ready adequately accounted to your em- incidental expenses when your employer does ample, an employer can treat 2 full days ofployer and returned any excess one of the following. per diem (that includes M&IE) paid forreimbursement. travel away from home from 9 a.m. of one• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in
day to 5 p.m. of the next day as being noIf the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow- kind).
more than the federal rate. This is trueance practices are not based on reasonably • Reimburses you, based on your receipts, even though a federal employee would beaccurate estimates of travel costs (including rec- for the actual cost of your lodging. limited to a reimbursement of M&IE forognition of cost differences in different areas for
only 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate.per diem amounts), you will not be considered to • Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your
have accounted to your employer. In this case, lodging.
The standard mileage rate. This is a setyou must be able to prove your expenses to the • Does not have a reasonable belief that rate per mile that you can use to compute yourIRS. you had (or will have) lodging expenses, deductible car expenses. For 2006, the standard
such as when you stay with friends or rela- mileage rate for the cost of operating your car forRelated to employer. You are related to your tives or sleep in the cab of your truck. business use is 441/2 cents per mile.employer if: 
• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to Fixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is an1. Your employer is your brother or sister, that used in computing your compensa- allowance your employer may use to reimbursehalf brother or half sister, spouse, ances- tion, such as number of hours worked or your car expenses. Under this method, yourtor, or lineal descendant, miles traveled. employer pays an allowance that includes a
2. Your employer is a corporation in which combination of payments covering fixed and va-High-low rate. This is a simplified methodyou own, directly or indirectly, more than riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate toof computing the federal per diem rate for travel10% in value of the outstanding stock, or cover your variable operating costs (such aswithin the continental United States. It elimi- gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi- nates the need to keep a current list of the per fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, diem rate for each city. ments), insurance, etc.). If your employera trust, and your employer. Under the high-low method, the per diem chooses to use this method, your employer willamount for travel during January through Sep-You may be considered to indirectly own stock, request the necessary records from you.tember of 2006 is $226 (including $58 for M&IE)for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a
for certain high-cost locations. All other areascorporation, partnership, estate, or trust that Reporting your expenses with a per diem orhave a per diem amount of $141 (including $45owns the stock or if a member of your family or car allowance. If your reimbursement is in thefor M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542your partner owns the stock. form of an allowance received under an ac-(Revised October 2006) on the Internet, which countable plan, the following facts affect yourgives the areas eligible for the $226 per diemThe federal rate. The federal rate can be fig- reporting.amount under the high-low method for all or partured using any one of the following methods.
• The federal rate.of this period.)
1. For per diem amounts: • Whether the allowance or your actual ex-Effective October 1, 2006, the per diem
rate for certain high-cost locations in- penses were more than the federal rate.a. The regular federal per diem rate.
creased to $246 (including $58 forCAUTION
!
The following discussions explain where to re-b. The standard meal allowance. M&IE). The rate for all other locations increased port your expenses depending upon how theto $148 (including $45 for M&IE). However, anc. The high-low rate. amount of your allowance compares to the fed-employer can continue to use the rates de- eral rate.scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re-2. For car expenses:
Allowance less than or equal to the federalmainder of 2006 if those rates and locations are
rate. If your allowance is less than or equal toa. The standard mileage rate. used consistently during October, November,
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the federal rate, the allowance will not be in-
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not
need to report the related expenses or the allow-
ance on your return if your expenses are equal
to or less than the allowance.
However, if your actual expenses are more
than your allowance, you can complete Form
2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-
penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the
total amount of your expenses and reimburse-
ments for the entire year. If you are using the
standard meal allowance or the standard mile-
age rate, you do not have to prove that amount.
Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-day
business trip to Denver. The federal rate for
Denver is $173 per day. As required by his
employer’s accountable plan, he accounts for
the time (dates), place, and business purpose of
the trip. His employer reimburses him $173 a
day ($346 total) for living expenses. Jeremy’s
living expenses in Denver are not more than
$173 a day.
Jeremy’s employer does not include any of
the reimbursement on his Form W-2 and Jeremy
does not deduct the expenses on his return.
Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-day
business trip to Boston. Matt’s employer uses
the high-low method to reimburse employees.
Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is given
an advance of $226 a day ($452 total) for his
lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt’s
actual expenses totaled $650.
Since Matt’s $650 of expenses are more
than his $452 advance, he includes the excess
expenses when he itemizes his deductions. Matt
completes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex-
penses and reimbursements). He must also al-
locate his reimbursement between his meals
and other expenses as discussed later under
Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
Example 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a
year for business. Under her employer’s ac-
countable plan, she accounts for the time
(dates), place, and business purpose of each
Table 6-1.
IF the type of reimbursement (or
other expense allowance)
arrangement is under:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: 
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
THEN the employer
reports on Form W-2:
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
No reimbursement plan:
Either adequate accounting or
return of excess, or both, not
required by plan
No amount.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
All expenses and
reimbursements only if
excess expenses are
claimed. Otherwise,
form is not filed.
All expenses.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106: *
Per diem or mileage allowance
exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the
federal rate only and
 excess not
returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
All expenses (and
reimbursements
reported on Form W-2,
box 12) only if expenses
in excess of the federal
rate are claimed.
Otherwise, form is not
filed.
No amount.
trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowance must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements and paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotel bill. The
of 30 cents a mile. up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of your employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for his
Since Nicole’s $4,450 expenses computed Form W-2) and all your expenses. You should meals and incidental expenses. The federal rate
under the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles × be able to prove these amounts to the IRS. for San Diego is $64 a day.
441/2 cents) are more than her $3,000 reim- Joe can prove that his actual meal expensesbursement (10,000 miles × 30 cents), she item- Example 1.  Laura lives and works in Aus- totaled $380. His employer’s accountable planizes her deductions to claim the excess tin. Her employer sent her to Albuquerque for 2 will not pay more than $75 a day for travel to Sanexpenses. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show- days on business. Laura’s employer paid the Diego, so Joe does not give his employer theing all of her expenses and reimbursements) hotel directly for her lodging and reimbursed records that prove that he actually spent $380.and enters $1,450 ($4,450 − $3,000) as an item- Laura $65 a day ($130 total) for meals and However, he does account for the time, place,ized deduction. incidental expenses. Laura’s actual meal ex- and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’s
penses were not more than the federal rate for only business trip this year.Allowance more than the federal rate. If Albuquerque, which is $49 per day.your allowance is more than the federal rate, Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 × 4 days),
your employer must include the allowance which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256Her employer included the $32 that was
amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your ($64 × 4 days). The employer includes the $44more than the federal rate (($65 − $49) × 2) in
Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However, as income on Joe’s Form W-2 in box 1. Thebox 1 of Laura’s Form W-2. Her employer shows
the excess allowance will be included in box 1 of employer also enters $256 in box 12 of Joe’s$98 ($49 a day × 2) in box 12 of her Form W-2.
your Form W-2. You must report this part of your Form W-2.This amount is not included in Laura’s income.
allowance as if it were wage income. Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-Laura does not have to complete Form 2106;
If your actual expenses are less than or ductible expenses. He enters the total of hishowever, she must include the $32 in her gross
equal to the federal rate, you do not complete actual expenses for the year ($380) on Formincome as wages (by reporting the total amount
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on 2106. He also enters the reimbursements thatshown in box 1 of her Form W-2).
your return. were not included in his income ($256). His total
However, if your actual expenses are more Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is
than the federal rate, you can complete Form works for the same employer as Laura. In May $124. After he figures the 50% limit on  his un-
2106 and deduct those excess expenses. You the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 days reimbursed meals and entertainment, he w ill
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
include the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc- W-2. This excess amount is considered paid she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ  and
tion. under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). itemize her deductions.
Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles for Example.  Your employer sends you on a Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month by
business. Under her employer’s accountable 5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you a his employer. On days that he travels away from
plan, she gets reimbursed 50 cents a mile, which $400 ($80 × 5 days) advance to cover your home on business, his employer designates $50
is more than the standard mileage rate. Her total meals and incidental expenses. The federal per a day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travel
reimbursement is $5,000. diem for meals and incidental expenses for expenses. Because his employer would pay Ke-
Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 3 days. vin his monthly salary whether or not he wasDebbie’s employer must include the reim-
Under your employer’s accountable plan, you traveling away from home, the arrangement is abursement amount up to the standard mileage
must return the $160 ($80 × 2 days) advance for nonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a dayrate, $4,450, in box 12 of her Form W-2. That
the 2 days you did not travel. You do not have to designated by his employer is treated as paidamount is not taxable. Her employer must also
return the $63 difference between the allowance under an accountable plan.include $550 ($5,000 − $4,450) in box 1 of her
you received and the federal rate for PhoenixForm W-2. This is the reimbursement that is
(($80 − $59) × 3 days). However, the $39 will bemore than the standard mileage rate. Rules for Independentreported on your Form W-2 as wages. If Debbie’s expenses are equal to or less Contractors and Clientsthan the standard mileage rate, she would not
complete Form 2106. If her expenses are more Nonaccountable Plans This section provides rules for independent con-
than the standard mileage rate, she would com- tractors who incur expenses on behalf of a clientA nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement orplete Form 2106 and report her total expenses or customer. The rules cover the reporting andexpense allowance arrangement that does notand reimbursement (shown in box 12 of her substantiation of certain expenses discussed inmeet one or more of the three rules listed earlierForm W-2). She would then claim the excess this publication, and they affect both indepen-under Accountable Plans.expenses as an itemized deduction. dent contractors and their clients or customers.In addition, even if your employer has an You are considered an independent contrac-accountable plan, the following payments will be tor if you are self-employed and you performtreated as being paid under a nonaccountableReturning Excess services for a customer or client.plan:Reimbursements
• Excess reimbursements you fail to returnUnder an accountable plan, you are required to Accounting to Your Clientto your employer, andreturn any excess reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowances for your business expenses • Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- If you received a reimbursement or an allow-to the person paying the reimbursement or al- penses related to your employer’s busi- ance for travel, entertainment, or gift expenseslowance. Excess reimbursement means any ness. See Reimbursement of that you incurred on behalf of a client, youamount for which you did not adequately ac- nondeductible expenses, earlier, under should provide an adequate accounting of thesecount within a reasonable period of time. For Accountable Plans. expenses to your client. If you do not account toexample, if you received a travel advance and your client for these expenses, you must includeAn arrangement that repays you for businessyou did not spend all the money on busi- any reimbursements or allowances in income.expenses by reducing the amount reported asness-related expenses, or you do not have proof You must keep adequate records of these ex-your wages, salary, or other pay will be treatedof all your expenses, you have an excess reim- penses whether or not you account to your clientas a nonaccountable plan. This is because youbursement. for these expenses.are entitled to receive the full amount of your pay“Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe- If you do not separately account for and seekwhether or not you have any business ex-riod of time” were discussed earlier in this chap- reimbursement for meals and entertainment inpenses.ter. connection with providing services for a client,If you are not sure if the reimbursement or you are subject to the 50% limit on those ex-Travel advance. You receive a travel ad- expense allowance arrangement is an account- penses. See 50% Limit in chapter 2.vance if your employer provides you with an able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-
expense allowance before you actually have the ployer. Adequate accounting. As a self-employedexpense, and the allowance is reasonably ex- person, you adequately account by reportingReporting your expenses under a nonac-pected to be no more than your expense. Under your actual expenses. You should follow thecountable plan. Your employer will combinean accountable plan, you are required to ade- recordkeeping rules in chapter 5.the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-quately account to your employer for this ad-
How to report. For information on how topense allowance paid to you under a nonac-vance and to return any excess within a
report expenses on your tax return, seecountable plan with your wages, salary, or otherreasonable period of time.
Self-employed at the beginning of this chapter.pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1If you do not adequately account for or do not
of your Form W-2.return any excess advance within a reasonable
You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZperiod of time, the amount you do not account Required Records forand itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-for or return will be treated as having been paid
Clients or Customerspenses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
tertainment. Your meal and entertainment If you are a client or customer, you generally doUnproved amounts. If you do not prove expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis- not have to keep records to prove the reimburse-that you actually traveled on each day for which cussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenses ments or allowances you give, in the course ofyou received a per diem or car allowance (prov- will be subject to the 2%-of-adj- your business, to an independent contractor foring the elements described in Table 5-1), you usted-gross-income limit that applies to most travel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf.must return this unproved amount of the travel miscellaneous itemized deductions. However, you must keep records if:advance within a reasonable period of time. If
you do not do this, the unproved amount will be Example 1. Kim’s employer gives her • You reimburse the contractor for entertain-considered paid under a nonaccountable plan $1,000 a month ($12,000 total for the year) for ment expenses incurred on your behalf,(discussed later). her business expenses. Kim does not have to and
provide any proof of her expenses to her em-Per diem allowance more than federal rate. • The contractor adequately accounts to youployer, and Kim can keep any funds that sheIf your employer’s accountable plan pays you an for these expenses.does not spend.allowance that is higher than the federal rate,
you do not have to return the difference between Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-
Contractor adequately accounts. If the con-the two rates for the period you can prove busi- countable plan. Her employer will include the
tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain-ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif- $12,000 on Kim’s Form W-2 as if it were wages.
ment expenses, you (the client or customer)ference will be reported as wages on your Form If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses,
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must keep records documenting each element • Percentage of business use. entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex-
penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui-of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Use • Date placed in service. tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses,your records as proof for a deduction on your tax
• Use of other vehicles. and trade and professional publications.return. If entertainment expenses are accounted
for separately, you are subject to the 50% limit • After-work use. If line 4 expenses are the only ones youon entertainment. If the contractor adequately are claiming, you received no reim-• Whether you have evidence to support theaccounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you do bursements (or the reimbursements
TIP
deduction.not have to report the amounts on an information were all included in box 1 of your Form W-2),return. and the Special Rules discussed later do not• Whether or not the evidence is written.
apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 orContractor does not adequately account.  If Employees must complete Form 2106, Part II, 2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly onthe contractor does not adequately account to Section A, or Form 2106-EZ, Part II, to provide Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. List the typeyou for allowances or reimbursements of enter- this information. and amount of each expense on the dotted linestainment expenses, you do not have to keep and include the total on line 20.Standard mileage rate. If you claim a de-records of these items. You are not subject to duction based on the standard mileage rate in-the 50% limit on entertainment in this case. You Meal and entertainment expenses. Showstead of your actual expenses, you mustcan deduct the reimbursements or allowances the full amount of your expenses for busi-complete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. Theas payment for services if they are ordinary and ness-related meals and entertainment on Formamount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to Formnecessary business expenses. However, you 2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals while2106, Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part 1, line 2,must file Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous In- away from your tax home overnight and otheryou can deduct parking fees and tolls that applycome, to report amounts paid to the indepen- business meals and entertainment. Enter 50%to the business use of the car. If you file Formdent contractor if the total of the reimbursements of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertainment2106-EZ, complete Part I, line 1, for the standardand any other fees is $600 or more during the expenses on line 9, Column B.mileage rate and line 2 for parking fees and tolls.calendar year. If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the fullSee Standard Mileage Rate in chapter 4 for amount of your meals and entertainment on theinformation on using this rate. line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by
Actual expenses. If you claim a deduction 50%. Enter the result on line 5.
Completing Forms based on actual expenses, you cannot use Hours of service limits. If you are subjectForm 2106-EZ. You must complete Form 2106, to the Department of Transportation’s “hours of2106 and 2106-EZ Part II, Section C. In addition, unless you lease service” limits (as explained earlier under Indi-your car, you must complete Section D to show viduals subject to “hours of service” limits  inThis section briefly describes how employees your depreciation deduction and any section chapter 2), use 75% instead of 50% for mealscomplete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 6-1 179 deduction you can claim. while away from your tax home.explains what the employer reports on Form
If you are still using a car that is fully depreci-W-2 and what the employee reports on Form
ated, continue to complete Section C. Since you Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 72106. The instructions for the forms have more
(you cannot use Form 2106-EZ) the amountshave no depreciation deduction, enter zero oninformation on completing them.
your employer (or third party) reimbursed youline 28. In this case, do not complete Section D.If you are self-employed, do not file that were not reported to you in box 1 of yourCar rentals. If you claim car rental ex-Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report your Form W-2. This includes any amount reportedpenses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have toexpenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or FCAUTION
!
under code L in box 12 of Form W-2.reduce that expense by an inclusion amount as(Form 1040). See the instructions for the form
Allocating your reimbursement. If youdescribed in chapter 4. If so, you can show yourthat you must file.
were reimbursed under an accountable plan andcar expenses and any inclusion amount as fol-
want to deduct excess expenses that were notlows.Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee bursement. This is necessary when your em-1. Compute the inclusion amount without tak-business expenses. You can use this form if you ployer pays your reimbursement in the followinging into account your business use per-meet all of the following conditions. manner:centage for the tax year.
• You are an employee deducting expenses • Pays you a single amount that covers2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) onattributable to your job. meals and/or entertainment, as well asForm 2106, Part II, line 24b.
• You were not reimbursed by your em- other business expenses, and3. Report on line 24c the net amount of carployer for your expenses (amounts in- • Does not clearly identify how much is forrental expenses (total car rental expensescluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not deductible meals and/or entertainment.minus the inclusion amount computed inconsidered reimbursements).
(1)). You must allocate that single payment so that• If you are claiming car expenses, you are you know how much to enter in Form 2106,The net amount of car rental expenses will beusing the standard mileage rate. Column A and Column B of line 7.adjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect
the percentage of business use for the tax year.Car expenses. If you used a car to perform Example. Rob’s employer paid him an ex-
your job as an employee, you may be able to pense allowance of $12,000 this year under anTransportation expenses. Show your trans-deduct certain car expenses. These are gener- accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con-portation expenses that did not involve overnightally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for enter-travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or onclaimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A. tainment and car expenses. The employer didForm 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on this not clearly show how much of the $7,000 was forCar expenses using the standard mileage rate
line business expenses you have for parking the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-
fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper- ally spent $14,000 during the year ($5,500 forpleting Part II and Part I, line 1.
ating your car or expenses of commuting be- airfare, $4,500 for entertainment, and $4,000 forInformation on use of cars. If you claim tween your home and work. car expenses).any deduction for the business use of a car, you Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-must answer certain questions and provide in- Employee business expenses other than tified, Rob knows that $5,000 of the paymentformation about the use of the car. The informa- meals and entertainment. Show your other goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. Totion relates to the following items. employee business expenses on Form 2106, allocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses the
Column A, lines 3 and 4, or Form 2106-EZ, lines• Mileage (total, business, commuting, and worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.
other personal mileage). 3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals and His completed worksheet follows.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Enter the total amount of miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,Armed Forces Reservists Traveling
reimbursements your employer you must meet all of the following requirements.More Than 100 Miles From Homegave you that were not reported
to you in box 1 of Form W-2 . . . 7,000 1. During the tax year, you perform servicesIf you are a member of a reserve component of2. Enter the total amount of your in the performing arts as an employee forthe Armed Forces of the United States and youexpenses for the periods at least two employers.travel more than 100 miles away from home incovered by this reimbursement 8,500 connection with your performance of services as3. Of the amount on line 2, enter 2. You receive at least $200 each from anya member of the reserves, you can deduct youryour total expense for meals two of these employers.travel expenses as an adjustment to gross in-and entertainment ......... 4,500
3. Your related performing-arts business ex-come rather than as a miscellaneous itemized4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the
penses are more than 10% of your grossresult as a decimal (rounded to deduction. The amount of expenses you can
at least three places) .......  .529 income from the performance of thosededuct as an adjustment to gross income is
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter services.limited to the regular federal per diem rate (forthe result here and in Column lodging, meals, and incidental expenses) and 4. Your adjusted gross income is not moreB, line 7 ............... 3,703 the standard mileage rate (for car expenses) than $16,000 before deducting these busi-6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter plus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. Seethe result here and in Column ness expenses.Per Diem and Car Allowances  earlier for moreA, line 7 ............... 3,297
information. Any expenses in excess of these Special rules for married persons. If you areOn line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297 amounts can be claimed only as a miscellane- married, you must file a joint return unless youous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit.($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) in lived apart from your spouse at all times duringColumn A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Column the tax year. If you file a joint return, you mustMember of a reserve component. You are aB. figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separatelymember of a reserve component of the Armed for both you and your spouse. However, require-Forces of the United States if you are in the ment (4) applies to your and your spouse’s com-After you complete the form. After you have Army, Naval, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast bined adjusted gross income.completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, follow Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the
the directions on that form to deduct your ex- United States, the Air National Guard of the Where to report. If you meet all of the abovepenses on the appropriate line of your tax return. United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub- requirements, you should first complete Formlic Health Service.For most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule A 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your per-
(Form 1040). However, if you are a government forming-arts-related expenses from Form 2106,
How to report. If you have reserve-relatedofficial paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on
travel that takes you more than 100 miles from Form 1040, line 24.an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-
home, you should first complete Form 2106 or If you do not meet all of the above require-ployee with impairment-related work expenses, Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-see Special Rules, later. reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to penses as an adjustment to gross income.
the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or
Limits on employee business expenses. Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040, 2106-EZ and deduct your employee business
line 24. Subtract this amount from the total onYour employee business expenses may be sub- expenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule
Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, andject to any of the three limits described next. A (Form 1040), line 20.
deduct the balance as an itemized deduction onThey are figured in the following order on the
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20.specified form.
You cannot deduct expenses of travel that Impairment-Related Work1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer- does not take you more than 100 miles from Expenses of Disabled Employeestain meal and entertainment expenses are sub- home as an adjustment to gross income. In-
ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, you If you are an employee with a physical or mentalstead, you must complete Form 2106 or
disability, your impairment-related work ex-figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 of 2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an
penses are not subject to the 2%-of- ad-Form 2106-EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.) itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040),
justed-gross-income limit that applies to mostline 20.2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc- other employee business expenses. After you
tions. If you are an employee, deduct your complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, enter your
employee business expenses (as figured on impairment-related work expenses from FormOfficials Paid on a Fee Basis
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 20 of Schedule A 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on
Certain fee-basis officials can claim their em-(Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de- Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27, and identify
ployee business expenses whether or not they the type and amount of this expense on theductions, including employee business ex-
itemize their other deductions on Schedule A dotted line next to line 27. Enter your employeepenses, are subject to a 2%-of-adjusted-
(Form 1040). business expenses that are unrelated to yourgross-income limit. This limit is figured on line 25
disability from Form 2106, line 10, or FormFee-basis officials are persons who are em-of Schedule A (Form 1040). 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),ployed by a state or local government and who
3. Limit on total itemized deductions. If line 20.are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They
your adjusted gross income (line 38 of Form Impairment-related work expenses are yourcan deduct their business expenses in perform-
allowable expenses for attendant care at youring services in that job as an adjustment to gross1040) is more than $150,500 ($75,250 if you are
workplace and other expenses in connectionincome rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedmarried filing separately), the total of certain
with your workplace that are necessary for youdeduction.itemized deductions, including employee busi-
to be able to work.If you are a fee-basis official, include yourness expenses, may be limited. See your form You are disabled if you have:employee business expenses from Form 2106,instructions for information on how to figure this
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on • A physical or mental disability (for exam-limit.
Form 1040, line 24. ple, blindness or deafness) that function-
ally limits your being employed, orSpecial Rules
• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-Expenses of CertainThis section discusses special rules that apply ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatPerforming Artistsonly to Armed Forces reservists, government substantially limits one or more of your
officials who are paid on a fee basis, performing If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to major life activities, such as performing
artists, and disabled employees with impair- deduct your employee business expenses as an manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-
adjustment to gross income rather than as ament-related work expenses. ing, learning, or working.
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can deduct impairment-related expenses (200% DB) to determine his depreciation deduc- He later takes John Smith of Attire Co.  out to
as business expenses if they are: tion. dinner to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’s
David’s total depreciation deduction would new line of clothing.• Necessary for you to do your work satis- normally be $3,430 ($24,500 (unadjusted basis) Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2003.factorily, × 70% (business use) × 20% (from table 4-1)). He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-
• For goods and services not required or However, it is limited in the first year to $2,072 pense purposes. He records his total mileage,
used, other than incidentally, in your per- ($2,960 (from the Maximum Depreciation De- business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the
sonal activities, and duction for Cars  table shown in chapter 4) × year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-
70%). He enters these amounts in Part II, Sec- nent information in his Weekly Traveling Ex-• Not specifically covered under other in- tion D. pense and Entertainment Record, shown income tax laws. His other car expenses included $5,150 for Table 6-3. He obtains receipts for his expenses
gas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters this for lodging and for any other expenses of $75 orExample. You are blind. You must use a amount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it by more.reader to do your work. You use the reader both the 70% business use. He adds this amount During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000during your regular working hours at your place ($3,605) to the depreciation deduction ($2,072) miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.of work and outside your regular working hours and reports the total ($5,677) on Part I, line 1. Following the instructions for Form 2106-EZ,away from your place of work. The reader’s His other transportation expenses for park- Part II, he answers all the questions and figuresservices are only for your work. You can deduct ing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,320. He enters his car expense to be $8,900 (20,000 × 44 1/2
your expenses for the reader as business ex- this amount on Part I, line 2. David’s employer cents per mile).penses. reimbursed him a total of $4,800 for his car and His total employee business expenses aretransportation expenses. This amount was paid
shown in the following table.from an accountable plan and was not shown onIllustrated Examples
David’s Form W-2. However, since he is claim- Type of Expense AmountThe following examples illustrate the reporting of ing expenses that are more than his reimburse-
Parking fees and tolls ........... $  5 2 0travel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex- ments, he must show the entire reimbursement
Car expenses ................ 8,900penses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Business amount on Part I, Column A, line 7. Since David
Meals ..................... 3,861use of a car is shown using actual car expenses had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en- Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning ..... 17,446in Example 1 and the standard mileage rate in ters his excess deductible expenses ($2,197) on Entertainment ................ 3,250Example 2. Sample records that prove some of Part I, line 10. He can deduct these expenses Gifts, education, etc. ........... 6 5 0
the claimed expenses are also shown. (subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income Total $34,627
limit) on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20, if he
Bill received an allowance of $30,000Example 1. David Pine purchased a new itemizes his deductions.
($2,500 per month) to help offset his expenses.car for $24,500 (including sales tax) on January
Bill did not have to account to his employer for5, 2006. In 2006, he used the car 70% for busi- Example 2. Bill Wilson is an employee of
the reimbursement and the $30,000 was in-ness purposes. A sample page from David’s Fashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a
cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.logbook is illustrated in Table 6-2. He records his typical travel week, Bill leaves his home on Long
business mileage (but not his personal miles) Island on Monday morning and drives to Albany Because Bill’s reimbursement was included
and expenses daily. to exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospec- in his income and he is using the standard mile-
David uses Form 2106 to claim actual car tive customers. Then he drives to Troy to show age rate for his car expenses, he files Form
expenses. He completes Part II, Section A, as Fashion’s new line of merchandise to Town De- 2106-EZ with his tax return.
shown later on his illustrated form. He does not partment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,
claim the section 179 deduction. He uses the he talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for
MACRS double declining balance method Town Department Store, to discuss the new line.Date
6/4/06
Table 6-2. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name:  David Pine
Destination
(City, Town, or Area)
Business
Purpose Start Stop
Miles
this trip
Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
Odometer Readings
6/5/06
6/6/06
6/7/06
6/8/06
6/9/06
6/10/06
Local
(St. Louis)
Indianapolis
Louisville
Return to
St. Louis
Local
(St. Louis)
Weekly
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Sales calls
Sales calls
See Bob Smith
(Pot. Client)
Sales calls
8,097
8,211
8,486
8,599
8,914
8,097
8,188
8,486
8,599
8,875
9,005
9,005
91
275
113
276
91
846
6,236
Gas
Parking
Gas/Repair
flat tire
Gas
$ 34.50
6.50
36.00
35.50
$ 167.50
$2,313.00
55.00
Expenses
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
David Pine 559 00 9559Sales
5,677
1,320
6,997
4,800
2,197
2,197
2,197
OMB No. 1545-0074Employee Business Expenses2106Form
/H17075See separate instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements
Column BColumn A
Step 1 Enter Your Expenses Meals and
Entertainment
Other Than Meals
and Entertainment
1
Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See
instructions.)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging,
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not
include meals and entertainment
4
4
5Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions)5
Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5
6
6
Note: If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8.
Step 2 Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see
instructions)
7
7
Step 3 Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040)
8
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if
line 7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as
income on Form 1040, line 7 (or on Form 1040NR, line 8)
8
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form 2106 to
your return.
9
9
10
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal
expenses incurred while away from home on business by 75% (.75)
instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20 (or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 9). (Reservists, qualified
performing artists, fee-basis state or local government officials, and individuals with disabilities:
See the instructions for special rules on where to enter the total.) /H1707510
Cat. No. 11700NFor Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Form 2106 (2006)
Part I
(99)
2006
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
/H12011
15 0 6
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
5,150
5,150
3,605
2,072
5,677
24,500
17,150
200DB 20%
3,430
3,430
2,960
2,072
2,072
/H12011
Page 2Form 2106 (2006)
Vehicle Expenses
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
//1111 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service
12 milesmiles12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2006
milesmiles1313 Business miles included on line 12
%%1414 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12
milesmiles1515 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance
milesmiles1616 Commuting miles included on line 12
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 milesmiles17
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?18 NoYes
NoYesWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?19
NoYes
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?21 NoYes
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?20
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or Section C.)
22 Multiply line 13 by 44.5¢ (.445)
Section C—Actual Expenses (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle
insurance, etc.
23
23
24a24a Vehicle rentals
24bb Inclusion amount (see instructions)
24cc Subtract line 24b from line 24a
Value of employer-provided
vehicle (applies only if 100% of
annual lease value was included
on Form W-2—see instructions)
25
25
2626 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25
Multiply line 26 by the
percentage on line 14
27
27
28Depreciation (see instructions)28
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total
here and on line 1 29
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C for the vehicle.)
(a) Vehicle 1 (b) Vehicle 2
Enter cost or other basis (see
instructions)
30
30
Enter section 179 deduction
(see instructions)
31
31
Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see
instructions if you claimed the
section 179 deduction or
special allowance)
32
32
Enter depreciation method and
percentage (see instructions)
33
33
Multiply line 32 by the percentage
on line 33 (see instructions)
34
34
35Add lines 31 and 3435
Enter the applicable limit explained
in the line 36 instructions
36
36
Multiply line 36 by the
percentage on line 14
37
37
Enter the smaller of line 35
or line 37. If you skipped lines
36 and 37, enter the amount
from line 35. Also enter this
amount on line 28 above
38
38
Part II
//
Form 2106 (2006)
22
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel and transportation expenses
Table 6-3. Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
From: August 6, 2006 To: August 12, 2006 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
Travel Expenses:
Airlines
1.
Excess baggage
Bus - Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Hotel and Motel
(Detail in Schedule B)
Entertainment
(Detail in Schedule C)
Other Expenses:
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s)
Trade Shows
2.
3.
4.
Car Expenses: (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
5.
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A - Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B - Lodging
Schedule C - Entertainment
Date
6.
Hotel
or
Motel
Name
City
August 10, 2006 Bar
Dinner
Item Place
John’s Steak House
Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
Troy
Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.25 00
50 00
Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern
Hotel
Albany Albany Albany Troy
57,600
57,445
155
155
57,620
57,600
20
57,650
57,620
57,660
57,650
57,840
57,660
30 10 395
170103020
180
385
80 0
139 25 283 00 283 75 179 50 29 50 915 00
20 0060 0 60 0
100 00 100 00
50 0050 00 100 00
200 00
55 0 40 0 95 0
94 00
22 00
97 5
94 00
20 25
10 00
87 5
94 00
21 50
10 25
80 0 82 5
10 25
80 00
75 00
90 0
10 50
34 00
50 75
362 00
63 75
75 00
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Other reimbursements
TOTAL
N/A
Page 38 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 39 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
8,900
17,446
650
3,556
31,072
1 3 2003
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
7,111
520
OMB No. 1545-0074
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 44.5¢
(.445)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and
entertainment
4
4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ × 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred
while away from home on business by 75% (.75) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20
(or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR, line 9). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local
government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the
instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2006)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2006.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements for this purpose).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2006, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2006 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
2006
1
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 39

Page 40 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Download forms, instructions, and publica- Walk-in. Many products and services
are available on a walk-in basis.tions.
• Order IRS products online.7.
• Products. You can walk in to many post• Research your tax questions online. offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up
• Search publications online by topic or certain forms, instructions, and publica-
How To Get Tax keyword. tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
stores, copy centers, city and county gov-• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) ernment offices, credit unions, and officeHelp published in the last few years. supply stores have a collection of products
• Figure your withholding allowances using available to print from a CD or photocopyYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, our withholding calculator. from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRSorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques- offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-• Sign up to receive local and national taxtions, and get information from the IRS in sev- enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuenews by email.eral ways. By selecting the method that is best Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-for you, you will have quick and easy access to • Get information on starting and operating able for research purposes.tax help. a small business.
• Services. You can walk in to your local
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
Taxpayer Advocate Service is an independent ness day for personal, face-to-face taxPhone. Many services are available byorganization within the IRS whose employees help. An employee can explain IRS letters,phone.assist taxpayers who are experiencing eco- request adjustments to your tax account,nomic harm, who are seeking help in resolving or help you set up a payment plan. If youtax problems that have not been resolved • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica- need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-through normal channels, or who believe that an tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur- tions about how the tax law applies to yourIRS system or procedure is not working as it rent-year forms, instructions, and individual tax return, or you’re more com-should. publications, and prior-year forms and in- fortable talking with someone in person,You can contact the Taxpayer Advocate structions. You should receive your order visit your local Taxpayer AssistanceService by calling toll-free 1-877-777-4778 or within 10 days. Center where you can spread out yourTTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi- records and talk with an IRS representa-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withble for assistance. You can also call or write to tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.your local taxpayer advocate, whose phone essary, but if you prefer, you can call yournumber and address are listed in your local • Solving problems. You can get local Center and leave a message re-telephone directory and in Publication 1546, The face-to-face help solving tax problems questing an appointment to resolve a taxTaxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS - How to every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- account issue. A representative will callGet Help With Unresolved Tax Problems. You sistance Centers. An employee can ex- you back within 2 business days to sched-can file Form 911, Application for Taxpayer As- plain IRS letters, request adjustments to ule an in-person appointment at your con-sistance Order, or ask an IRS employee to com- your account, or help you set up a pay- venience. To find the number, go to www.plete it on your behalf. For more information, go ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis- irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phoneto www.irs.gov/advocate. tance Center for an appointment. To find book under United States Government, In-the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-Low income tax clinics (LITCs). LITCs are ternal Revenue Service.tacts or look in the phone book underindependent organizations that provide low in-
United States Government, Internal Reve-come taxpayers with representation in federal Mail. You can send your order fortax controversies with the IRS for free or for a nue Service. forms, instructions, and publications tonominal charge. The clinics also provide tax • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access the address below. You should receiveeducation and outreach for taxpayers with lim- to TTY/TDD equipment, call a response within 10 business days after yourited English proficiency or who speak English as 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to request is received.a second language. Publication 4134, Low In- order forms and publications.come Taxpayer Clinic List, provides information
National Distribution Centeron clinics in your area. It is available at www.irs. • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-
P.O. Box 8903gov or at your local IRS office. ten to pre-recorded messages covering
Bloomington, IL 61702-8903various tax topics.
Free tax services. To find out what services
• Refund information. To check the status of CD for tax products. You can orderare available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to
your 2006 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 Publication 1796, IRS Tax ProductsFree Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax
and press 1 for automated refund informa- CD, and obtain:publications and describes other free tax infor-
tion or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure tomation services, including tax education and • A CD that is released twice so you havewait at least 6 weeks from the date youassistance programs and a list of TeleTax top- the latest products. The first release shipsfiled your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-ics. in January and the final release ships intronically). Have your 2006 tax return March.Internet. You can access the IRS web- available because you will need to knowsite at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 your social security number, your filing • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-days a week to: status, and the exact whole dollar amount lications.
of your refund.• E-file your return. Find out about commer- • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-cial tax preparation and e-file services tions.available free to eligible taxpayers. Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv- • Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD -ices. To ensure IRS representatives give accu-• Check the status of your 2006 refund. Ships with the final release.rate, courteous, and professional answers, weClick on Where’s My Refund. Wait at least
use several methods to evaluate the quality of • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and6 weeks from the date you filed your re-
our telephone services. One method is for a finding aid.turn (3 weeks if you filed electronically).
second IRS representative to listen in on orHave your 2006 tax return available be- • Tax law frequently asked questions.record random telephone calls. Another is to askcause you will need to know your social
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-some callers to complete a short survey at thesecurity number, your filing status, and the
sponse system.exact whole dollar amount of your refund. end of the call.
Page 40 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 41 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax • Tax law changes for 2006.
forms. Appendices• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
• Internal Revenue Bulletins. finding aid.
There are sixteen appendices.
• Toll-free and email technical support. • Web links to various government agen- Appendices A-1 through A-6 show the lease
cies, business associations, and IRS orga- inclusion amounts that you may need to report if
Buy the CD from National Technical Informa- nizations. you leased a car (other than a truck or van, or an
tion Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for electric car) for 30 days or more. The tables are• “Rate the Product” survey—your opportu-$25 (no handling fee) or call 1-877-CDFORMS numbered.nity to suggest changes for future editions.(1-877-233-6767) toll free to buy the CD for $25 Appendices B-1 through B-4 show the lease
(plus a $5 handling fee). Price is subject to • A site map of the CD to help you navigate inclusion amounts that you may need to report if
change. the pages of the CD with ease. you leased a truck or van.
Appendices C-1 through C-6 show the lease• An interactive “Teens in Biz” module thatCD for small businesses. Publication inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifgives practical tips for teens about starting3207, The Small Business Resource you leased an electric car.their own business, creating a businessGuide CD for 2006, is a must for every If any of these apply to you, use the appendixplan, and filing taxes.small business owner or any taxpayer about to for the year you first leased the car. (See chapterstart a business. This year’s CD includes: 4.)An updated version of this CD is available
• Helpful information, such as how to pre- each year in early April. You can get a free copy
pare a business plan, find financing for by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.
your business, and much more. gov/smallbiz.
• All the business tax forms, instructions,
and publications needed to successfully
manage a business.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 41

Page 42 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1997 through 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
14
25
36
47
62
80
99
117
136
154
173
191
209
228
255
292
329
366
403
439
477
513
550
587
624
661
697
735
771
808
845
882
919
955
992
1,028
1,066
1,102
1,140
1,176
1,213
1,250
1,286
1,324
1,360
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1997
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1998
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1999
For Lease Term
Beginning in
2000
5th and Later
For Lease Term
Beginning in
2001
10
21
32
44
58
77
95
114
132
151
169
187
205
224
252
288
326
362
399
435
473
509
546
583
620
657
693
731
767
804
841
878
915
951
989
1,026
1,062
1,098
1,136
1,172
1,209
1,246
1,282
1,320
1,356
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
2
1,398
1,434
1,471
1,508
1,544
1,582
1,619
1,674
1,747
1,821
1,894
1,968
2,042
2,115
2,189
1,394
1,430
1,467
1,504
1,540
1,578
1,615
1,670
1,743
1,817
1,890
1,964
2,038
2,112
2,186
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of th e lease.
For 1997, Revenue Procedure 97-20 (1997-1 CB 647)
For 1998, Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-1 CB 930)
For 1999, Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56)
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 274)
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732)
If you leased an electric car, use Appendix B.
15,500
$ 15,800$ 0$ 0$$ 6 $ 12 $
14
23
32
41
53
68
82
96
111
126
140
155
169
183
206
235
264
293
322
351
380
410
439
468
497
527
556
585
614
643
672
702
731
760
789
819
848
877
906
935
 964
 993
1,023
1,052
1,081
1,110
1,140
1,169
1,198
1,227
1,256
1,285
1,329
1,387
1,446
1,504
1,563
1,621
1,679
1,738
23
34
45
57
72
91
109
128
147
166
185
204
222
241
269
306
345
381
419
457
494
532
570
607
645
683
720
757
795
833
870
908
946
983
1,021
1,058
1,095
1,133
1,171
1,208
1,246
1,284
1,321
1,359
1,396
1,433
1,471
1,508
1,546
1,584
1,621
1,659
1,715
1,790
1,865
1,941
2,016
2,092
2,166
2,241
1
2
11
22
33
44
56
70
89
107
125
143
162
181
199
217
236
263
300
337
373
410
447
484
520
557
594
631
667
705
741
778
815
851
888
925
962
998
1,036
1,072
1,108
1,145
1,183
1,219
1,256
1,293
1,330
1,366
1,403
1,439
1,476
1,514
1,550
1,586
1,624
1,678
1,752
1,825
1,900
1,972
2,047
2,120
2,193
Page 42 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 43 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
2
3
4
6
7
5
9
14
18
23
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
9
11
14
16
18
21
23
25
28
30
33
38
43
47
52
57
61
66
71
75
80
85
89
94
99
103
108
112
117
122
126
131
136
140
145
150
154
159
164
168
173
177
182
187
191
196
201
205
212
222
231
240
250
259
268
277
287
296
312
335
359
382
29
37
44
52
60
67
75
82
90
97
108
123
139
154
169
185
199
214
230
245
260
276
290
305
321
336
351
366
381
396
411
426
441
457
472
487
502
517
532
548
904
934
964
1,017
1,092
1,169
1,245
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
3
7
10
13
16
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
56
60
66
74
84
94
104
114
124
135
145
155
165
175
185
196
206
216
226
236
247
257
267
278
288
298
308
318
328
339
349
359
369
379
390
400
410
420
430
440
451
466
486
507
527
547
568
589
609
629
650
686
737
787
838
6
11
17
22
29
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
98
108
117
130
149
166
185
203
220
239
258
275
294
312
329
348
367
384
403
421
439
457
475
493
512
530
548
566
584
602
620
639
657
675
693
711
729
747
766
784
802
829
866
902
938
974
1.011
1,047
1,083
1,120
1,156
1,219
1,311
1,401
1,491
6
13
19
26
31
40
50
61
72
82
93
103
114
123
134
150
171
192
213
234
255
276
296
318
338
360
381
402
422
443
464
485
506
527
549
570
590
611
632
653
674
695
717
737
758
779
800
821
842
863
883
905
925
957
999
1,041
1,083
1,125
1,166
1,208
1,250
1,292
1,334
1,408
1,512
1,617
1,722100,000
2
$$$$ $
563
578
593
608
624
639
654
669
692
722
752
783
813
843
873
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 43

Page 44 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
10
12
14
15
17
33
39
44
50
56
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
19
21
22
25
28
32
35
39
42
46
49
52
56
59
63
66
70
73
77
80
83
87
90
94
97
101
104
108
111
115
118
121
125
128
132
135
139
142
146
149
152
158
165
171
178
185
192
199
206
213
220
232
249
266
284
61
66
72
81
92
103
115
125
137
148
159
171
182
194
204
215
227
238
249
260
272
283
294
306
317
328
339
351
362
374
385
396
407
418
430
441
452
463
474
486
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
22
26
30
34
37
41
45
49
54
62
70
77
85
92
100
108
115
123
130
138
146
153
161
168
176
184
191
199
206
214
221
229
236
244
251
259
267
274
282
289
297
304
312
320
327
335
346
361
377
392
407
422
437
452
467
483
509
547
585
623
40
46
53
59
66
73
80
87
97
110
123
137
151
165
178
191
205
218
231
245
259
272
285
299
313
326
340
353
366
380
394
407
420
434
447
460
474
488
502
515
528
542
556
569
582
596
616
642
670
697
724
751
778
804
832
859
906
973
1.041
1,108
45
53
61
69
77
85
92
100
111
127
143
158
174
189
204
221
236
251
267
283
298
314
330
346
361
376
391
407
423
438
454
470
486
501
516
532
548
563
578
594
610
626
641
656
672
688
711
743
773
805
835
867
898
930
960
991
1,046
1,124
1,202
1,280
$$$$ $
497
514
537
559
581
604
626
649
672
694
716
756
812
868
924
100,000
2
Page 44 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 45 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
$$$$ $11 23 33 42 48
13 26 40 49 56
14 31 46 55 65
16 35 51 63 73
18 39 57 70 81
20 43 63 77 89
22 47 69 84 97
23 51 75 91 106
25 55 81 98 114
28 61 90 109 126
32 69 102 123 142
35 77 114 137 159
39 85 126 151 176
43 93 137 166 192
46 101 149 180 209
50 109 161 194 225
54 116 174 208 242
57 125 185 223 257
61 133 197 237 274
64 141 209 251 291
68 149 221 265 307
72 157 232 280 323
75 165 244 294 340
79 173 256 308 357
83 181 268 322 373
86 189 280 337 389
90 197 292 351 405
94 204 304 365 423
97 213 316 379 438
101 221 327 394 455
105 228 340 408 471
108 237 351 422 488
112 245 363 436 504
115 253 375 451 520
119 261 387 464 538
123 269 398 479 554
126 277 411 493 570
130 285 422 508 586
134 292 435 522 603
137 301 446 536 619
141 309 458 550 636
145 316 471 564 652
148 325 482 578 669
152 333 493 593 685
155 341 506 607 701
159 349 517 622 718
163 357 529 636 734
168 369 547 657 759
176 384 571 686 792
183 401 594 714 825
190 417 618 743 857
197 433 642 771 890
205 448 666 800 923
212 465 689 828 956
219 481 713 856 990
227 496 738 884 1,022
234 513 760 914 1,055
247 540 803 963 1,112
265 580 862 1,035 1,194
283 621 921 1,105 1,277
301 661 980 1,177 1,359
17,500 18,000
18,000 18,500
18,500 19,000
19,000 19,500
19,500 20,000
20,000 20,500
20,500 21,000
21,000 21,500
21,500 22,000
22,000 23,000
23,000 24,000
24,000 25,000
25,000 26,000
26,000 27,000
27,000 28,000
28,000 29,000
29,000 30,000
30,000 31,000
31,000 32,000
32,000 33,000
33,000 34,000
34,000 35,000
35,000 36,000
36,000 37,000
37,000 38,000
38,000 39,000
39,000 40,000
40,000 41,000
41,000 42,000
42,000 43,000
43,000 44,000
44,000 45,000
45,000 46,000
46,000 47,000
47,000 48,000
48,000 49,000
49,000 50,000
50,000 51,000
51,000 52,000
52,000 53,000
53,000 54,000
54,000 55,000
55,000 56,000
56,000 57,000
57,000 58,000
58,000 59,000
59,000 60,000
60,000 62,000
62,000 64,000
64,000 66,000
66,000 68,000
68,000 70,000
70,000 72,000
72,000 74,000
74,000 76,000
76,000 78,000
78,000 80,000
80,000 85,000
85,000 90,000
90,000 95,000
95,000 100,000
2
1
2
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 45

Page 46 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-2 IRB 759).
$$ $ $$15,200
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
1
2
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
267
276
285
294
310
3
4
5
7
8
9
11
14
16
18
20
23
25
27
30
32
35
40
44
49
54
58
63
67
72
77
81
86
90
95
99
104
109
113
118
122
127
132
136
141
145
150
154
159
164
168
173
177
182
186
191
196
200
205
212
221
230
239
248
258
586
606
626
646
682
6
9
12
15
18
21
25
30
35
40
46
50
55
61
65
70
78
88
98
108
118
128
138
149
159
168
179
189
199
209
219
229
239
249
259
269
279
289
299
309
320
329
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
465
485
506
526
546
566
 869
 899
 930
 960
1,011
9
13
18
22
27
32
38
45
52
60
67
75
82
89
97
105
116
131
146
161
175
191
205
220
234
250
265
279
295
309
325
339
354
370
384
400
414
429
444
459
473
489
504
518
533
548
563
578
593
609
623
638
653
668
691
721
750
780
810
839
1,044
1,079
1,114
1,150
1,213
11
17
22
27
32
38
45
54
63
72
80
90
99
108
117
125
139
156
175
192
211
228
247
264
283
300
318
336
354
372
389
408
426
443
462
479
497
515
533
551
569
587
604
623
640
659
676
694
712
729
748
766
784
802
828
 864
 900
 935
 971
1,008
1,204
1,247
1,288
1,329
1,402
13
19
26
32
39
44
52
63
73
83
94
104
115
125
135
146
161
182
202
223
244
265
285
306
326
348
367
389
409
430
451
471
491
512
533
554
575
595
616
636
657
678
699
719
740
760
781
802
823
844
864
884
905
925
957
998
1,039
1,081
1,123
1,163
85,000
90,000
95,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
333
356
379
732
782
832
1,086
1,161
1,236
1,303
1,392
1,481
1,504
1,608
1,712
2
Page 46 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 47 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645).
$$ $ $$15,200
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
1
2
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
380
393
407
420
443
4
6
8
9
11
13
16
19
23
26
29
32
36
39
42
45
50
57
63
70
76
83
90
96
103
109
116
122
129
135
142
148
155
161
168
175
181
188
194
201
207
214
220
227
233
233
240
246
253
259
273
279
286
292
302
315
328
341
354
367
833
862
890
919
969
6
10
15
19
24
28
34
41
48
55
62
70
76
84
91
98
109
123
138
152
166
181
195
209
223
238
252
267
281
295
309
324
338
353
367
381
396
410
424
438
453
467
482
496
510
525
539
553
568
582
596
611
625
639
661
690
718
747
776
804
10
16
22
29
35
42
50
61
71
82
93
103
114
124
135
146
162
183
204
225
247
268
289
311
332
460
481
502
523
545
566
587
608
630
651
672
694
715
736
758
778
800
821
842
864
885
906
927
949
981
1,023
1,066
1,108
1,151
1,194
1,236
1,278
1,321
1,363
1,438
1,481
1,532
1,583
1,634
1,723
10
18
25
33
40
48
58
71
84
96
109
122
135
148
160
173
192
218
243
269
294
319
345
371
397
422
448
473
498
523
549
575
601
626
651
677
702
728
753
779
805
830
855
881
906
932
958
984
1,009
1,034
1,060
1,085
1,111
1,136
1,174
1,225
1,276
1,328
1,378
1,429
1,707
1,767
1,825
1,884
1,987
10
18
28
36
45
53
66
80
95
110
125
139
154
168
184
198
220
250
279
309
339
368
397
426
455
485
515
545
574
604
633
662
691
721
750
780
810
839
869
898
927
956
986
1,016
1,045
1,075
1,104
1,133
1,163
1,192
1,221
1,251
1,281
1,311
1,354
1,413
1,473
1,531
1,590
1,649
85,000
90,000
95,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
475
508
541
1,041
1,112
1,184
1,544
1,651
1,757
1,851
1,978
2,106
2,135
2,282
2,429
2
353
374
395
417
439
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 47

Page 48 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
7
8
10
12
14
22
27
33
38
44
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
15
17
20
23
27
30
33
37
40
44
47
51
54
58
61
65
68
71
75
78
82
85
89
92
96
99
102
106
109
113
116
120
123
127
130
134
137
140
144
147
152
159
166
173
180
187
194
201
208
215
227
244
261
278
49
55
63
74
86
97
109
119
130
142
153
165
176
187
198
210
221
232
243
254
266
277
289
300
311
322
333
345
356
368
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
14
18
22
26
29
34
37
43
51
58
66
73
81
89
96
104
111
119
126
134
141
149
157
164
172
179
187
194
202
209
217
225
232
240
247
255
263
270
278
285
293
301
308
316
323
335
350
365
380
395
410
426
441
456
471
497
535
573
611
24
32
38
45
52
59
66
76
89
102
116
129
143
157
170
183
196
210
224
238
251
264
278
292
305
318
332
345
358
373
386
400
413
426
439
29
36
44
52
60
67
75
86
102
118
133
149
165
180
196
212
227
242
258
273
289
305
320
336
352
367
383
398
414
429
445
460
476
492
507
$$$$ $
100,000
2
379
389
401
412
434
445
457
468
480
496
519
542
564
587
609
631
654
676
699
739
795
851
907
453
467
480
493
507
521
534
548
561
575
595
622
648
676
702
730
757
783
811
837
885
952
1,020
1,088
424
523
538
554
570
585
601
617
632
647
663
687
717
749
780
811
842
873
905
935
967
1,021
1,099
1,177
1,254
Page 48 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 49 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1 st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lea se1
$$
For the last tax year of the lea se, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair mar ket value of the lea se is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
$$$$ $
1
2
18,000 18,500 7 15 21 26 30
18,500 19,000 9 18 28 33 38
19,000 19,500 11 22 34 40 47
19,500 20,000 13 26 39 48 55
20,000 20,500 14 31 45 54 63
20,500 21,000 16 35 51 61 72
21,000 21,500 18 38 58 68 80
21,500 22,000 20 42 63 76 88
22,000 23,000 23 48 72 87 100
23,000 24,000 26 57 83 101 117
24,000 25,000 30 64 96 115 133
25,000 26,000 34 72 108 129 149
26,000 27,000 37 81 119 143 166
27,000 28,000 41 88 132 157 183
28,000 29,000 44 97 143 172 198
29,000 30,000 48 104 155 187 215
30,000 31,000 52 112 167 201 231
31,000 32,000 55 121 178 215 248
32,000 33,000 59 128 191 229 264
33,000 34,000 63 136 203 243 281
34,000 35,000 66 145 214 257 298
35,000 36,000 70 152 227 271 314
36,000 37,000 74 160 238 286 330
37,000 38,000 77 169 249 301 346
38,000 39,000 81 176 262 314 364
39,000 40,000 84 185 273 329 379
40,000 41,000 88 192 286 343 396
41,000 42,000 92 200 298 357 412
42,000 43,000 95 209 309 371 429
43,000 44,000 99 216 322 385 445
44,000 45,000 103 224 333 400 462
45,000 46,000 106 233 345 413 479
46,000 47,000 110 240 357 428 495
47,000 48,000 114 248 369 442 511
48,000 49,000 117 257 380 457 527
49,000 50,000 121 264 393 471 544
50,000 51,000 125 272 404 486 560
51,000 52,000 128 280 417 499 577
52,000 53,000 132 288 428 514 593
53,000 54,000 135 297 440 527 610
54,000 55,000 139 304 452 542 626
55,000 56,000 143 312 464 556 643
56,000 57,000 146 321 475 571 659
57,000 58,000 150 328 488 585 675
58,000 59,000 154 336 499 600 691
59,000 60,000 157 345 511 613 708
60,000 62,000 163 356 529 635 733
62,000 64,000 170 372 553 663 766
64,000 66,000 177 389 576 692 798
66,000 68,000 185 404 600 720 832
68,000 70,000 192 420 624 749 864
70,000 72,000 199 436 648 777 897
72,000 74,000 206 453 671 805 931
74,000 76,000 214 468 695 834 963
76,000 78,000 221 484 719 863 996
78,000 80,000 228 501 742 891 1,029
80,000 85,000 241 528 785 940 1,087
85,000 90,000 259 568 844 1,012 1,168
90,000 95,000 277 609 902 1,084 1,250
95,000 100,000
2 296 648 962 1,155 1,333
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 49

Page 50 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans first Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-2 IRB 759).
$$ $ $$16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
1
2
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
326
349
372
3
4
7
9
11
14
16
18
20
23
25
28
33
38
42
47
51
56
60
65
70
74
79
83
88
93
97
102
106
111
115
120
125
129
134
138
143
148
152
157
161
166
170
175
180
184
189
193
198
205
214
223
232
241
251
260
269
278
287
303
717
767
817
6
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
63
73
83
93
103
113
123
133
143
153
163
173
184
193
203
214
223
234
244
254
264
274
284
294
304
314
324
334
344
355
364
375
385
394
405
415
425
435
450
470
490
510
531
550
571
591
611
631
666
1,063
1,137
1,212
8
14
21
29
37
44
51
59
67
74
81
92
107
122
137
152
167
182
197
212
227
242
257
271
287
302
316
332
346
361
376
391
406
421
436
451
466
481
496
511
525
541
555
570
586
600
615
630
645
667
697
727
757
786
817
846
876
906
936
989
1,274
1,365
1,454
10
17
26
35
43
52
62
71
79
88
98
111
129
147
165
183
201
218
237
254
272
290
308
326
344
361
380
397
415
433
451
469
487
505
523
541
558
576
594
612
630
648
666
684
701
720
737
755
773
800
836
872
908
944
979
1,015
1,051
1,087
1,123
1,185
1,472
1,575
1,678
11
20
30
40
51
61
71
81
92
103
113
129
149
169
190
210
231
253
272
294
314
335
355
376
397
418
438
459
480
500
521
542
562
583
603
624
645
666
687
707
728
748
769
789
811
830
852
873
893
924
966
1,007
1,048
1,089
1,131
1,172
1,213
1,254
1,296
1,368
2
Page 50 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 51 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-4. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645).
$$ $ $$16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
1
2
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
465
498
531
4
6
9
13
16
19
23
26
29
32
36
41
47
54
60
67
73
80
86
93
99
106
112
119
125
132
139
145
152
158
165
171
178
184
191
197
204
210
217
224
230
237
243
250
256
263
269
276
282
292
305
318
331
344
358
371
384
397
410
433
1,021
1,093
1,164
8
14
21
28
36
43
50
57
64
72
78
89
104
118
132
146
161
175
190
204
219
233
247
261
276
290
304
319
333
347
362
376
390
405
419
434
448
462
476
490
505
519
534
548
563
577
591
605
620
641
670
699
728
756
784
813
842
871
899
949
1,515
1,621
1,728
12
20
31
42
52
63
73
84
95
105
116
132
153
174
196
217
238
260
281
302
323
344
366
387
408
430
451
472
493
515
536
557
579
600
621
642
663
685
707
728
749
770
791
813
833
855
877
898
919
951
994
1,036
1,078
1,121
1,164
1,206
1,249
1,291
1,334
1,409
1,816
1,944
2,071
14
24
37
49
62
75
88
101
113
126
139
158
183
209
235
261
286
311
336
362
388
413
439
465
490
541
566
592
618
642
669
694
719
745
770
796
822
847
872
898
924
949
974
1,000
1,025
1,051
1,077
1,102
1,141
1,191
1,242
1,293
1,345
1,395
1,447
1,447
1,497
1,548
1,600
1,688
2,098
2,244
2,392
16
29
43
58
72
87
102
116
131
146
161
183
213
242
271
300
330
359
389
418
447
478
506
536
595
624
654
684
712
743
772
801
831
860
890
919
948
977
1,008
1,037
1,066
1,096
1,125
1,155
1,184
1,213
1,243
1,272
1,316
1,375
1,435
1,494
1,552
1,612
1,670
1,670
1,729
1,788
1,846
1,950
2
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 51

Page 52 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1997 through 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
47,000
48,100
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,500
55,000
56,500
57,000
58,500
59,000
60,500
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,500
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
23
60
96
134
171
207
244
281
318
355
391
428
465
520
594
668
741
815
888
962
1,035
1,109
1,183
1,312
1,496
1,681
1,865
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1997
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1998
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1999
$$
5th and Later
11
48
84
122
159
195
232
269
306
342
379
417
453
508
582
656
730
803
876
950
1,023
1,097
1,171
1,300
1,484
1,669
1,853
For Lease Term
Beginning in
2000
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 1997, Revenue Procedure 98-24 (1998-10 IRB 31)
For 1998, Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6)
For 1999, Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56)
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 274)
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732)
30
59
88
118
147
177
205
253
264
292
322
351
380
424
483
541
600
658
716
775
 833
 891
 949
1,052
1,198
1,343
1,489
36
66
95
124
153
183
211
240
270
299
328
357
387
430
489
547
606
664
723
781
 838
 897
 955
1,058
1,204
1,350
1,495
2
$$$ $
2
1
5th and Later
For Lease Term
Beginning in
2001
46
83
119
157
193
230
266
304
340
377
414
451
487
543
616
690
763
837
910
984
1,057
1,131
1,204
1,332
1,517
1,701
1,885
$
Page 52 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 53 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
3
7
12
17
21
26
31
35
40
45
49
54
59
63
70
79
89
98
107
117
126
135
145
154
170
193
217
240
6
16
26
36
47
57
67
77
87
98
108
118
128
139
154
276
297
317
337
373
424
475
526
10
26
41
56
71
86
101
117
132
146
161
177
192
206
229
260
290
320
350
381
411
441
472
502
555
631
706
782
102
120
138
156
174
193
211
229
248
275
311
347
384
420
456
493
529
564
602
665
756
847
937
117
138
159
180
201
222
242
264
284
316
358
400
442
484
525
567
609
652
693
767
871
976
1,081
174
195
215
236
256
11
29
47
66
83
12
33
54
74
96
Appendix C-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$ $$$$ $
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
28
31
35
38
42
45
49
54
61
68
75
81
88
95
102
109
116
128
145
162
180
60
68
76
83
91
98
106
117
132
147
163
178
193
208
223
239
254
280
318
356
394
90
101
112
124
134
146
157
174
197
219
241
264
287
309
332
353
376
416
472
528
584
108
121
134
148
162
175
188
209
235
263
290
317
343
371
397
425
452
499
566
634
701
124
140
156
171
187
203
218
241
273
304
334
366
397
428
460
491
521
576
655
732
810
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-19 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
2
1
3
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 53

Page 54 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
Appendix C-4. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$ $$$$ $
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-2 IRB 759).
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
33 72 106 127 147
37 79 118 142 164
40 88 130 155 180
44 96 141 170 197
48 103 154 184 213
51 112 165 199 229
55 120 177 213 245
60 132 195 234 270
68 147 219 263 303
75 164 242 291 336
82 180 266 320 369
90 195 290 348 402
97 211 314 377 435
104 228 337 405 468
111 244 361 434 500
119 259 385 462 534
126 275 409 491 566
139 303 451 540 624
157 343 510 612 706
175 384 569 682 788
193 424 628 754 870
2
1
3
Appendix C-5. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$$ $$$ $45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
5
10
14
19
23
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
23
28
33
37
42
46
51
55
60
65
69
76
85
94
104
113
122
131
140
159
175
197
220
243
11
21
31
41
52
61
71
82
92
102
112
122
132
142
152
69
76
85
94
104
113
122
131
140
159
175
197
220
243
18
33
48
63
77
93
108
122
137
152
167
182
197
212
227
250
280
309
339
369
398
428
458
489
518
571
645
720
795
21
39
57
75
93
111
129
147
164
183
200
218
236
254
272
298
334
370
406
442
478
514
550
585
621
683
773
863
952
25
45
66
86
107
127
148
169
190
210
231
252
272
293
314
345
386
427
469
510
551
593
634
675
717
789
892
995
1,099
2
Page 54 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 55 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-6. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$$ $$$ $45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
4
10
17
24
30
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
110,000
37
43
50
56
63
69
76
82
89
95
105
118
131
144
158
171
184
197
210
223
246
278
311
344
393
8
22
36
51
65
79
94
108
123
137
151
165
180
194
209
230
259
288
316
345
373
402
431
459
488
538
610
682
753
861
11
33
54
74
96
118
139
160
181
202
224
245
266
288
309
341
383
425
469
510
554
596
638
682
724
798
905
1,011
1,118
1,277
12
37
63
89
114
139
165
190
216
242
267
293
318
343
369
407
459
510
560
612
662
713
765
815
866
956
1,083
1,211
1,338
1,529
12
42
72
101
131
160
189
219
248
277
307
337
367
396
425
470
528
587
646
705
764
823
881
940
1,000
1,103
1,250
1,397
1,544
1,766
2
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645).
1
2
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 55

Page 56 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Casualty and theft losses: FL
Cars ....................... 1 750% limit on meals ........... 5 Fair market value of car ..... 2 4 Lavish or extravagant
Depreciation ............. 2 5 expenses ...............5 ,  1 2Farmers:
Charitable organizations: Leasing a car ............. 24-25Form 1040, Schedule F ..... 2 8A Benefit events for .......... 1 2 Luxury private boxes atFederal crime investigations orAccountable plans ....... 29-32 Sports events to benefit ..... 1 2 entertainment events ...... 1 2prosecutions:
Accounting to employer ..... 2 9 Clean-fuel cars .............. 2 1 Luxury water travel ........... 8Federal employees engaged
Adequate accounting ........ 2 9 Club dues ................... 1 3 i n ........................ 4
Independent contractors .... 3 2 Comments on publication .... 2 Federal rate for per diem .....6 , MAdequate records ........... 2 6 Commuting expenses ....... 1 5 30 MACRS (Modified AcceleratedAdvertising: Conventions ..............9 ,  1 0 Fee-basis officials ........... 3 4 Cost RecoveryCar display ................ 1 5 Country clubs ............... 1 3 Fees you pay ................ 1 5 System) ................... 2 0Expenses .................. 1 2 Cruise ships ................. 9 Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 2005 chart (Table 4-1) ...... 2 1Signs, display racks, or allowance ................. 3 0 Main place of business orpromotional material to be Form 1040, Schedule C ...... 2 8 work ....................... 3Dused on recipient’s business Form 1040, Schedule F ...... 2 8 Married taxpayers:premises ................ 1 4 Daily business mileage and Form 2106 ........ 18, 28, 29, 32, Performing artists .......... 3 4expense log (TableAirline clubs ................ 1 3 33-35 Meal expenses ............... 56-2) ....................... 3 5Allocating costs ....... 4 ,  12, 27 Form 2106-EZ ........... 33, 35 50% limit ................... 1 1Depreciation of car: (See alsoAllowance (See Form 4562 ................... 2 8 Determination of applicabilitySection 179 deductions) .... 1 7Reimbursements) (Figure A) ............. 1 1Form 4797 ................... 2 4Adjustment for using standardArmed forces: Exceptions ............... 1 1Form W-2:mileage rate ............. 2 5Assigned overseas .......... 3 “Hours of service” limits.... 2Employer-providedBasis ...................... 1 8Assistance (See Tax help) Actual cost method .......... 5vehicles ................. 2 8Sales taxes .............. 1 6Associated Form 2106 ................. 3 3Reimbursement of personalUnrecovered basis ....... 2 3entertainment ............. 1 0 Major cities with higherexpenses ................ 2 8Casualty or theft, effect ..... 2 5 allowances ............... 6Athletic clubs ............... 1 3 Statutory employees ........ 2 8Deduction .............. 17, 25 Standard meal allowance ....5 ,Excess depreciation ........ 2 4 Free tax services ............ 4 0 6, 30Modified Accelerated CostB Meals,Recovery SystemBasis of car: (See also entertainment-related ..... 1 2G(MACRS) ................ 2 0Depreciation of car) ........ 1 8 Mileage rate (See StandardSection 179 deduction ...... 2 3 Gifts ..................... 13-14Bona fide business mileage rate)Trade-in, effect ......... 19, 25 $25 limit ................... 1 3purpose .................... 5 Military (See Armed forces)Trucks and vans ........... 2 1 Combining for recordkeepingBox seats at entertainment Missing children, photographsDirectly-related purposes ................ 2 7events .................... 1 2 of .......................... 2entertainment ............. 1 0 Reporting requirements ..... 2 8Business travel .............. 6 Modified Accelerated CostDisabled employees: Golf clubs ................... 1 3Outside U.S. ................ 7 Recovery SystemImpairment-related work Gulf Opportunity Zone:Business use of car ......... 1 6 (MACRS) .................. 2 0expenses ................ 3 4 Qualified property .......... 1 8 2005 chart (Table 4-1) ...... 2 1More-than-50%-use Documentary evidence ...... 2 6 Special depreciationtest. ..................... 1 9 More information (See Tax help)
allowance ..............2 ,  1 8Qualified business use ...... 1 9
E NElectric cars ................. 1 7 H Nonaccountable plans ...... 3 2C Employer-provided Hauling tools ................ 1 5Canceled checks: vehicles ................... 1 6 Help (See Tax help)As evidence of business Reporting requirements ..... 2 8 OHigh-low rate method ....... 3 0expenses ................ 2 6 Entertainment Office in the home ........... 1 5Home office ................. 1 5Car expenses ............ 15-25 expenses ............ 9-12, 14 Officials paid on feeHotel clubs .................. 1 3Actual expenses ........... 1 6 50% limit ................... 1 1 basis ...................... 3 4Allowances for .......... 30-32 Determination of applicability Overseas travel:Business and personal (Figure A) ............. 1 1 Conventions ................ 9Iu s e...................... 1 6 Associated test ............. 1 0 Meal allowance ............. 6Impairment-related workCombining expenses ....... 2 7 Deductible .............. 12-13 Part of trip outside U.S. ...... 7expenses ................. 3 4Disposition of car ........... 2 5 Summary (Table 2-1) ..... 1 2 Incidental expenses:Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) Directly-related test ......... 1 0
Defined ..................... 5 Pallowance ................ 3 0 Entertainment, defined ...... 1 2
Gifts ....................... 1 3 Parking fees ............. 15, 16Form 2106 ................. 3 3 Form 2106 ................. 3 3
No meals, incidentalsLeasing a car ........... 24-25 Tickets (See Tickets) Per diem allowances ..... 30-32
only ...................... 5 Defined .................... 2 9Mileage rate (See Standard Entertainment facilities:
Income-producing Federal rate for ............. 3 0mileage rate) Expenses for use of ........ 1 3
property ................... 2 8Taxes paid on car .......... 1 6 Performing artists ........... 3 4Estimates of expenses ...... 2 6
Incomplete records .......... 2 7Traffic tickets ............... 1 7 Personal property taxes ..... 1 6Exceptions to the 50%
Indefinite job assignment .... 4Car pools ................... 1 5 Limit ...................... 1 1 Personal trips ................ 6
Independent contractors .... 3 2 Outside U.S. ................ 8Car rentals ............... 24-25 Excess reimbursements (See
Form 2106 ................. 3 3 Reimbursements) Interest on car loans ........ 1 6 Placed in service, cars ...... 1 8
Car, defined ................. 1 7 Extravagant expenses .....5 ,  1 2 Itinerants ..................... 3 Probationary work period .... 4
Page 56 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 57 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Proving business Reservists: Modified Accelerated Cost Travel expenses ............ 3 - 9
purpose ................... 2 7 Transportation Recovery System (MACRS) Another individual
expenses ................ 1 5 2005 chart (Table 4-1) .... 2 1 accompanyingPublic transportation:
Traveling more than 100 miles Proving expenses (Table taxpayer .................. 4Outside of U.S. travel ........ 7
from home ............... 3 4 5-1) ..................... 2 6 Away from home ............ 3Publications (See Tax help)
Reporting reimbursements Deductible ................ 4 - 9Returning excess
(Table 6-1) ............... 3 1 Summary of (Tablereimbursements ........... 3 2R Transportation expenses, 1-1) .................... 5Rural mail carriers .......... 1 5Recordkeeping determination of deductibility Defined ..................... 3
requirements ........... 25-28 (Figure B) ................ 1 4 Going home on days off ..... 4SAdequate records .......... 2 6 Travel expenses, determination In U.S. ...................... 6
Daily business mileage and Section 179 deduction: of deductibility (Table Lodging ..................... 6
expense log (Table Amended return ............ 1 8 1-1) ...................... 5 Luxury water travel .......... 8
6-2) ..................... 3 5 Deduction .................. 1 7 Weekly travel expense and Outside U.S. ................ 7
Destroyed records .......... 2 7 Limits ...................... 1 7 entertainment record (Table Travel to family home ........ 3
How to prove expenses (Table Self-employed persons ...... 1 1 6-3) ..................... 3 5 Trucks and vans:5-1) ..................... 2 6 Reporting requirements ..... 2 8 Tax help ..................... 4 0 Depreciation ............... 2 1Incomplete records ......... 2 7 Skyboxes ................... 1 2 Transportation workers ..... 1 2Tax home, determinationReimbursed expenses ...... 2 8 Special depreciation Transportation workers’of .......................... 3Sampling to prove allowance ................. 1 8 expenses ................. 6Taxpayer Advocate .......... 4 0expenses ................ 2 7 Spouse, expenses for .....4 ,  1 3 TTY/TDD information ........ 4 0Temporary jobSeparating and combining Standard meal allowance .....5 , Two places of work .......... 1 5assignments ............... 4expenses ................ 2 7 6, 30 Temporary work location .... 1 4Three-year period of Standard mileage rate .... 2 ,  1 5 , Tickets .................. 12, 14retention ................. 2 8 U30 Season or series tickets .... 2 7Weekly travel expense and UnclaimedDepreciation adjustment for Traffic violations ............ 1 7entertainment record (Table reimbursements ........... 2 8using .................... 2 5 Tools:6-3) ..................... 3 5 Unions:Form 2106 ................. 3 3 Hauling tools ............... 1 5Reimbursements ......... 29-33 Trips from union hall to place ofStatutory employees ........ 2 8 Trade associationAccountable plans .......... 2 9 work ..................... 1 5Suggestions for meetings .................. 1 2Excess .................... 3 2 Unrecovered basis of car .... 2 3publication ................. 2Form 2106 ................. 3 3 Trade-in of car .......... 19, 25
Nonaccountable plans ...... 3 2 Traffic tickets ............... 1 7 VNondeductible expenses .... 2 9 T Transients .................... 3 Volunteers ................... 2Personal expenses ......... 2 8 Tables and figures: TransportationRecordkeeping ............. 2 8 50% limit determination (Figure expenses .............. 14-25Reporting (Table 6-1) ....... 3 1 WA ) ....................... 1 1 Car expenses ........... 15-25Unclaimed ................. 2 8 Daily business mileage and Weekly travel expense andDeductible (Figure B) ....... 1 4
Reporting expense log (Table entertainment record (Tablefive or more cars ........... 1 6
requirements ........... 28-35 6-2) ..................... 3 5 6-3) ....................... 3 5Form 2106 ................. 3 3
Per diem or car Entertainment expenses, Transportation workers ......6 , ■allowance ................ 3 0 determination of deductibility 12Reimbursements ........ 29-33 (Table 2-1) ............... 1 2 Travel advance: (See also
Reimbursements) ...... 29, 32
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 57

Page 58 of 58 of Publication 463 13:13 - 27-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2007
Highlights of 2006 Tax Change s
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expen ses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expen ses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and E stimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individual s
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Di sabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Fir st-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Di spositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expen ses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S
. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Lo ss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Provider s)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IR S
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and E quivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefit s
How Do I Adju st My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Ri sk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IR S and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to E state and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS – How to Get Help With
Unresolved Tax Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
ServiceU.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IR S
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibido s en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Intere st and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Bu siness
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Lo ss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Di sabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependent s
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividend s for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filer s
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filer s
Estimated Tax for Individual s
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Tru sts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expen ses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Exten sion of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Account s
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individual s
Noncash Charitable Contribution s
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Lo ss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmer s and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of way s to get publication s, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Re quest9465
Page 58 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help