Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 61  15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service
Publication 463
Cat. No. 11081L
Travel,
Gift, and Car
Expenses
For use in preparing
2023 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Contents
Future Developments ....................... 2
What's New ............................... 2
Reminder ................................ 2
Introduction .............................. 2
Chapter 1. Travel .......................... 3
T raveling Away From Home................. 4
T ax Home .......................... 4
T ax Home Different From Family Home...... 5
T emporary Assignment or Job............... 5
What T ravel Expenses Are Deductible? ........ 6
Meals ............................. 7
T ravel in the United States............... 9
T ravel Outside the United States ......... 10
Luxury Water T ravel .................. 12
Conventions ........................ 13
Chapter 2. Meals and Entertainment ......... 14
50% Limit ............................. 16
Exception to the 50% Limit for Meals ...... 17
Chapter 3. Gifts .......................... 17
Chapter 4. Transportation .................. 18
Car Expenses ......................... 21
Standard Mileage Rate ................ 21
Actual Car Expenses ................. 22
Leasing a Car ....................... 33
Disposition of a Car ...................... 34
Chapter 5. Recordkeeping ................. 35
How T o Prove Expenses.................. 36
What Are Adequate Records? ........... 36
What if I Have Incomplete Records? ....... 37
Separating and Combining Expenses ...... 38
How Long T o Keep Records and 
Receipts ........................ 38
Examples of Records ................. 38
Chapter 6. How To Report .................. 41
Where T o Report ....................... 41
Vehicle Provided by Y our Employer....... 42
Reimbursements ....................... 42
Accountable Plans ................... 42
Nonaccountable Plans ................ 46
Rules for Independent Contractors and 
Clients .......................... 47
How T o Use Per Diem Rate T ables........... 48
The T wo Substantiation Methods......... 48
T ransition Rules..................... 48
Completing Form 2106 ................... 48
Special Rules ....................... 50
How To Get Tax Help ....................... 52
Appendices ............................. 55
Jan 29, 2024

Page 2 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Index .................................. 59
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Pub. 463, such as legislation enacted after it was 
published, go to IRS.gov/Pub463.
What's New
Standard mileage rate. For 2023, the standard mileage 
rate for the cost of operating your car for business use is 
65.5 cents ($0.655) per mile. Car expenses and use of the 
standard mileage rate are explained in chapter 4.
Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, and vans.  The 
first-year limit on the depreciation deduction, special de-
preciation allowance, and section 179 deduction for vehi-
cles acquired before September 28, 2017, and placed in 
service during 2023, is $12,200. The first -year limit on de-
preciation, special depreciation allowance, and section 
179 deduction for vehicles acquired after September 27, 
2017, and placed in service during 2023 increases to 
$20,200. If you elect not to claim a special depreciation al-
lowance for a vehicle placed in service in 2023, the 
amount increases to $12,200. Depreciation limits are ex-
plained in chapter 4.
Section 179 deduction.  The maximum amount you can 
elect to deduct for section 179 property (including cars, 
trucks, and vans) you placed in service in tax years begin-
ning in 2023 is $1,160,000. This limit is reduced by the 
amount by which the cost of section 179 property placed 
in service during the tax year exceeds $2,890,000. Sec-
tion 179 deduction is explained in chapter 4.
Also, the maximum section 179 expense deduction for 
sport utility vehicles placed in service in tax years begin-
ning in 2023 is $28,900.
Temporary deduction of 100% business meals.  The 
100% deduction on certain business meals expenses as 
amended under the T axpayer Certainty and Disaster T ax 
Relief Act of 2020, and enacted by the Consolidated Ap-
propriations Act, 2021, has expired. Generally, the cost of 
business meals remains deductible, subject to the 50% 
limitation. See 50% Limit  in chapter 2 for more informa-
tion.
Reminder
Photographs of missing children.  The IRS is a proud 
partner with the National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC). Photographs of missing children se-
lected by the Center may appear in this publication on pa-
ges that would otherwise be blank. Y ou can help bring 
these children home by looking at the photographs and 
calling 800-THE-LOST (800-843-5678) if you recognize a 
child.
Per diem rates. Current and prior per diem rates may be 
found on the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) 
website at GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates.
Introduction
Y ou may be able to deduct the ordinary and necessary 
business-related expenses you have for:
• T ravel,
• Non-entertainment-related meals,
• Gifts, or
• T ransportation.
An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted 
in your trade or business. A necessary expense is one that 
is helpful and appropriate for your business. An expense 
doesn’t have to be required to be considered necessary.
This publication explains:
• What expenses are deductible,
• How to report them on your return,
• What records you need to prove your expenses, and
• How to treat any expense reimbursements you may 
receive.
Who should use this publication.  Y ou should read this 
publication if you are an employee or a sole proprietor who 
has business -related travel, non -entertainment-related 
meals, gift, or transportation expenses.
Users of employer -provided vehicles.  If an em-
ployer-provided vehicle was available for your use, you re-
ceived a fringe benefit. Generally, your employer must in-
clude the value of the use or availability of the vehicle in 
your income. However, there are exceptions if the use of 
the vehicle qualifies as a working condition fringe benefit 
(such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal use vehicle).
A working condition fringe benefit is any property or 
service provided to you by your employer, the cost of 
which would be allowable as an employee business ex-
pense deduction if you had paid for it.
A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one that isn’t 
likely to be used more than minimally for personal purpo-
ses because of its design. See Qualified nonpersonal use 
vehicles under Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4.
For information on how to report your car expenses that 
your employer didn’t provide or reimburse you for (such as 
when you pay for gas and maintenance for a car your em-
ployer provides), see Vehicle Provided by Y our Employer 
in chapter 6.
Who doesn’t need to use this publication.  Partner-
ships, corporations, trusts, and employers who reimburse 
their employees for business expenses should refer to the 
instructions for their required tax forms, for information on 
deducting travel, meals, and entertainment expenses.
2 Publication 463 (2023)

Page 3 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are an employee, you won’t need to read this 
publication if all of the following are true.
• Y ou fully accounted to your employer for your work-re-
lated expenses.
• Y ou received full reimbursement for your expenses.
• Y our employer required you to return any excess reim-
bursement and you did so.
• There is no amount shown with a code L in box 12 of 
your Form W-2, Wage and T ax Statement.
If you meet all of these conditions, there is no need to 
show the expenses or the reimbursements on your return. 
If you would like more information on reimbursements and 
accounting to your employer, see chapter 6.
If you meet these conditions and your employer 
included reimbursements on your Form W-2 in er-
ror, ask your employer for a corrected Form W-2.
Volunteers. If you perform services as a volunteer 
worker for a qualified charity, you may be able to deduct 
some of your costs as a charitable contribution. See 
Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services in Pub. 526, 
Charitable Contributions, for information on the expenses 
you can deduct.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and suggestions for future 
editions.
Y ou can send us comments through IRS.gov/
FormComments. Or, you can write to the Internal Revenue 
Service, T ax Forms and Publications, 1111 Constitution 
Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments and suggestions as we revise 
our tax forms, instructions, and publications. Don’t send 
tax questions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions.  If you have 
a tax question not answered by this publication or the How 
T o Get T ax Help section at the end of this publication, go 
to the IRS Interactive T ax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the search 
feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download current and prior -year 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order current forms, instruc-
tions, and publications; call 800 -829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon as possible. 
Don’t resubmit requests you’ve already sent us. Y ou can 
get forms and publications faster online.
TIP
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
946 How T o Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From 
Business (Sole Proprietorship)
Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From 
Farming
2106 Employee Business Expenses
4562 Depreciation and Amortization (Including 
Information on Listed Property)
See How T o Get T ax Help for information about getting 
these publications and forms.
1.
Travel
If you temporarily travel away from your tax home, you can 
use this chapter to determine if you have deductible travel 
expenses.
This chapter discusses:
• T raveling away from home,
• T emporary assignment or job, and
• What travel expenses are deductible.
It also discusses the standard meal allowance, rules for 
travel inside and outside the United States, luxury water 
travel, and deductible convention expenses.
Travel expenses defined.  For tax purposes, travel ex-
penses are the ordinary and necessary expenses of trav-
eling away from home for your business, profession, or 
job.
An ordinary expense is one that is common and accep-
ted in your trade or business. A necessary expense is one 
that is helpful and appropriate for your business. An ex-
pense doesn’t have to be required to be considered nec-
essary.
Y ou will find examples of deductible travel expenses in 
T able 1-1 .
  946
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  Schedule C (Form 1040)
  Schedule F (Form 1040)
  2106
  4562
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 1 T ravel 3

Page 4 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Traveling Away From Home
Y ou are traveling away from home if:
• Y our duties require you to be away from the general 
area of your tax home (defined later) substantially lon-
ger than an ordinary day's work, and
• Y ou need to sleep or rest to meet the demands of your 
work while away from home.
This rest requirement isn’t satisfied by merely napping in 
your car. Y ou don’t have to be away from your tax home for 
a whole day or from dusk to dawn as long as your relief 
from duty is long enough to get necessary sleep or rest.
Example 1.  Y ou are a railroad conductor. Y ou leave 
your home terminal on a regularly scheduled round -trip 
run between two cities and return home 16 hours later. 
During the run, you have 6 hours off at your turnaround 
point where you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to 
get necessary sleep before starting the return trip. Y ou are 
considered to be away from home.
Example 2. Y ou are a truck driver. Y ou leave your ter-
minal and return to it later the same day. Y ou get an hour 
off at your turnaround point to eat. Because you aren’t off 
to get necessary sleep and the brief time off isn’t an ade-
quate rest period, you aren’t traveling away from home.
Members of the Armed Forces.  If you are a member of 
the U.S. Armed Forces on a permanent duty assignment 
overseas, you aren’t traveling away from home. Y ou can’t 
deduct your expenses for meals and lodging. Y ou can’t 
deduct these expenses even if you have to maintain a 
home in the United States for your family members who 
aren’t allowed to accompany you overseas. If you are 
transferred from one permanent duty station to another, 
you may have deductible moving expenses, which are ex-
plained in Pub. 3, Armed Forces' T ax Guide.
A naval officer assigned to permanent duty aboard a 
ship that has regular eating and living facilities has a tax 
home (explained next) aboard the ship for travel expense 
purposes.
Tax Home
T o determine whether you are traveling away from home, 
you must first determine the location of your tax home.
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-
ness or post of duty, regardless of where you maintain 
your family home. It includes the entire city or general area 
in which your business or work is located.
If you have more than one regular place of business, 
your tax home is your main place of business. See Main 
place of business or work, later.
If you don’t have a regular or a main place of business 
because of the nature of your work, then your tax home 
may be the place where you regularly live. See No main 
place of business or work, later.
If you don’t have a regular or main place of business or 
post of duty and there is no place where you regularly live, 
you are considered an itinerant (a transient) and your tax 
home is wherever you work. As an itinerant, you can’t 
claim a travel expense deduction because you are never 
considered to be traveling away from home.
Main place of business or work.  If you have more than 
one place of work, consider the following when determin-
ing which one is your main place of business or work.
• The total time you ordinarily spend in each place.
• The level of your business activity in each place.
• Whether your income from each place is significant or 
insignificant.
Example. Y ou live in Cincinnati where you have a sea-
sonal job for 8 months each year and earn $40,000. Y ou 
work the other 4 months in Miami, also at a seasonal job, 
and earn $15,000. Cincinnati is your main place of work 
because you spend most of your time there and earn most 
of your income there.
No main place of business or work.  Y ou may have a 
tax home even if you don’t have a regular or main place of 
work. Y our tax home may be the home where you regu-
larly live.
Factors used to determine tax home.  If you don’t 
have a regular or main place of business or work, use the 
following three factors to determine where your tax home 
is.
1. Y ou perform part of your business in the area of your 
main home and use that home for lodging while doing 
business in the area.
2. Y ou have living expenses at your main home that you 
duplicate because your business requires you to be 
away from that home.
3. Y ou haven’t abandoned the area in which both your 
historical place of lodging and your claimed main 
home are located; you have a member or members of 
your family living at your main home; or you often use 
that home for lodging.
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home is the 
home where you regularly live. If you satisfy only two fac-
tors, you may have a tax home depending on all the facts 
and circumstances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are 
an itinerant; your tax home is wherever you work and you 
can’t deduct travel expenses.
Example 1.  Y ou are single and live in Boston in an 
apartment you rent. Y ou have worked for your employer in 
Boston for a number of years. Y our employer enrolls you in 
a 12 -month executive training program. Y ou don’t expect 
to return to work in Boston after you complete your train-
ing.
During your training, you don’t do any work in Boston. 
Instead, you receive classroom and on -the-job training 
throughout the United States. Y ou keep your apartment in 
Boston and return to it frequently. Y ou use your apartment 
4 Chapter 1 T ravel Publication 463 (2023)

Page 5 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to conduct your personal business. Y ou also keep up your 
community contacts in Boston. When you complete your 
training, you are transferred to Los Angeles.
Y ou don’t satisfy factor (1) because you didn’t work in 
Boston. Y ou satisfy factor (2) because you had duplicate 
living expenses. Y ou also satisfy factor (3) because you 
didn’t abandon your apartment in Boston as your main 
home, you kept your community contacts, and you fre-
quently returned to live in your apartment. Therefore, you 
have a tax home in Boston.
Example 2.  Y ou are an outside salesperson with a 
sales territory covering several states. Y our employer's 
main office is in Newark, but you don’t conduct any busi-
ness there. Y our work assignments are temporary, and 
you have no way of knowing where your future assign-
ments will be located. Y ou have a room in your married si-
ster's house in Dayton. Y ou stay there for one or two 
weekends a year, but you do no work in the area. Y ou 
don’t pay your sister for the use of the room.
Y ou don’t satisfy any of the three factors listed earlier. 
Y ou are an itinerant and have no tax home.
Tax Home Different From Family 
Home
If you (and your family) don’t live at your tax home (defined 
earlier), you can’t deduct the cost of traveling between 
your tax home and your family home. Y ou also can’t de-
duct the cost of meals and lodging while at your tax home. 
See Example 1, later.
If you are working temporarily in the same city where 
you and your family live, you may be considered as travel-
ing away from home. See Example 2, later.
Example 1.  Y ou are a truck driver and you and your 
family live in T ucson. Y ou are employed by a trucking firm 
that has its terminal in Phoenix. At the end of your long 
runs, you return to your home terminal in Phoenix and 
spend one night there before returning home. Y ou can’t 
deduct any expenses you have for meals and lodging in 
Phoenix or the cost of traveling from Phoenix to T ucson. 
This is because Phoenix is your tax home.
Example 2.  Y our family home is in Pittsburgh, where 
you work 12 weeks a year. The rest of the year you work 
for the same employer in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat 
in restaurants and sleep in a rooming house. Y our salary is 
the same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Baltimore.
Because you spend most of your working time and earn 
most of your salary in Baltimore, that city is your tax home. 
Y ou can’t deduct any expenses you have for meals and 
lodging there. However, when you return to work in Pitts-
burgh, you are away from your tax home even though you 
stay at your family home. Y ou can deduct the cost of your 
round trip between Baltimore and Pittsburgh. Y ou can also 
deduct your part of your family's living expenses for 
non-entertainment-related meals and lodging while you 
are living and working in Pittsburgh.
Temporary
Assignment or Job
Y ou may regularly work at your tax home and also work at 
another location. It may not be practical to return to your 
tax home from this other location at the end of each work-
day.
Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assignment.  If 
your assignment or job away from your main place of work 
is temporary, your tax home doesn’t change. Y ou are con-
sidered to be away from home for the whole period you 
are away from your main place of work. Y ou can deduct 
your travel expenses if they otherwise qualify for deduc-
tion. Generally, a temporary assignment in a single loca-
tion is one that is realistically expected to last (and does in 
fact last) for 1 year or less.
However, if your assignment or job is indefinite, the lo-
cation of the assignment or job becomes your new tax 
home and you can’t deduct your travel expenses while 
there. An assignment or job in a single location is consid-
ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last for more 
than 1 year, whether or not it actually lasts for more than 1 
year.
If your assignment is indefinite, you must include in your 
income any amounts you receive from your employer for 
living expenses, even if they are called “travel allowances” 
and you account to your employer for them. Y ou may be 
able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new tax home 
as a moving expense. See Pub. 3 for more information.
For tax years beginning after December 2017 and 
before January 2026, the deduction of certain 
moving expenses is suspended for nonmilitary 
taxpayers. In order to deduct certain moving expenses, 
you must be an active member of the military and moving 
due to a permanent change of duty station.
Exception for federal crime investigations or prose-
cutions. If you are a federal employee participating in a 
federal crime investigation or prosecution, you aren’t sub-
ject to the 1-year rule. This means you may be able to de-
duct travel expenses even if you are away from your tax 
home for more than 1 year provided you meet the other re-
quirements for deductibility.
For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or their desig-
nee) must certify that you are traveling:
• For the federal government;
• In a temporary duty status; and
• T o investigate, prosecute, or provide support services 
for the investigation or prosecution of a federal crime.
Determining temporary or indefinite.  Y ou must deter-
mine whether your assignment is temporary or indefinite 
when you start work. If you expect an assignment or job to 
last for 1 year or less, it is temporary unless there are facts 
and circumstances that indicate otherwise. An assignment 
or job that is initially temporary may become indefinite due 
CAUTION
!
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 1 T ravel 5

Page 6 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to changed circumstances. A series of assignments to the 
same location, all for short periods but that together cover 
a long period, may be considered an indefinite assign-
ment.
The following examples illustrate whether an assign-
ment or job is temporary or indefinite.
Example 1.  Y ou are a construction worker. Y ou live 
and regularly work in Los Angeles. Y ou are a member of a 
trade union in Los Angeles that helps you get work in the 
Los Angeles area. Y our tax home is Los Angeles. Be-
cause of a shortage of work, you took a job on a construc-
tion project in Fresno. Y our job was scheduled to end in 8 
months. The job actually lasted 10 months.
Y ou realistically expected the job in Fresno to last 8 
months. The job actually did last less than 1 year. The job 
is temporary and your tax home is still in Los Angeles.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that you realistically expected the work in Fresno to 
last 18 months. The job was actually completed in 10 
months.
Y our job in Fresno is indefinite because you realistically 
expected the work to last longer than 1 year, even though 
it actually lasted less than 1 year. Y ou can’t deduct any 
travel expenses you had in Fresno because Fresno be-
came your tax home.
Example 3. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that you realistically expected the work in Fresno to 
last 9 months. After 8 months, however, you were asked to 
remain for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15 
months).
Initially, you realistically expected the job in Fresno to 
last for only 9 months. However, due to changed circum-
stances occurring after 8 months, it was no longer realistic 
for you to expect that the job in Fresno would last for 1 
year or less. Y ou can deduct only your travel expenses for 
the first 8 months. Y ou can’t deduct any travel expenses 
you had after that time because Fresno became your tax 
home when the job became indefinite.
Going home on days off.  If you go back to your tax 
home from a temporary assignment on your days off, you 
aren’t considered away from home while you are in your 
hometown. Y ou can’t deduct the cost of your meals and 
lodging there. However, you can deduct your travel expen-
ses, including meals and lodging, while traveling between 
your temporary place of work and your tax home. Y ou can 
claim these expenses up to the amount it would have cost 
you to stay at your temporary place of work.
If you keep your hotel room during your visit home, you 
can deduct the cost of your hotel room. In addition, you 
can deduct your expenses of returning home up to the 
amount you would have spent for meals had you stayed at 
your temporary place of work.
Probationary work period.  If you take a job that re-
quires you to move, with the understanding that you will 
keep the job if your work is satisfactory during a probation-
ary period, the job is indefinite. Y ou can’t deduct any of 
your expenses for meals and lodging during the probation-
ary period.
What Travel Expenses Are 
Deductible?
Once you have determined that you are traveling away 
from your tax home, you can determine what travel expen-
ses are deductible.
Y ou can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses you 
have when you travel away from home on business. The 
type of expense you can deduct depends on the facts and 
your circumstances.
T able 1-1 summarizes travel expenses you may be able 
to deduct. Y ou may have other deductible travel expenses 
that aren’t covered there, depending on the facts and your 
circumstances.
When you travel away from home on business, 
you must keep records of all the expenses you 
have and any advances you receive from your 
employer. Y ou can use a log, diary, notebook, or any other 
written record to keep track of your expenses. The types 
of expenses you need to record, along with supporting 
documentation, are described in T able 5-1 (see chap-
ter 5).
Separating costs. If you have one expense that includes 
the costs of non -entertainment-related meals, entertain-
ment, and other services (such as lodging or transporta-
tion), you must allocate that expense between the cost of 
non-entertainment-related meals, and entertainment and 
the cost of other services. Y ou must have a reasonable 
basis for making this allocation. For example, you must al-
locate your expenses if a hotel includes one or more 
meals in its room charge.
Travel expenses for another individual.  If a spouse, 
dependent, or other individual goes with you (or your em-
ployee) on a business trip or to a business convention, 
you generally can’t deduct their travel expenses.
Employee. Y ou can deduct the travel expenses of 
someone who goes with you if that person:
1. Is your employee,
2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the travel, and
3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the travel ex-
penses.
Business associate.  If a business associate travels 
with you and meets the conditions in (2) and (3) above, 
you can deduct the travel expenses you have for that per-
son. A business associate is someone with whom you 
could reasonably expect to actively conduct business. A 
business associate can be a current or prospective (likely 
to become) customer, client, supplier, employee, agent, 
partner, or professional advisor.
RECORDS
6 Chapter 1 T ravel Publication 463 (2023)

Page 7 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T able 1-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home for business purposes
IF you have expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of...
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your business destination. If you were provided 
with a free ticket or you are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your cost is zero. If 
you travel by ship, see Luxury Water T ravel and Cruise Ships under Conventions, later, for additional rules and 
limits.
taxi, commuter bus, and 
airport limousine
fares for these and other types of transportation that take you between:
• The airport or station and your hotel; and
• The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your business meeting place, or your 
temporary work location.
baggage and shipping sending baggage and sample or display material between your regular and temporary work locations.
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on business. Y ou can deduct actual 
expenses or the standard mileage rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car while 
away from home on business, you can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
lodging and meals your lodging and non-entertainment-related meals if your business trip is overnight or long enough that you 
need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, 
beverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals, later, for additional rules and limits.
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes business communication by fax machine or other 
communication devices.
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your business travel. These expenses might include 
transportation to or from a business meal, public stenographer's fees, computer rental fees, and operating 
and maintaining a house trailer.
Bona fide business purpose.  A bona fide business 
purpose exists if you can prove a real business purpose 
for the individual's presence. Incidental services, such as 
typing notes or assisting in entertaining customers, aren’t 
enough to make the expenses deductible.
Example. Y ou drive to Chicago on business and take 
your spouse with you. Y our spouse isn’t your employee. 
Y our spouse occasionally types notes, performs similar 
services, and accompanies you to luncheons and dinners. 
The performance of these services doesn’t establish that 
your spouse’s presence on the trip is necessary to the 
conduct of your business. Y our spouse’s expenses aren’t 
deductible.
Y ou pay $199 a day for a double room. A single room 
costs $149 a day. Y ou can deduct the total cost of driving 
your car to and from Chicago, but only $149 a day for your 
hotel room. If both you and your spouse use public trans-
portation, you can only deduct your fare.
Meals
Y ou can deduct a portion of the cost of meals if it is neces-
sary for you to stop for substantial sleep or rest to properly 
perform your duties while traveling away from home on 
business. Meal and entertainment expenses are dis-
cussed in chapter 2.
Lavish or extravagant.  Y ou can't deduct expenses for 
meals that are lavish or extravagant. An expense isn't con-
sidered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable based on 
the facts and circumstances. Meal expenses won't be dis-
allowed merely because they are more than a fixed dollar 
amount or because the meals take place at deluxe restau-
rants, hotels, or resorts.
50% limit on meals.  Y ou can figure your meal expenses 
using either of the following methods.
• Actual cost.
• The standard meal allowance.
Both of these methods are explained below. But, regard-
less of the method you use, you can generally deduct only 
50% of the unreimbursed cost of your meals.
If you are reimbursed for the cost of your meals, how 
you apply the 50% limit depends on whether your employ-
er's reimbursement plan was accountable or nonaccount-
able. If you aren’t reimbursed, the 50% limit applies even if 
the unreimbursed meal expense is for business travel. 
Chapter 2 discusses the 50% Limit  in more detail, and 
chapter 6 discusses accountable and nonaccountable 
plans.
Actual Cost
Y ou can use the actual cost of your meals to figure the 
amount of your expense before reimbursement and appli-
cation of the 50% deduction limit. If you use this method, 
you must keep records of your actual cost.
Standard Meal Allowance
Generally, you can use the “standard meal allowance” 
method as an alternative to the actual cost method. It al-
lows you to use a set amount for your daily meals and inci-
dental expenses (M&IE), instead of keeping records of 
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 1 T ravel 7

Page 8 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your actual costs. The set amount varies depending on 
where and when you travel. In this publication, “standard 
meal allowance” refers to the federal rate for M&IE, dis-
cussed later under Amount of standard meal allowance . If 
you use the standard meal allowance, you must still keep 
records to prove the time, place, and business purpose of 
your travel. See the recordkeeping rules for travel in chap-
ter 5.
Incidental expenses.  The term “incidental expenses” 
means fees and tips given to porters, baggage carriers, 
hotel staff, and staff on ships.
Incidental expenses don’t include expenses for laundry, 
cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodging taxes, costs of 
telegrams or telephone calls, transportation between pla-
ces of lodging or business and places where meals are 
taken, or the mailing cost of filing travel vouchers and pay-
ing employer-sponsored charge card billings.
Incidental-expenses-only method. Y ou can use an op-
tional method (instead of actual cost) for deducting inci-
dental expenses only. The amount of the deduction is $5 a 
day. Y ou can use this method only if you didn’t pay or incur 
any meal expenses. Y ou can’t use this method on any day 
that you use the standard meal allowance. This method is 
subject to the proration rules for partial days. See T ravel 
for days you depart and return, later, in this chapter.
Note.  The incidental-expenses-only method isn’t sub-
ject to the 50% limit discussed below.
Federal employees should refer to the Federal 
T ravel Regulations ( FTR) at eCFR.gov for 
changes affecting claims for reimbursement.
50% limit may apply. If you use the standard meal allow-
ance method for non -entertainment-related meal expen-
ses and you aren’t reimbursed or you are reimbursed un-
der a nonaccountable plan, you can generally deduct only 
50% of the standard meal allowance. If you are reim-
bursed under an accountable plan and you are deducting 
amounts that are more than your reimbursements, you 
can deduct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50% 
Limit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and ac-
countable and nonaccountable plans are discussed in 
chapter 6.
There is no optional standard lodging amount 
similar to the standard meal allowance. Y our al-
lowable lodging expense deduction is your actual 
cost.
Who can use the standard meal allowance.  Y ou can 
use the standard meal allowance whether you are an em-
ployee or self-employed, and whether or not you are reim-
bursed for your traveling expenses.
Use of the standard meal allowance for other travel. 
Y ou can use the standard meal allowance to figure your 
meal expenses when you travel in connection with invest-
ment and other income -producing property. Y ou can also 
use it to figure your meal expenses when you travel for 
qualifying educational purposes. Y ou can’t use the stand-
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
ard meal allowance to figure the cost of your meals when 
you travel for medical or charitable purposes.
Amount of standard meal allowance.  The standard 
meal allowance is the federal M&IE rate. For travel in 
2023, the rate for most small localities in the United States 
is $59 per day.
Most major cities and many other localities in the Uni-
ted States are designated as high -cost areas, qualifying 
for higher standard meal allowances.
Y ou can find this information (organized by state) 
at GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates. En-
ter a zip code or select a city and state for the per 
diem rates for the current fiscal year. Per diem rates for 
prior fiscal years are available by using the drop -down 
menu.
If you travel to more than one location in one day, use 
the rate in effect for the area where you stop for sleep or 
rest. If you work in the transportation industry, however, 
see Special rate for transportation workers, later.
Federal government's fiscal year. Per diem rates are 
listed by the federal government's fiscal year, which runs 
from October 1 to September 30. Y ou can choose to use 
the rates from the 2022 fiscal year per diem tables or the 
rates from the 2023 fiscal year tables, but you must con-
sistently use the same tables for all travel you are report-
ing on your income tax return for the year. See T ransition 
Rules, later.
Standard meal allowance for areas outside the 
continental United States.  The standard meal allow-
ance rates above don’t apply to travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or 
any other location outside the continental United States. 
The Department of Defense establishes per diem rates for 
Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, 
Midway, the Northern Mariana Islands, the U.S. Virgin Is-
lands, Wake Island, and other non -foreign areas outside 
the continental United States. The Department of State 
establishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas.
Y ou can access per diem rates for non -foreign 
areas outside the continental United States at 
T ravel.dod.mil/T ravel- T ransportation-Rates/Per-
Diem/Per-Diem-Rate-Lookup/. Y ou can access all other 
foreign per diem rates at aoprals.state.gov/web920/
per_diem.asp.
Special rate for transportation workers.  Y ou can 
use a special standard meal allowance if you work in the 
transportation industry. Y ou are in the transportation in-
dustry if your work:
• Directly involves moving people or goods by airplane, 
barge, bus, ship, train, or truck; and
• Regularly requires you to travel away from home and, 
during any single trip, usually involves travel to areas 
eligible for different standard meal allowance rates.
If this applies, you can claim a standard meal allowance of 
$69 a day ($74 for travel outside the continental United 
States) for travel in 2023.
8 Chapter 1 T ravel Publication 463 (2023)

Page 9 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Using the special rate for transportation workers elimi-
nates the need for you to determine the standard meal al-
lowance for every area where you stop for sleep or rest. If 
you choose to use the special rate for any trip, you must 
use the special rate (and not use the regular standard 
meal allowance rates) for all trips you take that year.
Travel for days you depart and return.  For both the 
day you depart for and the day you return from a business 
trip, you must prorate the standard meal allowance (figure 
a reduced amount for each day). Y ou can do so by one of 
two methods.
• Method 1: Y ou can claim 3/4 of the standard meal al-
lowance.
• Method 2: Y ou can prorate using any method that you 
consistently apply and that is in accordance with rea-
sonable business practice.
Example. Y ou are employed in New Orleans as a con-
vention planner. In March, your employer sent you on a 
3-day trip to Washington, DC, to attend a planning semi-
nar. Y ou left your home in New Orleans at 10 a.m. on 
Wednesday and arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. 
After spending 2 nights there, you flew back to New Or-
leans on Friday and arrived back home at 8 p.m. Y our em-
ployer gave you a flat amount to cover your expenses and 
included it with your wages.
Under Method 1, you can claim 2 1/2 days of the stand-
ard meal allowance for Washington, DC: 3/4 of the daily 
rate for Wednesday and Friday (the days you departed 
and returned), and the full daily rate for Thursday.
Under Method 2 , you could also use any method that 
you apply consistently and that is in accordance with rea-
sonable business practice. For example, you could claim 3 
days of the standard meal allowance even though a fed-
eral employee would have to use Method 1 and be limited 
to only 21/2 days.
Travel in the United States
The following discussion applies to travel in the United 
States. For this purpose, the United States includes the 50 
states and the District of Columbia. The treatment of your 
travel expenses depends on how much of your trip was 
business related and on how much of your trip occurred 
within the United States. See Part of T rip Outside the Uni-
ted States, later.
Trip Primarily for Business
Y ou can deduct all of your travel expenses if your trip was 
entirely business related. If your trip was primarily for busi-
ness and, while at your business destination, you exten-
ded your stay for a vacation, made a personal side trip, or 
had other personal activities, you can deduct only your 
business-related travel expenses. These expenses in-
clude the travel costs of getting to and from your business 
destination and any business -related expenses at your 
business destination.
Example. Y ou work in Atlanta and take a business trip 
to New Orleans in May. Y our business travel totals 900 
miles round trip. On your way home, you stop in Mobile to 
visit your parents. Y ou spend $2,165 for the 9 days you are 
away from home for travel, non -entertainment-related 
meals, lodging, and other travel expenses. If you hadn’t 
stopped in Mobile, you would have been gone only 6 
days, and your total cost would have been $1,633.50. Y ou 
can deduct $1,633.50 for your trip, including the cost of 
round-trip transportation to and from New Orleans. The 
deduction for your non -entertainment-related meals is 
subject to the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.
Trip Primarily for
Personal Reasons
If your trip was primarily for personal reasons, such as a 
vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a nondeductible per-
sonal expense. However, you can deduct any expenses 
you have while at your destination that are directly related 
to your business.
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be a vacation 
even if the promoter advertises that it is primarily for busi-
ness. The scheduling of incidental business activities dur-
ing a trip, such as viewing videotapes or attending lec-
tures dealing with general subjects, won’t change what is 
really a vacation into a business trip.
Part of Trip Outside
the United States
If part of your trip is outside the United States, use the 
rules described later in this chapter under T ravel Outside 
the United States  for that part of the trip. For the part of 
your trip that is inside the United States, use the rules for 
travel in the United States. T ravel outside the United 
States doesn’t include travel from one point in the United 
States to another point in the United States. The following 
discussion can help you determine whether your trip was 
entirely within the United States.
Public transportation. If you travel by public transporta-
tion, any place in the United States where that vehicle 
makes a scheduled stop is a point in the United States. 
Once the vehicle leaves the last scheduled stop in the 
United States on its way to a point outside the United 
States, you apply the rules under T ravel Outside the Uni-
ted States, later.
Example. Y ou fly from New Y ork to Puerto Rico with a 
scheduled stop in Miami. Puerto Rico isn’t considered part 
of the United States for purposes of travel. Y ou return to 
New Y ork nonstop. The flight from New Y ork to Miami is in 
the United States, so only the flight from Miami to Puerto 
Rico is outside the United States. Because there are no 
scheduled stops between Puerto Rico and New Y ork, all 
of the return trip is outside the United States.
Private car. T ravel by private car in the United States is 
travel between points in the United States, even though 
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 1 T ravel 9

Page 10 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you are on your way to a destination outside the United 
States.
Example. Y ou travel by car from Denver to Mexico City 
and return. Y our travel from Denver to the border and from 
the border back to Denver is travel in the United States, 
and the rules in this section apply. The rules below under 
T ravel Outside the United States apply to your trip from the 
border to Mexico City and back to the border.
Travel Outside
the United States
If any part of your business travel is outside the United 
States, some of your deductions for the cost of getting to 
and from your destination may be limited. For this pur-
pose, the United States includes the 50 states and the 
District of Columbia.
How much of your travel expenses you can deduct de-
pends in part upon how much of your trip outside the Uni-
ted States was business related.
Travel Entirely for Business or
Considered Entirely for Business
Y ou can deduct all your travel expenses of getting to and 
from your business destination if your trip is entirely for 
business or considered entirely for business.
Travel entirely for business.  If you travel outside the 
United States and you spend the entire time on business 
activities, you can deduct all of your travel expenses.
Travel considered entirely for business.  Even if you 
didn’t spend your entire time on business activities, your 
trip is considered entirely for business if you meet at least 
one of the following four exceptions.
Exception 1 —No substantial control.  Y our trip is 
considered entirely for business if you didn’t have sub-
stantial control over arranging the trip. The fact that you 
control the timing of your trip doesn’t, by itself, mean that 
you have substantial control over arranging your trip.
Y ou don’t have substantial control over your trip if you:
• Are an employee who was reimbursed or paid a travel 
expense allowance, and
• Aren’t related to your employer, or
• Aren’t a managing executive.
“Related to your employer” is defined later in chapter 6 
under Per Diem and Car Allowances.
A “managing executive” is an employee who has the 
authority and responsibility, without being subject to the 
veto of another, to decide on the need for the business 
travel.
A self-employed person generally has substantial con-
trol over arranging business trips.
Exception 2—Outside United States no more than 
a week. Y our trip is considered entirely for business if you 
were outside the United States for a week or less, 
combining business and nonbusiness activities. One 
week means 7 consecutive days. In counting the days, 
don’t count the day you leave the United States, but do 
count the day you return to the United States.
Example. Y ou traveled to Brussels primarily for busi-
ness. Y ou left Denver on T uesday and flew to New Y ork. 
On Wednesday, you flew from New Y ork to Brussels, arriv-
ing the next morning. On Thursday and Friday, you had 
business discussions, and from Saturday until T uesday, 
you were sightseeing. Y ou flew back to New Y ork, arriving 
Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday, you flew back to 
Denver.
Although you were away from your home in Denver for 
more than a week, you weren’t outside the United States 
for more than a week. This is because the day you depart 
doesn’t count as a day outside the United States.
Y ou can deduct your cost of the round -trip flight be-
tween Denver and Brussels. Y ou can also deduct the cost 
of your stay in Brussels for Thursday and Friday while you 
conducted business. However, you can’t deduct the cost 
of your stay in Brussels from Saturday through T uesday 
because those days were spent on nonbusiness activities.
Exception 3 —Less than 25% of time on personal 
activities. Y our trip is considered entirely for business if:
• Y ou were outside the United States for more than a 
week, and
• Y ou spent less than 25% of the total time you were 
outside the United States on nonbusiness activities.
For this purpose, count both the day your trip began and 
the day it ended.
Example. Y ou flew from Seattle to T okyo, where you 
spent 14 days on business and 5 days on personal mat-
ters. Y ou then flew back to Seattle. Y ou spent 1 day flying 
in each direction.
Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of your total time 
abroad was for nonbusiness activities, you can deduct as 
travel expenses what it would have cost you to make the 
trip if you hadn’t engaged in any nonbusiness activity. The 
amount you can deduct is the cost of the round -trip plane 
fare and 16 days of non-entertainment-related meals (sub-
ject to the 50% Limit ), lodging, and other related expen-
ses.
Exception 4—Vacation not a major consideration. 
Y our trip is considered entirely for business if you can es-
tablish that a personal vacation wasn’t a major considera-
tion, even if you have substantial control over arranging 
the trip.
Travel Primarily for Business
If you travel outside the United States primarily for busi-
ness but spend some of your time on other activities, you 
generally can’t deduct all of your travel expenses. Y ou can 
only deduct the business portion of your cost of getting to 
and from your destination. Y ou must allocate the costs be-
tween your business and other activities to determine your 
deductible amount. See T ravel allocation rules, later.
10 Chapter 1 T ravel Publication 463 (2023)

Page 11 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Y ou don’t have to allocate your travel expenses if 
you meet one of the four exceptions listed earlier 
under T ravel considered entirely for business. In 
those cases, you can deduct the total cost of getting to 
and from your destination.
Travel allocation rules.  If your trip outside the United 
States was primarily for business, you must allocate your 
travel time on a day -to-day basis between business days 
and nonbusiness days. The days you depart from and re-
turn to the United States are both counted as days outside 
the United States.
T o figure the deductible amount of your round-trip travel 
expenses, use the following fraction. The numerator (top 
number) is the total number of business days outside the 
United States. The denominator (bottom number) is the 
total number of business and nonbusiness days of travel.
Counting business days.  Y our business days include 
transportation days, days your presence was required, 
days you spent on business, and certain weekends and 
holidays.
Transportation day. Count as a business day any day 
you spend traveling to or from a business destination. 
However, if because of a nonbusiness activity you don’t 
travel by a direct route, your business days are the days it 
would take you to travel a reasonably direct route to your 
business destination. Extra days for side trips or nonbusi-
ness activities can’t be counted as business days.
Presence required. Count as a business day any day 
your presence is required at a particular place for a spe-
cific business purpose. Count it as a business day even if 
you spend most of the day on nonbusiness activities.
Day spent on business.  If your principal activity dur-
ing working hours is the pursuit of your trade or business, 
count the day as a business day. Also, count as a busi-
ness day any day you are prevented from working be-
cause of circumstances beyond your control.
Certain weekends and holidays.  Count weekends, 
holidays, and other necessary standby days as business 
days if they fall between business days. But if they follow 
your business meetings or activity and you remain at your 
business destination for nonbusiness or personal reasons, 
don’t count them as business days.
Example 1. Y our tax home is New Y ork City. Y ou travel 
to Quebec, where you have a business meeting on Friday. 
Y ou have another meeting on the following Monday. Be-
cause your presence was required on both Friday and 
Monday, they are business days. Because the weekend is 
between business days, Saturday and Sunday are coun-
ted as business days. This is true even though you use the 
weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or other nonbusi-
ness activity.
Example 2. If, in Example 1 , you had no business in 
Quebec after Friday, but stayed until Monday before start-
ing home, Saturday and Sunday would be nonbusiness 
days.
TIP
Nonbusiness activity on the way to or from your 
business destination.  If you stopped for a vacation or 
other nonbusiness activity either on the way from the Uni-
ted States to your business destination, or on the way 
back to the United States from your business destination, 
you must allocate part of your travel expenses to the non-
business activity.
The part you must allocate is the amount it would have 
cost you to travel between the point where travel outside 
the United States begins and your nonbusiness destina-
tion and a return to the point where travel outside the Uni-
ted States ends.
Y ou determine the nonbusiness portion of that expense 
by multiplying it by a fraction. The numerator (top number) 
of the fraction is the number of nonbusiness days during 
your travel outside the United States, and the denominator 
(bottom number) is the total number of days you spend 
outside the United States.
Example. Y ou live in New Y ork. On May 4, you flew to 
Paris to attend a business conference that began on May 
5. The conference ended at noon on May 14. That eve-
ning, you flew to Dublin where you visited with friends until 
the afternoon of May 21, when you flew directly home to 
New Y ork. The primary purpose for the trip was to attend 
the conference.
If you hadn’t stopped in Dublin, you would have arrived 
home the evening of May 14. Y ou don’t meet any of the 
exceptions that would allow you to consider your travel en-
tirely for business. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are 
business days and May 15 through May 21 (7 days) are 
nonbusiness days.
Y ou can deduct the cost of your non-entertainment-re-
lated meals (subject to the 50% Limit), lodging, and other 
business-related travel expenses while in Paris.
Y ou can’t deduct your expenses while in Dublin. Y ou 
also can’t deduct 7/18 of what it would have cost you to 
travel round trip between New Y ork and Dublin.
Y ou paid $750 to fly from New Y ork to Paris, $400 to fly 
from Paris to Dublin, and $700 to fly from Dublin back to 
New Y ork. Round-trip airfare from New Y ork to Dublin 
would have been $1,250.
Y ou figure the deductible part of your air travel expen-
ses by subtracting 7/18 of the round -trip airfare and other 
expenses you would have had in traveling directly be-
tween New Y ork and Dublin ($1,250 × 7/18 = $486) from 
your total expenses in traveling from New Y ork to Paris to 
Dublin and back to New Y ork ($750 + $400 + $700 = 
$1,850).
Y our deductible air travel expense is $1,364 ($1,850 − 
$486).
Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond business 
destination. If you had a vacation or other nonbusiness 
activity at, near, or beyond your business destination, you 
must allocate part of your travel expenses to the nonbusi-
ness activity.
The part you must allocate is the amount it would have 
cost you to travel between the point where travel outside 
the United States begins and your business destination 
and a return to the point where travel outside the United 
States ends.
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 1 T ravel 11

Page 12 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Y ou determine the nonbusiness portion of that expense 
by multiplying it by a fraction. The numerator (top number) 
of the fraction is the number of nonbusiness days during 
your travel outside the United States, and the denominator 
(bottom number) is the total number of days you spend 
outside the United States.
None of your travel expenses for nonbusiness activities 
at, near, or beyond your business destination are deducti-
ble.
Example. Assume that the dates are the same as in 
the previous example but that instead of going to Dublin 
for your vacation, you fly to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.
Y ou can’t deduct any part of the cost of your trip from 
Paris to Venice and return to Paris. In addition, you can’t 
deduct 7/18 of the airfare and other expenses from New 
Y ork to Paris and back to New Y ork.
Y ou can deduct 11/18 of the round -trip plane fare and 
other travel expenses from New Y ork to Paris, plus your 
non-entertainment-related meals (subject to the 50% 
Limit), lodging, and any other business expenses you had 
in Paris. (Assume these expenses total $4,939.) If the 
round-trip plane fare and other travel -related expenses 
(such as food during the trip) are $1,750, you can deduct 
travel costs of $1,069 ( 11/18 × $1,750), plus the full $4,939 
for the expenses you had in Paris.
Other methods. Y ou can use another method of count-
ing business days if you establish that it more clearly re-
flects the time spent on other than business activities out-
side the United States.
Travel Primarily for Personal Reasons
If you travel outside the United States primarily for vaca-
tion or for investment purposes, the entire cost of the trip is 
a nondeductible personal expense. However, if you spend 
some time attending brief professional seminars or a con-
tinuing education program, you can deduct your registra-
tion fees and other expenses you have that are directly re-
lated to your business.
Example. The university from which you graduated 
has a continuing education program for members of its 
alumni association. This program consists of trips to vari-
ous foreign countries where academic exercises and con-
ferences are set up to acquaint individuals in most occu-
pations with selected facilities in several regions of the 
world. However, none of the conferences are directed to-
ward specific occupations or professions. It is up to each 
participant to seek out specialists and organizational set-
tings appropriate to their occupational interests.
Three-hour sessions are held each day over a 5 -day 
period at each of the selected overseas facilities where 
participants can meet with individual practitioners. These 
sessions are composed of a variety of activities including 
workshops, mini -lectures, roleplaying, skill development, 
and exercises. Professional conference directors sched-
ule and conduct the sessions. Participants can choose 
those sessions they wish to attend.
Y ou can participate in this program because you are a 
member of the alumni association. Y ou and your family 
take one of the trips. Y ou spend about 2 hours at each of 
the planned sessions. The rest of the time you go touring 
and sightseeing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1 
week.
Y our travel expenses for the trip aren’t deductible since 
the trip was primarily a vacation. However, registration 
fees and any other incidental expenses you have for the 
five planned sessions you attended that are directly rela-
ted and beneficial to your business are deductible busi-
ness expenses. These expenses should be specifically 
stated in your records to ensure proper allocation of your 
deductible business expenses.
Luxury Water Travel
If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other form of 
luxury water transportation for business purposes, there is 
a daily limit on the amount you can deduct. The limit is 
twice the highest federal per diem rate allowable at the 
time of your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem is the 
amount paid to federal government employees for daily 
living expenses when they travel away from home within 
the United States for business purposes.)
Daily limit on luxury water travel.  The highest federal 
per diem rate allowed and the daily limit for luxury water 
travel in 2023 are shown in the following table.
. . 
2023 Dates
Highest Federal 
Per Diem
Daily Limit on Luxury 
Water T ravel
January 1 – March 31 $564 $1,128
April 1 – April 30 498 996
May 1– May 31 398 796
June 1 – September 30 538 1,076
October 1 – October 31 401 802
November 1 – November 30 394 788
December 1 – December 
31 
564 1,128
Example. Y ou are a travel agent and traveled by ocean 
liner from New Y ork to London, England, on business in 
May. Y our expense for the 6-day cruise was $6,200. Y our 
deduction for the cruise can’t exceed $4,776 (6 days × 
$796 daily limit).
Meals and entertainment.  If your expenses for luxury 
water travel include separately stated amounts for meals 
or entertainment, those amounts are subject to the 50% 
limit on non -entertainment-related meals and entertain-
ment before you apply the daily limit. For a discussion of 
the 50% Limit, see chapter 2.
Example. In the previous example, your luxury water 
travel had a total cost of $6,200. Of that amount, $3,700 
was separately stated as non-entertainment-related meals 
and $1,000 was separately stated as entertainment. Con-
sidering that you are self-employed, you aren’t reimbursed 
for any of your travel expenses. Y ou figure your deductible 
travel expenses as follows.
12 Chapter 1 T ravel Publication 463 (2023)

Page 13 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Entertainment ...................... $1,000
 0% limit ......................... x 0.00
Allowable entertainment ................ $0.00
Non-entertainment-related meals .......... $3,700
50% limit ........................ × 0.50
Allowable non-entertainment meals & 
entertainment ...................... $1,850
Other travel expenses ................ + 1,500
Allowable cost before the daily limit ............... $3,350
Daily limit for May 2023 ................ $ 796
Times number of days ................ × 6
Maximum luxury water travel ......
deduction .............................. $4,776
Amount of allowable deduction ................ $3,350
Y our deduction for your cruise is limited to $3,350, even 
though the limit on luxury water travel is higher.
Not separately stated.  If your meal or entertainment 
charges aren’t separately stated or aren’t clearly identifia-
ble, you don’t have to allocate any portion of the total 
charge to meals or entertainment.
Exceptions
The daily limit on luxury water travel  (discussed earlier) 
doesn’t apply to expenses you have to attend a conven-
tion, seminar, or meeting on board a cruise ship. See 
Cruise Ships, later, under Conventions.
Conventions
Y ou can deduct your travel expenses when you attend a 
convention if you can show that your attendance benefits 
your trade or business. Y ou can’t deduct the travel expen-
ses for your family.
If the convention is for investment, political, social, or 
other purposes unrelated to your trade or business, you 
can’t deduct the expenses.
Y our appointment or election as a delegate 
doesn’t, in itself, determine whether you can de-
duct travel expenses. Y ou can deduct your travel 
expenses only if your attendance is connected to your 
own trade or business.
Convention agenda. The convention agenda or program 
generally shows the purpose of the convention. Y ou can 
show your attendance at the convention benefits your 
trade or business by comparing the agenda with the offi-
cial duties and responsibilities of your position. The 
agenda doesn’t have to deal specifically with your official 
duties and responsibilities; it will be enough if the agenda 
is so related to your position that it shows your attendance 
was for business purposes.
CAUTION
!
Conventions Held Outside
the North American Area
Y ou can’t deduct expenses for attending a convention, 
seminar, or similar meeting held outside the North Ameri-
can area unless:
• The meeting is directly related to the active conduct of 
your trade or business, and
• It is as reasonable to hold the meeting outside the 
North American area as within the North American 
area. See Reasonableness test, later.
If the meeting meets these requirements, you must also 
satisfy the rules for deducting expenses for business trips 
in general, discussed earlier under T ravel Outside the Uni-
ted States.
North American area.  The North American area in-
cludes the following locations.
American Samoa Jarvis Island
Antigua and Barbuda Johnston Island
Aruba Kingman Reef
Bahamas Marshall Islands
Baker Island Mexico
Barbados Micronesia
Bermuda Midway Islands
Canada Northern Mariana
Costa Rica Islands
Curaçao Palau
Dominica Palmyra Atoll
Dominican Republic Panama
Grenada Puerto Rico
Guam Saint Lucia
Guyana T rinidad and T obago
Honduras USA
Howland Island U.S. Virgin Islands
Jamaica Wake Island
The North American area also includes U.S. islands, cays, 
and reefs that are territories of the United States and not 
part of the 50 states or the District of Columbia. See Reve-
nue Ruling 2016 -16, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2016-26_IRB#RR-2016-16, for more information.
Reasonableness test.  The following factors are taken 
into account to determine if it was as reasonable to hold 
the meeting outside the North American area as within the 
North American area.
• The purpose of the meeting and the activities taking 
place at the meeting.
• The purposes and activities of the sponsoring organi-
zations or groups.
• The homes of the active members of the sponsoring 
organizations and the places at which other meetings 
of the sponsoring organizations or groups have been 
or will be held.
• Other relevant factors you may present.
Cruise Ships
Y ou can deduct up to $2,000 per year of your expenses of 
attending conventions, seminars, or similar meetings held 
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 1 T ravel 13

Page 14 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on cruise ships. All ships that sail are considered cruise 
ships.
Y ou can deduct these expenses only if all of the follow-
ing requirements are met.
1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is directly related 
to the active conduct of your trade or business.
2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered in the United 
States.
3. All of the cruise ship's ports of call are in the United 
States or in territories of the United States.
4. Y ou attach to your return a written statement signed 
by you that includes information about:
a. The total days of the trip (not including the days of 
transportation to and from the cruise ship port),
b. The number of hours each day that you devoted to 
scheduled business activities, and
c. A program of the scheduled business activities of 
the meeting.
5. Y ou attach to your return a written statement signed 
by an officer of the organization or group sponsoring 
the meeting that includes:
a. A schedule of the business activities of each day 
of the meeting, and
b. The number of hours you attended the scheduled 
business activities.
2.
Meals and Entertainment
Y ou can no longer take a deduction for any expense rela-
ted to activities generally considered entertainment, 
amusement, or recreation. Y ou can continue to deduct 
50% of the cost of business meals if you (or your em-
ployee) are present and the food or beverages aren't con-
sidered lavish or extravagant.
If food or beverages are provided during or at an 
entertainment event, and the food and beverages 
were purchased separately from the entertain-
ment or the cost of the food and beverages was stated 
separately from the cost of the entertainment on one or 
more bills, invoices, or receipts, you may be able to deduct 
the separately stated costs as a meal expense. For more 
information, see Regulations section 1. 274-11(d)(2), Ex-
ample 2.
TIP
Entertainment
Entertainment—Defined
Entertainment includes any activity generally considered 
to provide entertainment, amusement, or recreation. Ex-
amples include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-
cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at sporting 
events; on yachts; or on hunting, fishing, vacation, and 
similar trips. Entertainment may also include meeting per-
sonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such as pro-
viding meals, a hotel suite, or a car to customers or their 
families.
Deduction may depend on your type of business. 
Y our kind of business may determine if a particular activity 
is considered entertainment. For example, if you are a 
dress designer and have a fashion show to introduce your 
new designs to store buyers, the show generally isn’t con-
sidered entertainment. This is because fashion shows are 
typical in your business. But, if you are an appliance dis-
tributor and hold a fashion show for the spouses of your 
retailers, the show is generally considered entertainment.
Separating costs.  If you have one expense that in-
cludes the costs of entertainment and other services 
(such as lodging or transportation), you must allocate that 
expense between the cost of entertainment and the cost 
of other services. Y ou must have a reasonable basis for 
making this allocation. For example, you must allocate 
your expenses if a hotel includes entertainment in its 
lounge on the same bill with your room charge.
Exceptions to the Rules
In general, entertainment expenses are nondeductible. 
However, there are a few exceptions to the general rule, 
including:
• Entertainment treated as compensation on your origi-
nally filed tax returns (and treated as wages to your 
employees);
• Recreational expenses for employees such as a holi-
day party or a summer picnic;
• Expenses related to attending business meetings or 
conventions of certain exempt organizations such as 
business leagues, chambers of commerce, professio-
nal associations, etc.; and
• Entertainment sold to customers. For example, if you 
run a nightclub, your expenses for the entertainment 
you furnish to your customers, such as a floor show, 
aren’t subject to the nondeductible rules.
Examples of Nondeductible Entertainment
Entertainment events. Generally, you can't deduct any 
expense for an entertainment event. This includes expen-
ses for entertaining guests at nightclubs; at social, athletic, 
14 Chapter 2 Meals and Entertainment Publication 463 (2023)

Page 15 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and sporting clubs; at theaters; at sporting events; on 
yachts; or on hunting, fishing, vacation, and similar trips.
Entertainment facilities.  Generally, you can’t deduct 
any expense for the use of an entertainment facility. This 
includes expenses for depreciation and operating costs 
such as rent, utilities, maintenance, and protection.
An entertainment facility is any property you own, rent, 
or use for entertainment. Examples include a yacht, hunt-
ing lodge, fishing camp, swimming pool, tennis court, 
bowling alley, car, airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or 
home in a vacation resort.
Club dues and membership fees.  Y ou can’t deduct 
dues (including initiation fees) for membership in any club 
organized for business, pleasure, recreation, or other so-
cial purposes.
This rule applies to any membership organization if one 
of its principal purposes is either:
• T o conduct entertainment activities for members or 
their guests; or
• T o provide members or their guests with access to en-
tertainment facilities, discussed later.
The purposes and activities of a club, not its name, will 
determine whether or not you can deduct the dues. Y ou 
can’t deduct dues paid to:
• Country clubs,
• Golf and athletic clubs,
• Airline clubs,
• Hotel clubs, and
• Clubs operated to provide meals under circumstances 
generally considered to be conducive to business dis-
cussions.
Gift or entertainment.  Any item that might be consid-
ered either a gift or entertainment will generally be consid-
ered entertainment. However, if you give a customer pack-
aged food or beverages that you intend the customer to 
use at a later date, treat it as a gift.
Meals
As discussed above, entertainment expenses are gener-
ally nondeductible. However, you may continue to deduct 
50% of the cost of business meals if you (or an employee) 
is present and the food or beverages are not considered 
lavish or extravagant. The meals may be provided to a cur-
rent or potential business customer, client, consultant, or 
similar business contact.
Food and beverages that are provided during entertain-
ment events are not considered entertainment if pur-
chased separately from the entertainment, or if the cost of 
the food and beverages is stated separately from the cost 
of the entertainment on one or more bills, invoices, or re-
ceipts. However, the entertainment disallowance rule may 
not be circumvented through inflating the amount charged 
for food and beverages.
Other rules for meals and entertainment expenses. 
Any allowed expense must be ordinary and necessary. An 
ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in 
your trade or business. A necessary expense is one that is 
helpful and appropriate for your business. An expense 
doesn't have to be required to be considered necessary. 
Expenses must not be lavish or extravagant. An expense 
isn't considered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable 
based on the facts and circumstances.
Examples. For each example, assume that the food and 
beverage expenses are ordinary and necessary expenses 
under section 162(a) paid or incurred during the tax year 
in carrying on a trade or business and are not lavish or ex-
travagant under the circumstances. Also assume that the 
taxpayer and the business contact are not engaged in a 
trade or business that has any relation to the entertain-
ment activity.
Example 1. T axpayer A invites B, a business contact, 
to a baseball game. A purchases tickets for A and B to at-
tend the game. While at the game, A buys hot dogs and 
drinks for A and B. The baseball game is entertainment as 
defined in Regulations section 1.274-11(b)(1)(i) and, thus, 
the cost of the game tickets is an entertainment expense 
and is not deductible by A. The cost of the hot dogs and 
drinks, which are purchased separately from the game 
tickets, is not an entertainment expense and is not subject 
to the section 274(a)(1) disallowance. Therefore, A may 
deduct 50% of the expenses associated with the hot dogs 
and drinks purchased at the game.
Example 2. T axpayer C invites D, a business contact, 
to a basketball game. C purchases tickets for C and D to 
attend the game in a suite, where they have access to 
food and beverages. The cost of the basketball game tick-
ets, as stated on the invoice, includes the food and bever-
ages. The basketball game is entertainment as defined in 
Regulations section 1. 274-11(b)(1)(i) and, thus, the cost 
of the game tickets is an entertainment expense and is not 
deductible by C. The cost of the food and beverages, 
which are not purchased separately from the game tick-
ets, is not stated separately on the invoice. Thus, the cost 
of the food and beverages is also an entertainment ex-
pense that is subject to the section 274(a)(1) disallow-
ance. Therefore, C may not deduct any of the expenses 
associated with the basketball game.
Example 3. Assume the same facts as in Example 2, 
except that the invoice for the basketball game tickets sep-
arately states the cost of the food and beverages. As in 
Example 2 , the basketball game is entertainment as de-
fined in Regulations section 1.274-2(b)(1)(i) and, thus, the 
cost of the game tickets, other than the cost of the food 
and beverages, is an entertainment expense and is not 
deductible by C. However, the cost of the food and bever-
ages, which is stated separately on the invoice for the 
game tickets, is not an entertainment expense and is not 
subject to the section 274(a)(1) disallowance. Therefore, 
C may deduct 50% of the expenses associated with the 
food and beverages provided at the game.
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 2 Meals and Entertainment 15

Page 16 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
50% Limit
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your business -re-
lated meal expenses, unless an exception applies. (If you 
are subject to the Department of T ransportation's “hours of 
service” limits, you can deduct 80% of your business -rela-
ted meal expenses. See Individuals subject to “hours of 
service” limits, later.)
The 50% limit applies to employees or their employers, 
and to self-employed persons (including independent con-
tractors) or their clients, depending on whether the expen-
ses are reimbursed.
Examples of meals might include:
• Meals while traveling away from home (whether eating 
alone or with others) on business, or
• Meal at a business convention or business league 
meeting.
Costs to include or exclude. T axes and tips relating to a 
business meal are included as a cost of the meal and are 
subject to the 50% limit. However, the cost of transporta-
tion to and from the meal is not treated as part of the cost 
and would not be subject to the limit.
Application of 50% limit.  The 50% limit on meal expen-
ses applies if the expense is otherwise deductible and 
isn’t covered by one of the exceptions discussed later. Fig-
ure A  can help you determine if the 50% limit applies to 
you.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal expenses 
that aren’t business related. It applies to meal expenses 
you have for the production of income, including rental or 
royalty income. It also applies to the cost of meals inclu-
ded in deductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit.  The 50% limit will apply 
after determining the amount that would otherwise qualify 
for a deduction. Y ou first have to determine the amount of 
meal expenses that would be deductible under the other 
rules discussed in this publication.
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit for Meals, later.
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer didn’t
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
aren’t included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
Start Here
Your meal and entertainment 
expenses are NOT subject to 
the limitations. However, since 
the reimbursement wasn’t 
treated as wages or as other 
taxable income, you can’t 
deduct the expenses.
Your meal expenses ARE 
subject to the 50% limit. 
Your entertainment 
expenses are nondeduct-
ible.
16 Chapter 2 Meals and Entertainment Publication 463 (2023)

Page 17 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Taking turns paying for meals.  If a group of business 
acquaintances takes turns picking up each others' meal 
checks primarily for personal reasons, without regard to 
whether any business purposes are served, no member of 
the group can deduct any part of the expense.
Example 1.  Y ou spend $200 (including tax and tip) for 
a business meal. If $110 of that amount isn’t allowable be-
cause it is lavish and extravagant, the remaining $90 is 
subject to the 50% limit. Y our deduction can’t be more 
than $45 (50% (0.50) × $90).
Example 2. Y ou purchase two tickets to a concert for 
$200 for you and your client. Y our deduction is zero be-
cause no deduction is allowed for entertainment expen-
ses.
Exception to the 50% Limit for Meals
Y our meal expense isn’t subject to the 50% limit if the ex-
pense meets one of the following exceptions.
1—Expenses treated as compensation.  In general, 
expenses for goods, services, and facilities, to the extent 
the expenses are treated by the taxpayer, with respect to 
entertainment, amusement, or recreation, as compensa-
tion to an employee and as wages to the employee for tax 
purposes.
2—Employee's reimbursed expenses.  If you are an 
employee, you aren’t subject to the 50% limit on expenses 
for which your employer reimburses you under an ac-
countable plan. Accountable plans are discussed in chap-
ter 6.
3—Self-employed reimbursed expenses. If you are 
self-employed, your deductible meal expenses aren’t sub-
ject to the 50% limit if all of the following requirements are 
met.
• Y ou have these expenses as an independent contrac-
tor.
• Y our customer or client reimburses you or gives you 
an allowance for these expenses in connection with 
services you perform.
• Y ou provide adequate records of these expenses to 
your customer or client. (See chapter 5.)
In this case, your client or customer is subject to the 
50% limit on the expenses.
Example. Y ou are a self-employed attorney who ade-
quately accounts for meal expenses to a client who reim-
burses you for these expenses. Y ou aren’t subject to the 
limitation on meal expenses. If the client can deduct the 
expenses, the client is subject to the 50% limit.
If you (as an independent contractor) have expenses 
for meals related to providing services for a client but don’t 
adequately account for and seek reimbursement from the 
client for those expenses, you are subject to the 50% limit 
on non -entertainment-related meals and the entertain-
ment-related meal expenses are nondeductible to you.
4—Recreational expenses for employees.  Y ou 
aren't subject to the 50% limit for expenses for recrea-
tional, social, or similar activities (including facilities) such 
as a holiday party or a summer picnic.
5—Advertising expenses.  Y ou aren’t subject to the 
50% limit if you provide meals to the general public as a 
means of advertising or promoting goodwill in the com-
munity. For example, neither the expense of sponsoring a 
television or radio show nor the expense of distributing 
free food and beverages to the general public is subject to 
the 50% limit.
6—Sale of meals. Y ou aren’t subject to the 50% limit if 
you actually sell meals to the public. For example, if you 
run a restaurant, your expense for the food you furnish to 
your customers isn’t subject to the 50% limit.
Individuals subject to “hours of service” limits.  Y ou 
can deduct a higher percentage of your meal expenses 
while traveling away from your tax home if the meals take 
place during or incident to any period subject to the De-
partment of T ransportation's “hours of service” limits. The 
percentage is 80%.
Individuals subject to the Department of T ransporta-
tion's “hours of service” limits include the following per-
sons.
• Certain air transportation workers (such as pilots, 
crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and control tower oper-
ators) who are under Federal Aviation Administration 
regulations.
• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers who are un-
der Department of T ransportation regulations.
• Certain railroad employees (such as engineers, con-
ductors, train crews, dispatchers, and control opera-
tions personnel) who are under Federal Railroad Ad-
ministration regulations.
• Certain merchant mariners who are under Coast 
Guard regulations.
The temporary 100 -percent deduction for expen-
ses that were paid or incurred after December 31, 
2020, and before January 1, 2023, for food or 
beverages provided by a restaurant has expired. Gener-
ally, the 50% deduction continues to apply. See 50% Limit, 
earlier.
3.
Gifts
If you give gifts in the course of your trade or business, 
you may be able to deduct all or part of the cost. This 
chapter explains the limits and rules for deducting the 
costs of gifts.
CAUTION
!
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 3 Gifts 17

Page 18 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$25 limit. Y ou can deduct no more than $25 for business 
gifts you give directly or indirectly to each person during 
your tax year. A gift to a company that is intended for the 
eventual personal use or benefit of a particular person or a 
limited class of people will be considered an indirect gift to 
that particular person or to the individuals within that class 
of people who receive the gift.
If you give a gift to a member of a customer's family, the 
gift is generally considered to be an indirect gift to the cus-
tomer. This rule doesn’t apply if you have a bona fide, in-
dependent business connection with that family member 
and the gift isn’t intended for the customer's eventual use.
If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of you are 
treated as one taxpayer. It doesn’t matter whether you 
have separate businesses, are separately employed, or 
whether each of you has an independent connection with 
the recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partnership 
and the partners are treated as one taxpayer.
Example. Y ou sell products to a local company. Y ou 
and your spouse gave the local company three gourmet 
gift baskets to thank them for their business. Y ou and your 
spouse paid $80 for each gift basket, or $240 total. Three 
of the local company's executives took the gift baskets 
home for their families' use. Y ou and your spouse have no 
independent business relationship with any of the execu-
tives' other family members. Y ou and your spouse can de-
duct a total of $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the gift baskets.
Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as engraving on 
jewelry, or packaging, insuring, and mailing, are generally 
not included in determining the cost of a gift for purposes 
of the $25 limit.
A cost is incidental only if it doesn’t add substantial 
value to the gift. For example, the cost of gift wrapping is 
an incidental cost. However, the purchase of an ornamen-
tal basket for packaging fruit isn’t an incidental cost if the 
value of the basket is substantial compared to the value of 
the fruit.
Exceptions. The following items aren’t considered gifts 
for purposes of the $25 limit.
1. An item that costs $4 or less and:
a. Has your name clearly and permanently imprinted 
on the gift, and
b. Is one of a number of identical items you widely 
distribute. Examples include pens, desk sets, and 
plastic bags and cases.
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional material to 
be used on the business premises of the recipient.
Gift or entertainment.  Any item that might be consid-
ered either a gift or entertainment will generally be consid-
ered entertainment. However, if you give a customer pack-
aged food or beverages you intend the customer to use at 
a later date, treat it as a gift.
If you are entitled to a reimbursement from your 
employer but you don’t claim it, you can’t claim a 
deduction for the expenses to which that un-
claimed reimbursement applies. This type of deduction is 
considered a miscellaneous deduction that is no longer al-
lowable due to the suspension of miscellaneous itemized 
deductions subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a).
4.
Transportation
This chapter discusses expenses you can deduct for busi-
ness transportation when you aren’t traveling away from 
home, as defined in chapter 1. These expenses include 
the cost of transportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the 
cost of driving and maintaining your car.
T ransportation expenses include the ordinary and neces-
sary costs of all of the following.
• Getting from one workplace to another in the course of 
your business or profession when you are traveling 
within the city or general area that is your tax home. 
T ax home is defined in chapter 1.
• Visiting clients or customers.
• Going to a business meeting away from your regular 
workplace.
• Getting from your home to a temporary workplace 
when you have one or more regular places of work. 
These temporary workplaces can be either within the 
area of your tax home or outside that area.
T ransportation expenses don’t include expenses you have 
while traveling away from home overnight. Those expen-
ses are travel expenses discussed in chapter 1. However, 
if you use your car while traveling away from home over-
night, use the rules in this chapter to figure your car ex-
pense deduction. See Car Expenses, later.
Daily transportation expenses you incur while traveling 
from home to one or more regular places of business are 
generally nondeductible commuting expenses. However, 
there may be exceptions to this general rule. Y ou can de-
duct daily transportation expenses incurred going be-
tween your residence and a temporary work station out-
side the metropolitan area where you live. Also, daily 
transportation expenses can be deducted if (1) you have 
one or more regular work locations away from your resi-
dence; or (2) your residence is your principal place of 
business and you incur expenses going between the resi-
dence and another work location in the same trade or 
business, regardless of whether the work is temporary or 
permanent and regardless of the distance.
CAUTION
!
18 Chapter 4 T ransportation Publication 463 (2023)

Page 19 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are entitled to a reimbursement from your 
employer but you don’t claim it, you can’t claim a 
deduction for the expenses to which that un-
claimed reimbursement applies. This type of deduction is 
considered a miscellaneous deduction that is no longer al-
lowable due to the suspension of miscellaneous itemized 
deductions subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a).
Illustration of transportation expenses. Figure B above 
illustrates the rules that apply for deducting  transportation 
expenses when you have a regular or main job away from 
your home. Y ou may want to refer to it when deciding 
whether you can deduct your transportation expenses.
Temporary work location. If you have one or more regu-
lar work locations away from your home and you commute 
CAUTION
!
to a temporary work location in the same trade or busi-
ness, you can deduct the expenses of the daily round -trip 
transportation between your home and the temporary lo-
cation, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is realistically ex-
pected to last (and does in fact last) for 1 year or less, the 
employment is temporary unless there are facts and cir-
cumstances that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is realistically ex-
pected to last for more than 1 year or if there is no realistic 
expectation that the employment will last for 1 year or less, 
the employment isn’t temporary, regardless of whether it 
actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is realistically 
expected to last for 1 year or less, but at some later date 
the employment is realistically expected to last more than 
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
Most employees and self -employed persons can use this chart. (Don’t use this chart if your home is your principal 
place of business. See Office in the home, later.)
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never 
de
duct
ible
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. If you don’t go directly from your /f_irst job to your second
job, you can only deduct the transportation expenses of going directly from your /f_irst
job to your second job. You can’t deduct your transportation expenses between
your home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 4 T ransportation 19

Page 20 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1 year, that employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that would indicate 
otherwise) until your expectation changes. It won’t be trea-
ted as temporary after the date you determine it will last 
more than 1 year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the general 
area of your regular place of work and you stay overnight, 
you are traveling away from home. Y ou may have deducti-
ble travel expenses, as discussed in chapter 1.
No regular place of work.  If you have no regular place 
of work but ordinarily work in the metropolitan area where 
you live, you can deduct daily transportation costs be-
tween home and a temporary work site outside that metro-
politan area.
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the area within 
the city limits and the suburbs that are considered part of 
that metropolitan area.
Y ou can’t deduct daily transportation costs between 
your home and temporary work sites within your metropol-
itan area. These are nondeductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work.  If you work at two places in 1 day, 
whether or not for the same employer, you can deduct the 
expense of getting from one workplace to the other. How-
ever, if for some personal reason you don’t go directly 
from one location to the other, you can’t deduct more than 
the amount it would have cost you to go directly from the 
first location to the second.
T ransportation expenses you have in going between 
home and a part -time job on a day off from your main job 
are commuting expenses. Y ou can’t deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists.  A meeting of an Armed 
Forces reserve unit is a second place of business if the 
meeting is held on a day on which you work at your regular 
job. Y ou can deduct the expense of getting from one work-
place to the other as just discussed under T wo places of 
work.
Y ou usually can’t deduct the expense if the reserve 
meeting is held on a day on which you don’t work at your 
regular job. In this case, your transportation is generally a 
nondeductible commuting expense. However, you can de-
duct your transportation expenses if the location of the 
meeting is temporary and you have one or more regular 
places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metropolitan area 
but not at any specific location and the reserve meeting is 
held at a temporary location outside that metropolitan 
area, you can deduct your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to attend a 
guard or reserve meeting, you can deduct your travel ex-
penses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 1.
If you travel more than 100 miles away from home in 
connection with your performance of services as a mem-
ber of the reserves, you may be able to deduct some of 
your reserve -related travel costs as an adjustment to 
gross income rather than as an itemized deduction. For 
more information, see Armed Forces Reservists T raveling 
More Than 100 Miles From Home  under Special Rules in 
chapter 6.
Commuting expenses.  Y ou can’t deduct the costs of 
taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, or of driving a car be-
tween your home and your main or regular place of work. 
These costs are personal commuting expenses. Y ou can’t 
deduct commuting expenses no matter how far your home 
is from your regular place of work. Y ou can’t deduct com-
muting expenses even if you work during the commuting 
trip.
Example. Y ou sometimes use your cell phone to make 
business calls while commuting to and from work. Some-
times business associates ride with you to and from work, 
and you have a business discussion in the car. These ac-
tivities don’t change the trip from personal to business. 
Y ou can’t deduct your commuting expenses.
Parking fees. Fees you pay to park your car at your 
place of business are nondeductible commuting expen-
ses. Y ou can, however, deduct business-related parking 
fees when visiting a customer or client.
Advertising display on car.  Putting display material 
that advertises your business on your car doesn’t change 
the use of your car from personal use to business use. If 
you use this car for commuting or other personal uses, 
you still can’t deduct your expenses for those uses.
Car pools. Y ou can’t deduct the cost of using your car 
in a nonprofit car pool. Don’t include payments you re-
ceive from the passengers in your income. These pay-
ments are considered reimbursements of your expenses. 
However, if you operate a car pool for a profit, you must in-
clude payments from passengers in your income. Y ou can 
then deduct your car expenses (using the rules in this 
publication).
Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling tools or instru-
ments in your car while commuting to and from work 
doesn’t make your car expenses deductible. However, you 
can deduct any additional costs you have for hauling tools 
or instruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow with 
your car).
Union members' trips from a union hall.  If you get 
your work assignments at a union hall and then go to your 
place of work, the costs of getting from the union hall to 
your place of work are nondeductible commuting expen-
ses. Although you need the union to get your work assign-
ments, you are employed where you work, not where the 
union hall is located.
Office in the home.  If you have an office in your home 
that qualifies as a principal place of business, you can de-
duct your daily transportation costs between your home 
and another work location in the same trade or business. 
(See Pub. 587, Business Use of Y our Home, for informa-
tion on determining if your home office qualifies as a prin-
cipal place of business.)
Examples of deductible transportation.  The following 
examples show when you can deduct transportation ex-
penses based on the location of your work and your 
home.
20 Chapter 4 T ransportation Publication 463 (2023)

Page 21 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. Y ou regularly work in an office in the city 
where you live. Y our employer sends you to a 1 -week 
training session at a different office in the same city. Y ou 
travel directly from your home to the training location and 
return each day. Y ou can deduct the cost of your daily 
round-trip transportation between your home and the 
training location.
Example 2. Y our principal place of business is in your 
home. Y ou can deduct the cost of round-trip transportation 
between your qualifying home office and your client's or 
customer's place of business.
Example 3. Y ou have no regular office, and you don’t 
have an office in your home. In this case, the location of 
your first business contact inside the metropolitan area is 
considered your office. T ransportation expenses between 
your home and this first contact are nondeductible com-
muting expenses. T ransportation expenses between your 
last business contact and your home are also nondeducti-
ble commuting expenses. While you can’t deduct the 
costs of these trips, you can deduct the costs of going 
from one client or customer to another.
Car Expenses
If you use your car for business purposes, you may be 
able to deduct car expenses. Y ou can generally use one of 
the two following methods to figure your deductible expen-
ses.
• Standard mileage rate.
• Actual car expenses.
If you qualify to use both methods, you may want 
to figure your deduction both ways to see which 
gives you a larger deduction.
The cost of using your car as an employee, whether 
measured using actual expenses or the standard mileage 
rate, will no longer be allowed to be claimed as an unreim-
bursed employee travel expense as a miscellaneous item-
ized deduction due to the suspension of miscellaneous 
itemized deductions that are subject to the 2% floor under 
section 67(a). The suspension applies to tax years begin-
ning after December 2017 and before January 2026. De-
ductions for expenses that are deductible in determining 
adjusted gross income are not suspended. For example, 
Armed Forces reservists, qualified performing artists, and 
fee-basis state or local government officials are allowed to 
deduct unreimbursed employee travel expenses as an ad-
justment to total income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 12.
If you use actual expenses to figure your deduction for 
a car you lease, there are rules that affect the amount of 
your lease payments you can deduct. See Leasing a Car, 
later.
In this publication, “car” includes a van, pickup, or panel 
truck. For the definition of “car” for depreciation purposes, 
see Car defined under Actual Car Expenses, later.
TIP
Standard Mileage Rate
For 2023, the standard mileage rate for the cost of operat-
ing your car for business use is 65.5 cents ($0.655) per 
mile.
If you use the standard mileage rate for a year, 
you can’t deduct your actual car expenses for that 
year. Y ou can’t deduct depreciation, lease pay-
ments, maintenance and repairs, gasoline (including gas-
oline taxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle registration fees. 
See Choosing the standard mileage rate  and Standard 
mileage rate not allowed, later.
Y ou can generally use the standard mileage rate 
whether or not you are reimbursed and whether or not any 
reimbursement is more or less than the amount figured 
using the standard mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more 
information on reimbursements.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.  If you want to 
use the standard mileage rate for a car you own, you must 
choose to use it in the first year the car is available for use 
in your business. Then, in later years, you can choose to 
use either the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.
If you want to use the standard mileage rate for a car 
you lease, you must use it for the entire lease period. For 
leases that began on or before December 31, 1997, the 
standard mileage rate must be used for the entire portion 
of the lease period (including renewals) that is after 1997.
Y ou must make the choice to use the standard mileage 
rate by the due date (including extensions) of your return. 
Y ou can’t revoke the choice. However, in later years, you 
can switch from the standard mileage rate to the actual ex-
penses method. If you change to the actual expenses 
method in a later year, but before your car is fully depreci-
ated, you have to estimate the remaining useful life of the 
car and use straight line depreciation for the car’s remain-
ing estimated useful life, subject to depreciation limits (dis-
cussed later).
For more information about depreciation included in the 
standard mileage rate, see Exception under Methods of 
depreciation, later.
Standard mileage rate not allowed.  Y ou can’t use the 
standard mileage rate if you:
• Use five or more cars at the same time (such as in 
fleet operations);
• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the car using 
any method other than straight line for the car’s esti-
mated useful life;
• Used the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-
tem (MACRS) (as discussed later under Depreciation 
Deduction);
• Claimed a section 179 deduction (discussed later) on 
the car;
• Claimed the special depreciation allowance on the 
car; or
• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 for a car you 
leased.
CAUTION
!
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 4 T ransportation 21

Page 22 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. Y ou can elect to use the standard mileage rate if 
you used a car for hire (such as a taxi) unless the standard 
mileage rate is otherwise not allowed, as discussed 
above.
Five or more cars.  If you own or lease five or more 
cars that are used for business at the same time, you can’t 
use the standard mileage rate for the business use of any 
car. However, you may be able to deduct your actual ex-
penses for operating each of the cars in your business. 
See Actual Car Expenses, later, for information on how to 
figure your deduction.
Y ou aren’t using five or more cars for business at the 
same time if you alternate using (use at different times) 
the cars for business.
The following examples illustrate the rules for when you 
can and can’t use the standard mileage rate for five or 
more cars.
Example 1.  A salesperson owns three cars and two 
vans that they alternate using for calling on their custom-
ers. The salesperson can use the standard mileage rate 
for the business mileage of the three cars and the two 
vans because they don’t use them at the same time.
Example 2.  Y ou and your employees use your four 
pickup trucks in your landscaping business. During the 
year, you traded in two of your old trucks for two newer 
ones. Y ou can use the standard mileage rate for the busi-
ness mileage of all six of the trucks you owned during the 
year.
Example 3. Y ou own a repair shop and an insurance 
business. Y ou and your employees use your two pickup 
trucks and van for the repair shop. Y ou alternate using 
your two cars for the insurance business. No one else 
uses the cars for business purposes. Y ou can use the 
standard mileage rate for the business use of the pickup 
trucks, the van, and the cars because you never have 
more than four vehicles used for business at the same 
time.
Example 4. Y ou own a car and four vans that are used 
in your housecleaning business. Y our employees use the 
vans, and you use the car to travel to various customers. 
Y ou can’t use the standard mileage rate for the car or the 
vans. This is because all five vehicles are used in your 
business at the same time. Y ou must use actual expenses 
for all vehicles.
Interest. If you are an employee, you can’t deduct any in-
terest paid on a car loan. This applies even if you use the 
car 100% for business as an employee.
However, if you are self -employed and use your car in 
your business, you can deduct that part of the interest ex-
pense that represents your business use of the car. For 
example, if you use your car 60% for business, you can 
deduct 60% of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). 
Y ou can’t deduct the part of the interest expense that rep-
resents your personal use of the car.
If you use a home equity loan to purchase your 
car, you may be able to deduct the interest. See 
Pub. 936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, for 
more information.
Personal property taxes. If you itemize your deductions 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct on line 5c 
state and local personal property taxes on motor vehicles. 
Y ou can take this deduction even if you use the standard 
mileage rate or if you don’t use the car for business.
If you are self -employed and use your car in your busi-
ness, you can deduct the business part of state and local 
personal property taxes on motor vehicles on Schedule C 
(Form 1040), or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize 
your deductions, you can include the remainder of your 
state and local personal property taxes on the car on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using the standard 
mileage rate, you can deduct any business -related park-
ing fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park your car at 
your place of work are nondeductible commuting expen-
ses.)
Sale, trade-in, or other disposition. If you sell, trade in, 
or otherwise dispose of your car, you may have a gain or 
loss on the transaction or an adjustment to the basis of 
your new car. See Disposition of a Car, later.
Actual Car Expenses
If you don’t use the standard mileage rate, you may be 
able to deduct your actual car expenses.
Actual car expenses include:
Depreciation
Licenses
Lease 
payments
Registration 
fees
Gas Insurance Repairs
Oil Garage rent Tires
T olls Parking fees
If you have fully depreciated a car that you still use in 
your business, you can continue to claim your other actual 
car expenses. Continue to keep records, as explained 
later in chapter 5.
Business and personal use. If you use your car for both 
business and personal purposes, you must divide your ex-
penses between business and personal use. Y ou can di-
vide your expense based on the miles driven for each pur-
pose.
Example. Y ou are a contractor and drive your car 
20,000 miles during the year: 12,000 miles for business 
use and 8,000 miles for personal use. Y ou can claim only 
60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of operating your car as 
a business expense.
Employer-provided vehicle. If you use a vehicle provi-
ded by your employer for business purposes, you can de-
duct your actual unreimbursed car expenses. Y ou can’t 
use the standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided by 
Y our Employer in chapter 6.
TIP
22 Chapter 4 T ransportation Publication 463 (2023)

Page 23 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest on car loans.  If you are an employee, you can’t 
deduct any interest paid on a car loan. This interest is 
treated as personal interest and isn’t deductible. If you are 
self-employed and use your car in that business, see Inter-
est, earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate.
Taxes paid on your car. If you are an employee, you can 
deduct personal property taxes paid on your car if you 
itemize deductions. Enter the amount paid on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 5c.
Sales taxes.  Generally, sales taxes on your car are 
part of your car's basis and are recovered through depre-
ciation, discussed later.
Fines and collateral.  Y ou can’t deduct fines you pay or 
collateral you forfeit for traffic violations.
Casualty and theft losses.  If your car is damaged, de-
stroyed, or stolen, you may be able to deduct part of the 
loss not covered by insurance. See Pub. 547, Casualties, 
Disasters, and Thefts, for information on deducting a loss 
on your car.
Depreciation and section 179 deductions.  Generally, 
the cost of a car, plus sales tax and improvements, is a 
capital expense. Because the benefits last longer than 1 
year, you generally can’t deduct a capital expense. How-
ever, you can recover this cost through the section 179 de-
duction (the deduction allowed by section 179 of the Inter-
nal Revenue Code), special depreciation allowance, and 
depreciation deductions. Depreciation allows you to re-
cover the cost over more than 1 year by deducting part of 
it each year. The section 179 deduction, special deprecia-
tion allowance , and depreciation deductions  are dis-
cussed later.
Generally, there are limits on these deductions. Special 
rules apply if you use your car 50% or less in your work or 
business.
Y ou can claim a section 179 deduction and use a de-
preciation method other than straight line only if you don’t 
use the standard mileage rate to figure your business-rela-
ted car expenses in the year you first place a car in serv-
ice.
If, in the year you first place a car in service, you claim 
either a section 179 deduction or use a depreciation 
method other than straight line for its estimated useful life, 
you can’t use the standard mileage rate on that car in any 
future year.
Car defined.  For depreciation purposes, a car is any 
four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck or van) made pri-
marily for use on public streets, roads, and highways. Its 
unloaded gross vehicle weight (for trucks and vans, gross 
vehicle weight) must not be more than 6,000 pounds. A 
car includes any part, component, or other item physically 
attached to it or usually included in the purchase price.
A car doesn’t include:
• An ambulance, hearse, or combination ambu-
lance-hearse used directly in a business;
• A vehicle used directly in the business of transporting 
persons or property for pay or hire; or
• A truck or van that is a qualified nonpersonal use vehi-
cle.
Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles.  These are ve-
hicles that by their nature aren’t likely to be used more 
than a minimal amount for personal purposes. They in-
clude trucks and vans that have been specially modified 
so that they aren’t likely to be used more than a minimal 
amount for personal purposes, such as by installation of 
permanent shelving and painting the vehicle to display ad-
vertising or the company's name. Delivery trucks with 
seating only for the driver, or only for the driver plus a fold-
ing jump seat, are qualified nonpersonal use vehicles.
More information. See Depreciation Deduction, later, 
for more information on how to depreciate your vehicle.
Section 179 Deduction
Y ou can elect to recover all or part of the cost of a car that 
is qualifying section 179 property, up to a limit, by deduct-
ing it in the year you place the property in service. This is 
the section 179 deduction. If you elect the section 179 de-
duction, you must reduce your depreciable basis in the car 
by the amount of the section 179 deduction.
There is a limit on the total section 179 deduction, 
special depreciation allowance, and depreciation 
deduction for cars, trucks, and vans that may re-
duce or eliminate any benefit from claiming the section 
179 deduction. See Depreciation Limits, later.
Y ou can claim the section 179 deduction only in the 
year you place the car in service. For this purpose, a car is 
placed in service when it is ready and available for a spe-
cifically assigned use in a trade or business. Even if you 
aren’t using the property, it is in service when it is ready 
and available for its specifically assigned use.
A car first used for personal purposes can’t qualify for 
the deduction in a later year when its use changes to busi-
ness.
Example. In 2022, you bought a new car and used it 
for personal purposes. In 2023, you began to use it for 
business. Changing its use to business use doesn’t qual-
ify the cost of your car for a section 179 deduction in 2023. 
However, you can claim a depreciation deduction for the 
business use of the car starting in 2023. See Depreciation 
Deduction, later.
More than 50% business use requirement.  Y ou must 
use the property more than 50% for business to claim any 
section 179 deduction. If you used the property more than 
50% for business, multiply the cost of the property by the 
percentage of business use. The result is the cost of the 
property that can qualify for the section 179 deduction.
Example. Y ou purchased a new car in April 2023 for 
$24,500 and used it 60% for business. Based on your 
business usage, the total cost of your car that qualifies for 
the section 179 deduction is $14,700 ($24,500 cost × 
60% (0.60) business use). But see Limit on total section 
TIP
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 4 T ransportation 23

Page 24 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
179, special depreciation allowance, and depreciation de-
duction, discussed later.
Limits. There are limits on:
• The amount of the section 179 deduction;
• The section 179 deduction for sport utility and certain 
other vehicles; and
• The total amount of the section 179 deduction, special 
depreciation allowance, and depreciation deduction 
(discussed later) you can claim for a qualified prop-
erty.
Limit on the amount of the section 179 deduction. 
For tax years beginning in 2023, the total amount you can 
elect to deduct under section 179 can’t be more than 
$1,160,000.
If the cost of your section 179 property placed in serv-
ice in tax years beginning in 2023 is over $2,890,000, you 
must reduce the $1,160,000 dollar limit (but not below 
zero) by the amount of cost over $2,890,000. If the cost of 
your section 179 property placed in service during tax 
years beginning in 2023 is $4,050,000 or more, you can’t 
take a section 179 deduction.
The total amount you can deduct under section 179 
each year after you apply the limits listed above cannot be 
more than the taxable income from the active conduct of 
any trade or business during the year.
If you are married and file a joint return, you and your 
spouse are treated as one taxpayer in determining any re-
duction to the dollar limit, regardless of which of you pur-
chased the property or placed it in service.
If you and your spouse file separate returns, you are 
treated as one taxpayer for the dollar limit. Y ou must allo-
cate the dollar limit (after any reduction) between you.
For more information on the above section 179 deduc-
tion limits, see Pub. 946, How T o Depreciate Property.
Limit for sport utility and certain other vehicles. 
Y ou cannot elect to deduct more than $28,900 of the cost 
of any heavy sport utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other 
vehicles placed in service during the tax years beginning 
in 2023. This rule applies to any four -wheeled vehicle pri-
marily designed or used to carry passengers over public 
streets, roads, or highways that isn’t subject to any of the 
passenger automobile limits explained under Depreciation 
Limits, later, and that is rated at more than 6,000 pounds 
gross vehicle weight and not more than 14,000 pounds 
gross vehicle weight. However, the $28,900 limit doesn’t 
apply to any vehicle:
• Designed to have a seating capacity of more than nine 
persons behind the driver's seat;
• Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6 feet in interior 
length that is an open area or is designed for use as 
an open area but is enclosed by a cap and isn’t readily 
accessible directly from the passenger compartment; 
or
• That has an integral enclosure, fully enclosing the 
driver compartment and load carrying device, doesn’t 
have seating rearward of the driver's seat, and has no 
body section protruding more than 30 inches ahead of 
the leading edge of the windshield.
Limit on total section 179 deduction, special de-
preciation allowance, and depreciation deduction. 
The first-year limit on the depreciation deduction, special 
depreciation allowance, and section 179 deduction for ve-
hicles acquired before September 28, 2017, and placed in 
service during 2023, is $12,200. The first -year limit on de-
preciation, special depreciation allowance, and section 
179 deduction for vehicles acquired after September 27, 
2017, and placed in service during 2023 increases to 
$20,200. If you elect not to claim a special depreciation al-
lowance for a vehicle placed in service in 2023, the 
amount increases to $12,200. The limit is reduced if your 
business use of the vehicle is less than 100%. See Depre-
ciation Limits, later, for more information.
Example. In the earlier example under More than 50% 
business use requirement , you had a car with a cost (for 
purposes of the section 179 deduction) of $14,700. How-
ever, based on your business usage of the car, the total of 
your section 179 deduction, special depreciation allow-
ance, and depreciation deductions is limited to $12,120 
($20,200 limit x 60% (0.60) business use) because the car 
was acquired after September 27, 2017, and placed in 
service during 2023.
Cost of car.  For purposes of the section 179 deduction, 
the cost of the car doesn’t include any amount figured by 
reference to any other property held by you at any time. 
For example, if you buy a car as a replacement for a car 
that was stolen or that was destroyed in a casualty loss, 
and you use section 1033 to determine the basis in your 
replacement vehicle, your cost for purposes of the section 
179 deduction doesn’t include your adjusted basis in the 
relinquished car. In that case, your cost includes only the 
cash you paid.
Basis of car for depreciation.  The amount of the 
section 179 deduction reduces your basis in your car. If 
you choose the section 179 deduction, you must subtract 
the amount of the deduction from the cost of your car. The 
resulting amount is the basis in your car you use to figure 
your depreciation deduction.
When to elect. If you want to take the section 179 deduc-
tion, you must make the election in the tax year you place 
the car in service for business or work.
How to elect.  Employees use Form 2106, Employee 
Business Expenses, to make the election and report the 
section 179 deduction. All others use Form 4562, Depreci-
ation and Amortization, to make an election.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed Forces reserv-
ists, qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or 
local government officials, and employees with 
impairment-related work expenses. Due to the suspension 
of miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2% 
floor under section 67(a), employees who do not fit into 
one of the listed categories may not use Form 2106.
CAUTION
!
24 Chapter 4 T ransportation Publication 463 (2023)

Page 25 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
File the appropriate form with either of the following.
• Y our original tax return filed for the year the property 
was placed in service (whether or not you file it 
timely).
• An amended return filed within the time prescribed by 
law. An election made on an amended return must 
specify the item of section 179 property to which the 
election applies and the part of the cost of each such 
item to be taken into account. The amended return 
must also include any resulting adjustments to taxable 
income.
Y ou must keep records that show the specific 
identification of each piece of qualifying section 
179 property. These records must show how you 
acquired the property, the person you acquired it from, 
and when you placed it in service.
Revoking an election.  An election (or any specifica-
tion made in the election) to take a section 179 deduction 
for 2023 can only be revoked with the Commissioner's ap-
proval.
Recapture of section 179 deduction.  T o be eligible to 
claim the section 179 deduction, you must use your car 
more than 50% for business or work in the year you ac-
quired it. If your business use of the car is 50% or less in a 
later tax year during the recovery period, you have to re-
capture (include in income) in that later year any excess 
depreciation. Any section 179 deduction claimed on the 
car is included in figuring the excess depreciation. For in-
formation on this calculation, see Excess depreciation , 
later in this chapter under Car Used 50% or Less for Busi-
ness. For more information on recapture of a section 179 
deduction, see Pub. 946.
Dispositions. If you dispose of a car on which you had 
claimed the section 179 deduction, the amount of that de-
duction is treated as a depreciation deduction for recap-
ture purposes. Y ou treat any gain on the disposition of the 
property as ordinary income up to the amount of the sec-
tion 179 deduction and any allowable depreciation (unless 
you establish the amount actually allowed). For informa-
tion on the disposition of a car, see Disposition of a Car , 
later. For more information on recapture of a section 179 
deduction, see Pub. 946.
Special Depreciation Allowance
Y ou may be able to claim the special depreciation allow-
ance for your car, truck, or van if it is qualified property and 
was placed in service in 2023. The allowance for 2023 is 
an additional depreciation deduction for 100% of the car's 
depreciable basis (after any section 179 deduction, but 
before figuring your regular depreciation deduction under 
MACRS) if the vehicle was acquired after September 27, 
2017, and placed in service during 2023. Further, while it 
applies to a new vehicle, it also applies to a used vehicle 
only if the vehicle meets the used property requirements. 
For more information on the used property requirements, 
see section 168(k)(2)(E)(ii). T o qualify for the allowance, 
CAUTION
!
more than 50% of the use of the car must be in a qualified 
business use (as defined under Depreciation Deduction , 
later).
Combined depreciation.  The first -year limit on the de-
preciation deduction, special depreciation allowance, and 
section 179 deduction for vehicles acquired before Sep-
tember 28, 2017, and placed in service during 2023, is 
$12,200. Y our combined section 179 depreciation, special 
depreciation allowance, and regular MACRS depreciation 
deduction is limited to the maximum allowable deprecia-
tion deduction for vehicles acquired after September 27, 
2017, and placed in service during 2023 is $20,200. If you 
elect not to claim a special depreciation allowance for a 
vehicle placed in service in 2023, the amount is $12,200. 
See Depreciation Limits, later in this chapter.
Qualified car. T o be qualified property, the car (including 
the truck or van) must meet all of the following tests.
• Y ou acquired the car after September 27, 2017, but 
only if no written binding contract to acquire the car 
existed before September 28, 2017.
• Y ou acquired the car new or used.
• Y ou placed the car in service in your trade or business 
before January 1, 2027.
• Y ou used the car more than 50% in a qualified busi-
ness use during the tax year.
Election not to claim the special depreciation allow-
ance. Y ou can elect not to claim the special depreciation 
allowance for your car, truck, or van that is qualified prop-
erty. If you make this election, it applies to all 5 -year prop-
erty placed in service during the year.
T o make this election, attach a statement to your timely 
filed return (including extensions) indicating the class of 
property (5 -year for cars) for which you are making the 
election and that you are electing not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance for qualified property in that class 
of property.
Unless you elect not to claim the special depreci-
ation allowance, you must reduce the car's adjus-
ted basis by the amount of the allowance, even if 
the allowance wasn’t claimed.
Depreciation Deduction
If you use actual car expenses to figure your deduction for 
a car you own and use in your business, you can claim a 
depreciation deduction. This means you can deduct a cer-
tain amount each year as a recovery of your cost or other 
basis in your car.
Y ou generally need to know the following things about 
the car you intend to depreciate.
• Y our basis in the car.
• The date you place the car in service.
• The method of depreciation and recovery period you 
will use.
CAUTION
!
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 4 T ransportation 25

Page 26 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Basis. Y our basis in a car for figuring depreciation is gen-
erally its cost. This includes any amount you borrow or pay 
in cash, other property, or services.
Generally, you figure depreciation on your car, truck, or 
van using your unadjusted basis (see Unadjusted basis , 
later). However, in some situations, you will use your ad-
justed basis (your basis reduced by depreciation allowed 
or allowable in earlier years). For one of these situations, 
see Exception under Methods of depreciation, later.
If you change the use of a car from personal to busi-
ness, your basis for depreciation is the lesser of the fair 
market value or your adjusted basis in the car on the date 
of conversion. Additional rules concerning basis are dis-
cussed later in this chapter under Unadjusted basis.
Placed in service.  Y ou generally place a car in service 
when it is available for use in your work or business, in an 
income-producing activity, or in a personal activity. Depre-
ciation begins when the car is placed in service for use in 
your work or business or for the production of income.
For purposes of figuring depreciation, if you first start 
using the car only for personal use and later convert it to 
business use, you place the car in service on the date of 
conversion.
Car placed in service and disposed of in the same 
year. If you place a car in service and dispose of it in the 
same tax year, you can’t claim any depreciation deduction 
for that car.
Methods of depreciation. Generally, you figure depreci-
ation on cars using the Modified Accelerated Cost Recov-
ery (MACRS) discussed later in this chapter.
Exception. If you used the standard mileage rate in 
the first year of business use and change to the actual ex-
penses method in a later year, you can’t depreciate your 
car under the MACRS rules. Y ou must use straight line de-
preciation over the estimated remaining useful life of the 
car. The amount you depreciate can’t be more than the 
depreciation limit that applies for that year. See Deprecia-
tion Limits, later.
T o figure depreciation under the straight line method, 
you must reduce your basis in the car (but not below zero) 
by a set rate per mile for all miles for which you used the 
standard mileage rate. The rate per mile varies depending 
on the year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. For the 
rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustment when you 
used the standard mileage rate  under Disposition of a 
Car, later.
This reduction of basis is in addition to those basis ad-
justments described later under Unadjusted basis . Y ou 
must use your adjusted basis in your car to figure your de-
preciation deduction. For additional information on the 
straight line method of depreciation, see Pub. 946.
More-than-50%-use test. Generally, you must use your 
car more than 50% for qualified business use (defined 
next) during the year to use MACRS. Y ou must meet this 
more-than-50%-use test each year of the recovery period 
(6 years under MACRS) for your car.
If your business use is 50% or less, you must use the 
straight line method to depreciate your car. This is ex-
plained later under Car Used 50% or Less for Business.
Qualified business use. A qualified business use is any 
use in your trade or business. It doesn’t include use for the 
production of income (investment use), or use provided 
under lease to, or as compensation to, a 5% owner or rela-
ted person. However, you do combine your business and 
investment use to figure your depreciation deduction for 
the tax year.
Use of your car by another person.  Don’t treat any 
use of your car by another person as use in your trade or 
business unless that use meets one of the following condi-
tions.
• It is directly connected with your business.
• It is properly reported by you as income to the other 
person (and, if you have to, you withhold tax on the in-
come).
• It results in a payment of fair market rent. This includes 
any payment to you for the use of your car.
Business use changes.  If you used your car more than 
50% in qualified business use in the year you placed it in 
service, but 50% or less in a later year (including the year 
of disposition), you have to change to the straight line 
method of depreciation. See Qualified business use 50% 
or less in a later year  under Car Used 50% or Less for 
Business, later.
Property doesn’t cease to be used more than 
50% in qualified business use by reason of a 
transfer at death.
Use for more than one purpose.  If you use your car for 
more than one purpose during the tax year, you must allo-
cate the use to the various purposes. Y ou do this on the 
basis of mileage. Figure the percentage of qualified busi-
ness use by dividing the number of miles you drive your 
car for business purposes during the year by the total 
number of miles you drive the car during the year for any 
purpose.
Change from personal to business use.  If you change 
the use of a car from 100% personal use to business use 
during the tax year, you may not have mileage records for 
the time before the change to business use. In this case, 
you figure the percentage of business use for the year as 
follows.
1. Determine the percentage of business use for the pe-
riod following the change. Do this by dividing business 
miles by total miles driven during that period.
2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction. The nu-
merator (top number) is the number of months the car 
is used for business, and the denominator (bottom 
number) is 12.
Example. Y ou use a car only for personal purposes 
during the first 6 months of the year. During the last 6 
months of the year, you drive the car a total of 15,000 
TIP
26 Chapter 4 T ransportation Publication 463 (2023)

Page 27 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
miles of which 12,000 miles are for business. This gives 
you a business use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000) 
for that period. Y our business use for the year is 40% 
(80% (0.80) × 6/12).
Limits. The amount you can claim for section 179, spe-
cial depreciation allowance, and depreciation deductions 
may be limited. The maximum amount you can claim de-
pends on the year in which you placed your car in service. 
Y ou have to reduce the maximum amount if you did not 
use the car exclusively for business. See Depreciation 
Limits, later.
Unadjusted basis. Y ou use your unadjusted basis (often 
referred to as your basis or your basis for depreciation) to 
figure your depreciation using the MACRS depreciation 
chart, explained later under Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS). Y our unadjusted basis for fig-
uring depreciation is your original basis increased or de-
creased by certain amounts.
T o figure your unadjusted basis, begin with your car's 
original basis, which is generally its cost. Cost includes 
sales taxes (see Sales taxes, earlier), destination charges, 
and dealer preparation. Increase your basis by any sub-
stantial improvements you make to your car, such as add-
ing air conditioning or a new engine. Decrease your basis 
by any section 179 deduction, special depreciation allow-
ance, gas guzzler tax, and vehicle credits claimed. See 
Pub. 551, Basis of Assets, for further details.
If your business use later falls to 50% or less, you 
may have to recapture (include in your income) 
any excess depreciation. See Car Used 50% or 
Less for Business, later, for more information.
If you acquired the car by gift or inheritance, see Pub. 
551, Basis of Assets, for information on your basis in the 
car.
Improvements. A major improvement to a car is trea-
ted as a new item of 5 -year recovery property. It is treated 
as placed in service in the year the improvement is made. 
It doesn’t matter how old the car is when the improvement 
is added. Follow the same steps for depreciating the im-
provement as you would for depreciating the original cost 
of the car. However, you must treat the improvement and 
the car as a whole when applying the limits on the depre-
ciation deductions. Y our car's depreciation deduction for 
the year (plus any section 179 deduction, special depreci-
ation allowance, and depreciation on any improvements) 
can’t be more than the depreciation limit that applies for 
that year. See Depreciation Limits, later.
Car trade-in. If you traded one car (the “old car”) for an-
other car (the “new car”) in 2023, you must treat the trans-
action as a disposition of the old car and the purchase of 
the new car. Y ou must treat the old car as disposed of at 
the time of the trade -in. The depreciable basis of the new 
car is the adjusted basis of the old car (figured as if 100% 
of the car’s use had been for business purposes) plus any 
additional amount you paid for the new car. Y ou then fig-
ure your depreciation deduction for the new car beginning 
with the date you placed it in service. Y ou must also com-
CAUTION
!
plete Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This method is ex-
plained later, beginning at Effect of trade-in on basis.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed Forces reserv-
ists, qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or 
local government officials, and employees with 
impairment-related work expenses. Due to the suspension 
of miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2% 
floor under section 67(a), employees who do not fit into 
one of the listed categories may not use Form 2106.
Effect of trade -in on basis.  The discussion that fol-
lows applies to trade -ins of cars in 2023, where the elec-
tion was made to treat the transaction as a disposition of 
the old car and the purchase of the new car. For informa-
tion on how to figure depreciation for cars involved in a 
like-kind exchange (trade -in) in 2023, for which the elec-
tion wasn’t made, see Pub. 946 and Regulations section 
1.168(i)-6(d)(3).
Note. Like-kind exchanges completed after December 
31, 2017, are generally limited to exchanges of real prop-
erty not held primarily for sale. Regulations section 
1.168(i)-6 doesn't reflect this change in law.
Traded car used only for business.  If you trade in a 
car you used only in your business for another car that will 
be used only in your business, your original basis in the 
new car is your adjusted basis in the old car, plus any ad-
ditional amount you pay for the new car.
Example. Y ou trade in a car that has an adjusted basis 
of $5,000 for a new car. In addition, you pay cash of 
$20,000 for the new car. Y our original basis of the new car 
is $25,000 (your $5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus 
the $20,000 cash paid). Y our unadjusted basis is $25,000 
unless you claim the section 179 deduction, special de-
preciation allowance, or have other increases or decrea-
ses to your original basis, discussed under Unadjusted 
basis, earlier.
Traded car used partly in business. If you trade in a 
car you used partly in your business for a new car you will 
use in your business, you must make a “trade -in” adjust-
ment for the personal use of the old car. This adjustment 
has the effect of reducing your basis in your old car, but 
not below zero, for purposes of figuring your depreciation 
deduction for the new car. (This adjustment isn’t used, 
however, when you determine the gain or loss on the later 
disposition of the new car. See Pub. 544, Sales and Other 
Dispositions of Assets, for information on how to report the 
disposition of your car.)
T o figure the unadjusted basis of your new car for de-
preciation, first add to your adjusted basis in the old car 
any additional amount you pay for the new car. Then sub-
tract from that total the excess, if any, of:
1. The total of the amounts that would have been allowa-
ble as depreciation during the tax years before the 
trade if 100% of the use of the car had been business 
and investment use, over
2. The total of the amounts actually allowed as deprecia-
tion during those years.
CAUTION
!
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 4 T ransportation 27

Page 28 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For information about figuring depreciation, see Modified 
Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) next.
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System 
(MACRS). MACRS is the name given to the tax rules for 
getting back (recovering) through depreciation deductions 
the cost of property used in a trade or business or to pro-
duce income.
The maximum amount you can deduct is limited, de-
pending on the year you placed your car in service. See 
Depreciation Limits, later.
Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are classified 
as 5 -year property. Y ou actually depreciate the cost of a 
car, truck, or van over a period of 6 calendar years. This is 
because your car is generally treated as placed in service 
in the middle of the year, and you claim depreciation for 
one-half of both the first year and the sixth year.
For more information on the qualifications for this 
shorter recovery period and the percentages to use in fig-
uring the depreciation deduction, see chapter 4 of Pub. 
946.
Depreciation methods.  Y ou can use one of the fol-
lowing methods to depreciate your car.
• The 200% declining balance method (200% DB) over 
a 5-year recovery period that switches to the straight 
line method when that method provides an equal or 
greater deduction.
• The 150% declining balance method (150% DB) over 
a 5-year recovery period that switches to the straight 
line method when that method provides an equal or 
greater deduction.
• The straight line method (SL) over a 5-year recovery 
period.
If you use T able 4-1 (discussed later) to determine 
your depreciation rate for 2023, you don’t need to 
determine in what year using the straight line 
method provides an equal or greater deduction. This is 
because the chart has the switch to the straight line 
method built into its rates.
Before choosing a method, you may wish to consider 
the following facts.
• Using the straight line method provides equal yearly 
deductions throughout the recovery period.
• Using the declining balance methods provides greater 
deductions during the earlier recovery years with the 
deductions generally getting smaller each year.
MACRS depreciation chart.  A 2023 MACRS Deprecia-
tion Chart and instructions are included in this chapter as 
T able 4-1. Using this table will make it easy for you to fig-
ure the 2023 depreciation deduction for your car. A similar 
chart appears in the Instructions for Form 2106.
Y ou may have to use the tables in Pub. 946 in-
stead of using this MACRS Depreciation Chart.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Y ou must use the Depreciation T ables in Pub. 946 
rather than the 2023 MACRS Depreciation Chart  in this 
publication if any one of the following three conditions ap-
plies to you.
1. Y ou file your return on a fiscal year basis.
2. Y ou file your return for a short tax year (less than 12 
months).
3. During the year, all of the following conditions apply.
a. Y ou placed some property in service from January 
through September.
b. Y ou placed some property in service from October 
through December.
c. Y our basis in the property you placed in service 
from October through December (excluding non-
residential real property, residential rental property, 
and property placed in service and disposed of in 
the same year) was more than 40% of your total 
bases in all property you placed in service during 
the year.
Depreciation in future years.  If you use the percen-
tages from the chart, you generally must continue to use 
them for the entire recovery period of your car. However, 
you can’t continue to use the chart if your basis in your car 
is adjusted because of a casualty. In that case, for the year 
of the adjustment and the remaining recovery period, fig-
ure the depreciation without the chart using your adjusted 
basis in the car at the end of the year of the adjustment 
and over the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the 
Deduction Without Using the T ables in chapter 4 of Pub. 
946.
In future years, don’t use the chart in this edition 
of the publication. Instead, use the chart in the 
publication or the form instructions for those future 
years.
Disposition of car during recovery period.  If you 
dispose of the car before the last year of the recovery pe-
riod, you are generally allowed a half -year of depreciation 
in the year of disposition. This rule applies unless the 
mid-quarter convention applies to the vehicle being dis-
posed of. See Depreciation deduction for the year of dis-
position under Disposition of a Car , later, for information 
on how to figure the depreciation allowed in the year of 
disposition.
How to use the 2023 chart.  T o figure your deprecia-
tion deduction for 2023, find the percentage in the column 
of T able 4-1 based on the date that you first placed the car 
in service and the depreciation method that you are using. 
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car (defined earlier) 
by that percentage to determine the amount of your depre-
ciation deduction. If you prefer to figure your depreciation 
deduction without the help of the chart, see Pub. 946.
Y our deduction can’t be more than the maximum 
depreciation limit for cars. See Depreciation Lim-
its, later.
TIP
CAUTION
!
28 Chapter 4 T ransportation Publication 463 (2023)

Page 29 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Y ou bought a used truck in February 2022 to 
use exclusively in your landscape business. Y ou paid 
$9,200 for the truck with no trade -in. Y ou didn’t claim any 
section 179 deduction, the truck didn’t qualify for the spe-
cial depreciation allowance, and you chose to use the 
200% DB method to get the largest depreciation deduc-
tion in the early years.
Y ou used the MACRS Depreciation Chart in 2022 to 
find your percentage. The unadjusted basis of the truck 
equals its cost because you used it exclusively for busi-
ness. Y ou multiplied the unadjusted basis of the truck, 
$9,200, by the percentage that applied, 20%, to figure 
your 2022 depreciation deduction of $1,840.
In 2023, you used the truck for personal purposes when 
you repaired your parent’s cabin. Y our records show that 
the business use of the truck was 90% in 2023. Y ou used 
T able 4-1 to find your percentage. Reading down the first 
column for the date placed in service and across to the 
200% DB column, you locate your percentage, 32%. Y ou 
multiply the unadjusted basis of the truck, $8,280 ($9,200 
cost × 90% (0.90) business use), by 32% (0.32) to figure 
your 2023 depreciation deduction of $2,650.
Depreciation Limits
There are limits on the amount you can deduct for depre-
ciation of your car, truck, or van. The section 179 deduc-
tion and special depreciation allowance are treated as de-
preciation for purposes of the limits. The maximum 
amount you can deduct each year depends on the date 
you acquired the passenger automobile and the year you 
place the passenger automobile in service. These limits 
are shown in the following tables for 2023.
Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Passenger Automobiles (Including 
Trucks and
Vans) Acquired Before September 28, 2017, 
and
Placed in Service During 2018–2023
Date 4th &
Placed in 1st 2nd 3rd Later
Service Y ear Y ear Y ear Y ears
2023 $12,200 $19,500 $11,700 $6,960
2022 11,200 18,000 10,800 6,460
2021 10,200 16,400  9,800  5,860
2020  10,100  16,100  9,700  5,760
2019  14,9001  16,100  9,700  5,760
2018  16,4002  16,000  9,600  5,760
1 $10,100 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim 
the special depreciation allowance.
2 $10,000 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim 
the special depreciation allowance.
Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Passenger Automobiles (Including 
Trucks and
Vans) Acquired After September 27, 2017, 
and
Placed in Service During 2018 or Later
Date 4th &
Placed in 1st 2nd 3rd Later
Service Y ear Y ear Y ear Y ears
2023 $20,2001 $19,500 $11,700 $6,960
2022 19,2002 18,000 10,800 6,460
2021  18,2003  16,400  9,800  5,860
2019–2020  18,1004  16,100  9,700  5,760
2018  18,0005  16,000  9,600  5,760
1 $12,200 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim 
the special depreciation allowance.
2 $11,200 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim 
the special depreciation allowance.
3 $10,200 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim 
the special depreciation allowance.
4 $10,100 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim 
the special depreciation allowance.
5 $10,000 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim 
the special depreciation allowance.
The maximum amount you can deduct each year de-
pends on the year you place the car in service. These lim-
its are shown in the following tables for prior years.
Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Cars Placed in Service
Prior to 2018
Date 4th &
Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later
in Service Y ear Y ear Y ear Y ears
2012–2017 $11,1601 $5,100 $3,050 $1,875
2010–2011  11,0602  4,900  2,950 1,775
2008–2009  10,9603  4,800  2,850  1,775
2007 3,060  4,900  2,850 1,775
2006 2,960  4,800  2,850 1,775
2005 2,960  4,700  2,850 1,675
2004 10,6103  4,800  2,850 1,675
5/06/2003–
12/31/2003
10,7104  4,900  2,950 1,775
1/01/2003–
5/05/2003
7,6605  4,900  2,950 1,775
1 $3,160 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance.
2 $3,060 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance.
3 $2,960 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you elect not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance.
4 $7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/06/2003. $3,060 if the car isn’t qualified 
property or if you elect not to claim any special depreciation allowance.
5 $3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the car isn’t qualified property, or 
you elect not to claim the special depreciation allowance.
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 4 T ransportation 29

Page 30 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Trucks and vans.  For tax years prior to 2018, the 
maximum depreciation deductions for trucks and vans are 
generally higher than those for cars. A truck or van is a 
passenger automobile that is classified by the manufac-
turer as a truck or van and rated at 6,000 pounds gross 
vehicle weight or less.
Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Trucks and Vans
Placed in Service
Prior to 2018
Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Trucks and 
Vans Placed in Service Prior to 2018
Date 4th &
Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later
in Service Y ear Y ear Y ear Y ears
2017 $11,5601 $5,700 $3,450 $2,075
2016  11,5601 5,700 3,350 2,075
2015  11,4601 5,600 3,350 1,975
2014  11,4601 5,500 3,350 1,975
2013  11,3601 5,400 3,250 1,975
2012  11,3601 5,300 3,150 1,875
2011  11,2601 5,200 3,150 1,875
2010  11,1601 5,100 3,050 1,875
2009  11,0601 4,900 2,950 1,775
2008  11,1601 5,100 3,050 1,875
2007 3,260 5,200 3,050 1,875
2005–2006 3,260 5,200 3,150 1,875
2004  10,9101 5,300 3,150 1,875
2003  11,0101, 2 5,400 3,250 1,975
1 If the special depreciation allowance doesn’t apply or you make the election not to 
claim the special depreciation allowance, the first-year limit is $3,560 for 2017 
and 2016, $3,460 for 2015 and 2014, $3,360 for 2013 and 2012, $3,260 for 
2011, $3,160 for 2010, $3,060 for 2009, $3,160 for 2008, $3,260 for 2004, and 
$3,360 for 2003.
2 If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/2003, the truck or van is qualified 
property, and you claim the special depreciation allowance for the truck or van, 
the maximum deduction is $7,960.
Car used less than full year.  The depreciation limits 
aren’t reduced if you use a car for less than a full year. 
This means that you don’t reduce the limit when you either 
place a car in service or dispose of a car during the year. 
However, the depreciation limits are reduced if you don’t 
use the car exclusively for business and investment purpo-
ses. See Reduction for personal use next.
Reduction for personal use. The depreciation limits are 
reduced based on your percentage of personal use. If you 
use a car less than 100% in your business or work, you 
must determine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-
plying the limit amount by the percentage of business and 
investment use during the tax year.
Section 179 deduction.  The section 179 deduction is 
treated as a depreciation deduction. If you acquired a pas-
senger automobile (including trucks and vans) after Sep-
tember 27, 2017, and placed it in service in 2023, use it 
only for business, and choose the section 179 deduction, 
the special depreciation allowance and depreciation de-
duction for that vehicle for 2023 is limited to $20,200.
Example. On September 4, 2023, you bought and 
placed in service a used car for $15,000. Y ou used it 80% 
for your business, and you choose to take a section 179 
deduction for the car. The car isn’t qualified property for 
purposes of the special depreciation allowance.
Before applying the limit, you figure your maximum sec-
tion 179 deduction to be $12,000. This is the cost of your 
qualifying property (up to the maximum $1,160,000 
amount) multiplied by your business use ($15,000 × 80% 
(0.80)).
Y ou then figure that your section 179 deduction for 
2023 is limited to $9,760 (80% of $12,200). Y ou then fig-
ure your unadjusted basis of $2,440 (($15,000 × 80% 
(0.80)) − $9,760) for determining your depreciation deduc-
tion. Y ou have reached your maximum depreciation de-
duction for 2023. For 2024, you will use your unadjusted 
basis of $2,440 to figure your depreciation deduction.
Deductions in years after the recovery period.  If the 
depreciation deductions for your car are reduced under 
the passenger automobile limits  (discussed earlier), you 
will have unrecovered basis in your car at the end of the 
recovery period. If you continue to use your car for busi-
ness, you can deduct that unrecovered basis (subject to 
depreciation limits) after the recovery period ends.
Unrecovered basis. This is your cost or other basis in 
the car reduced by any clean -fuel vehicle deduction (for 
vehicles placed in service before January 1, 2006), alter-
native motor vehicle credit, electric vehicle credit, gas guz-
zler tax, and depreciation (including any special deprecia-
tion allowance, discussed earlier, unless you elect not to 
claim it) and section 179 deductions that would have been 
allowable if you had used the car 100% for business and 
investment use.
The recovery period. For 5-year property, your recov-
ery period is 6 calendar years. A part year's depreciation 
is allowed in the first calendar year, a full year's deprecia-
tion is allowed in each of the next 4 calendar years, and a 
part year's depreciation is allowed in the 6th calendar 
year.
Under MACRS, your recovery period is the same 
whether you use declining balance or straight line depreci-
ation. Y ou determine your unrecovered basis in the 7th 
year after you placed the car in service.
How to treat unrecovered basis.  If you continue to 
use your car for business after the recovery period, you 
can claim a depreciation deduction in each succeeding 
tax year until you recover your basis in the car. The maxi-
mum amount you can deduct each year is determined by 
the date you placed the car in service and your busi-
ness-use percentage. For example, no deduction is al-
lowed for a year you use your car 100% for personal pur-
poses.
Example. In April 2017, you bought and placed in 
service a car you used exclusively in your business. The 
car cost $31,500. Y ou didn’t claim a section 179 deduction 
30 Chapter 4 T ransportation Publication 463 (2023)

Page 31 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or the special depreciation allowance for the car. Y ou con-
tinued to use the car 100% in your business throughout 
the recovery period (2017 through 2022). For those years, 
you used the MACRS Depreciation Chart (200% DB 
method), the Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Cars 
Placed in Service Prior to 2018  table and Maximum De-
preciation Deduction for Passenger Automobiles (Includ-
ing T rucks and Vans) Acquired Before September 28, 
2017, and Placed in Service During 2018–2023  table, ear-
lier, for the applicable tax year to figure your depreciation 
deductions during the recovery period. Y our depreciation 
deductions were subject to the depreciation limits, so you 
will have unrecovered basis at the end of the recovery pe-
riod as shown in the following table.
MACRS Deprec.
Y ear % Amount Limit Allowed
2017 20.00 $6,300 $3,160 $3,160
2018 32.00 10,080 5,100 5,100
2019 19.20 6,048 3,050 3,050
2020 11.52 3,629  1,875 1,875
2021 11.52 3,629 1,875 1,875
2022 5.76 1,814 1,875 1,814
Total $31,500 $16,874
For the correct limit, see the Maximum Depreciation 
Deduction for Cars Placed in Service Prior to 2018  table 
and the Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Passenger 
Automobiles (Including T rucks and Vans) Acquired Before 
September 28, 2017, and Placed in Service During 2018–
2023 table under Depreciation Limits, earlier, for the maxi-
mum amount of depreciation allowed each year.
At the end of 2022, you had an unrecovered basis in 
the car of $14,626 ($31,500 – $16,874). If you continued 
to use the car 100% for business in 2023 and later years, 
you can claim a depreciation deduction equal to the lesser 
of $1,875 or your remaining unrecovered basis.
If your business use of the car was less than 100% dur-
ing any year, your depreciation deduction would be less 
than the maximum amount allowable for that year. How-
ever, in determining your unrecovered basis in the car, you 
would still reduce your original basis by the maximum 
amount allowable as if the business use had been 100%. 
For example, if you had used your car 60% for business 
instead of 100%, your allowable depreciation deductions 
would have been $10,124 ($16,874 × 60% (0.60)), but you 
still would have to reduce your basis by $16,874 to deter-
mine your unrecovered basis.
Car Used 50% or Less
for Business
If you use your car 50% or less for qualified business use 
(defined earlier under Depreciation Deduction ) either in 
the year the car is placed in service or in a later year, spe-
cial rules apply. The rules that apply in these two situa-
tions are explained in the following paragraphs. (For this 
purpose, “car” was defined earlier under Actual Car Ex-
penses and includes certain trucks and vans.)
Qualified business use 50% or less in year placed in 
service. If you use your car 50% or less for qualified busi-
ness use, the following rules apply.
• Y ou can’t take the section 179 deduction.
• Y ou can’t take the special depreciation allowance.
• Y ou must figure depreciation using the straight line 
method over a 5-year recovery period. Y ou must con-
tinue to use the straight line method even if your per-
centage of business use increases to more than 50% 
in a later year.
Instead of making the computation yourself, you can 
use column (c) of T able 4-1 to find the percentage to use.
Example. In May 2023, you bought and placed in 
service a car for $17,500. Y ou used it 40% for your con-
sulting business. Because you didn’t use the car more 
than 50% for business, you can’t take any section 179 de-
duction or special depreciation allowance, and you must 
use the straight line method over a 5 -year recovery period 
to recover the cost of your car.
Y ou deduct $700 in 2023. This is the lesser of:
1. $700 (($17,500 cost × 40% (0.40) business use) × 
10% (0.10) recovery percentage (from column (c) of 
T able 4-1)), or
2. $4,880 ($12,200 maximum limit × 40% (0.40) busi-
ness use).
Qualified business use 50% or less in a later year.  If 
you use your car more than 50% in qualified business use 
in the tax year it is placed in service but the business use 
drops to 50% or less in a later year, you can no longer use 
an accelerated depreciation method for that car.
For the year the business use drops to 50% or less and 
all later years in the recovery period, you must use the 
straight line depreciation method over a 5 -year recovery 
period. In addition, for the year your business use drops to 
50% or less, you must recapture (include in your gross in-
come) any excess depreciation (discussed later). Y ou also 
increase the adjusted basis of your car by the same 
amount.
Example. In June 2020, you purchased a car for exclu-
sive use in your business. Y ou met the 
more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 years of the recov-
ery period (2020 through 2022) but failed to meet it in the 
fourth year (2023). Y ou determine your depreciation for 
2023 using 20% (from column (c) of T able 4-1). Y ou will 
also have to determine and include in your gross income 
any excess depreciation, discussed next.
Excess depreciation.  Y ou must include any excess 
depreciation in your gross income and add it to your car's 
adjusted basis for the first tax year in which you don’t use 
the car more than 50% in qualified business use. Use 
Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to figure and re-
port the excess depreciation in your gross income.
Excess depreciation is:
1. The amount of the depreciation deductions allowable 
for the car (including any section 179 deduction 
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 4 T ransportation 31

Page 32 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
claimed and any special depreciation allowance 
claimed) for tax years in which you used the car more 
than 50% in qualified business use, minus
2. The amount of the depreciation deductions that would 
have been allowable for those years if you hadn’t used 
the car more than 50% in qualified business use for 
the year you placed it in service. This means the 
amount of depreciation figured using the straight line 
method.
Example. In September 2019, you bought a car for 
$20,500 and placed it in service. Y ou didn’t claim the sec-
tion 179 deduction or the special depreciation allowance. 
Y ou used the car exclusively in qualified business use for 
2019, 2020, 2021, and 2022. For those years, you used 
the appropriate MACRS Depreciation Chart to figure de-
preciation deductions totaling $13,185 ($3,160 for 2019, 
$5,100 for 2020, $3,050 for 2021, and $1,875 for 2022) 
under the 200% DB method.
During 2023, you used the car 30% for business and 
70% for personal purposes. Since you didn’t meet the 
more-than-50%-use test, you must switch from the 200% 
DB depreciation method to the straight line depreciation 
method for 2023, and include in gross income for 2023 
your excess depreciation determined as follows.
T able 4-1. 2023 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use To Figure Depreciation for 2023)
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below to find the 
depreciation method and percentage to use for your 2023 return for cars 
placed in service in 2023.
 
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the car in service in 
2023. Then select the depreciation method and percentage from column 
(a), (b), or (c) following the rules explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2023, you must use the same 
method you used on last year's return unless a decline in your 
business use requires you to change to the straight line method. Refer 
back to the MACRS Depreciation Chart for the year you placed the car 
in service. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business, earlier.)
 
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business-use 
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in the 
chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for 2023. (Also 
see Depreciation Limits, earlier.)
CAUTION
!
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the same 
year, you may have to use the Jan. 1–Sept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1–Dec. 31 percentage for your car. T o find out if this 
applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property (including other cars) you placed in service after September of that 
year, and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in 
service after September isn’t more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the entire 
year, use the percentage for Jan. 1–Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of 
Pub. 946 for more details.
Example. Y ou buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2023 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2023, both used 100% in your business. 
Y ou use the percentage for Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2023, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the $20,000 basis of the property (van) 
placed in service after September isn’t more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in service during the year (40% (0.40) × ($32,000 + 20,000) 
= $20,800).
(a) (b) (c)
Date Placed in Service 200% Declining 
Balance (200% DB)1
150% Declining 
Balance (150% DB)1
Straight Line 
(SL)
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2023 200 DB  5.0% 150 DB  3.75% SL  2.5%
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2023 200 DB 20.0 150 DB 15.0 SL 10.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2022 200 DB 38.0 150 DB 28.88 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2022 200 DB 32.0 150 DB 25.5 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2021 200 DB 22.8 150 DB 20.21 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2021 200 DB 19.2 150 DB 17.85 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2020 200 DB 13.68 150 DB 16.4 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2020 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2019 200 DB 10.94 150 DB 16.41 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2019 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2018 200 DB  9.58 150 DB 14.35 SL 17.5
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2018 200 DB  5.76 150 DB  8.33 SL 10.0
 Prior to 20182
1 Y ou can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
2 If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to claim depreciation. See 
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits, earlier.
32 Chapter 4 T ransportation Publication 463 (2023)

Page 33 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T otal depreciation claimed: 
(MACRS 200% DB method) ................. $13,185
Minus total depreciation allowable: 
(Straight line method) 
2019—10% of $20,500 .............. $2,050
(Limit: $3,160)
2020—20% of $20,500 .............. 4,100
(Limit: $5,100)
2021—20% of $20,500 .............. 3,050
(Limit: $3,050)
2022—20% of $20,500 .............. 1,875 –11,075
(Limit: $1,875)
Excess depreciation ................ $2,110
For the correct limit, see the Maximum Depreciation 
Deduction for Cars Placed in Service Prior to 2018  table 
and the Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Passenger 
Automobiles (Including T rucks and Vans) Acquired Before 
September 28, 2017, and Placed in Service During 
2018-2023 table under Depreciation Limits, earlier, for the 
maximum amount of depreciation allowed each year.
In 2023, using Form 4797, you figure and report the 
$2,110 excess depreciation you must include in your 
gross income. Y our adjusted basis in the car is also in-
creased by $2,110. Y our 2023 depreciation is $1,230 
($20,500 (unadjusted basis) × 30% (0.30) (business -use 
percentage) × 20% (0.20) (from column (c) of T able 4-1 on 
the line for Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2019)). However, your depre-
ciation deduction is limited to $563 ($1,875 x 30% (0. 30) 
business use).
Leasing a Car
If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in your busi-
ness, you can use the standard mileage rate or actual ex-
penses to figure your deductible expense. This section ex-
plains how to figure actual expenses for a leased car, 
truck, or van.
Deductible payments.  If you choose to use actual ex-
penses, you can deduct the part of each lease payment 
that is for the use of the vehicle in your business. Y ou can’t 
deduct any part of a lease payment that is for personal 
use of the vehicle, such as commuting.
Y ou must spread any advance payments over the entire 
lease period. Y ou can’t deduct any payments you make to 
buy a car, truck, or van even if the payments are called 
“lease payments.”
If you lease a car, truck, or van for 30 days or more, you 
may have to reduce your lease payment deduction by an 
“inclusion amount,” explained next.
Inclusion Amounts
If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in your busi-
ness for a lease term of 30 days or more, you may have to 
include an inclusion amount in your income for each tax 
year you lease the vehicle. T o do this, you don’t add an 
amount to income. Instead, you reduce your deduction for 
your lease payment. (This reduction has an effect similar 
to the limit on the depreciation deduction you would have 
on the vehicle if you owned it.)
The inclusion amount is a percentage of part of the fair 
market value of the leased vehicle multiplied by the per-
centage of business and investment use of the vehicle for 
the tax year. It is prorated for the number of days of the 
lease term in the tax year.
The inclusion amount applies to each tax year that you 
lease the vehicle if the fair market value  (defined next) 
when the lease began was more than the amounts shown 
in the following tables.
All vehicles are subject to a single inclusion amount 
threshold for passenger automobiles leased and put into 
service in 2023. Y ou may have an inclusion amount for a 
passenger automobile if:
Passenger Automobiles
(Including Trucks and Vans)
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value
2023 $60,000
2022  56,000
2021  51,000
2018*–2020  50,000
*If the lease term began before 2018, see tables below to find out if you have an inclusion amount.
For years prior to 2018, see the inclusion tables below. 
Y ou may have an inclusion amount for a passenger auto-
mobile if:
Cars
(Except for Trucks and Vans)
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value
2013–2017 $19,000
2010–2012  18,500
Trucks and Vans
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value
. 
2014–2017 $19,500
2010–2013   19,000
Fair market value. Fair market value is the price at which 
the property would change hands between a willing buyer 
and seller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having 
reasonable knowledge of all the necessary facts. Sales of 
similar property around the same date may be helpful in 
figuring the fair market value of the property.
Figure the fair market value on the first day of the lease 
term. If the capitalized cost of a car is specified in the 
lease agreement, use that amount as the fair market 
value.
Figuring the inclusion amount.  Inclusion amounts for 
tax years 2018–2023 are listed in Appendices A-1 through 
A-6 for passenger vehicles (including trucks and vans). If 
the fair market value of the vehicle is $100,000 or less, use 
the appropriate appendix (depending on the year you first 
placed the vehicle in service) to determine the inclusion 
amount. If the fair market value is more than $100,000, 
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 4 T ransportation 33

Page 34 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
see the revenue procedure(s) identified in the footnote of 
that year’s appendix for the inclusion amount.
For each tax year during which you lease the car for 
business, determine your inclusion amount by following 
these three steps.
1. Locate the appendix that applies to you. T o find the in-
clusion amount, do the following.
a. Find the line that includes the fair market value of 
the car on the first day of the lease term.
b. Go across the line to the column for the tax year in 
which the car is used under the lease to find the 
dollar amount. For the last tax year of the lease, 
use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1b) for the number of 
days of the lease term included in the tax year.
3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) by the percent-
age of business and investment use for the tax year. 
This is your inclusion amount.
Example. On January 17, 2023, you leased a car for 3 
years and placed it in service for use in your business. 
The car had a fair market value of $62,500 on the first day 
of the lease term. Y ou use the car 75% for business and 
25% for personal purposes during each year of the lease. 
Assuming you continue to use the car 75% for business, 
you use Appendix A -6 to arrive at the following inclusion 
amounts for each year of the lease. For the last tax year of 
the lease, 2026, you use the amount for the preceding 
year.
T ax year
Dollar 
amount Proration Business use
Inclusion 
amount
2023 $13  348/365 75% $9
2024  29  366/366 75%  22
2025  43  365/365 75%  32
2026  43  16/365 75%  1
Note. 2024 is a leap year and includes an extra calen-
dar day, February 29, 2024.
For each year of the lease that you deduct lease pay-
ments, you must reduce your deduction by the inclusion 
amount figured for that year.
Leased car changed from business to personal use. 
If you lease a car for business use and, in a later year, 
change it to personal use, follow the rules explained ear-
lier under Figuring the inclusion amount . For the tax year 
in which you stop using the car for business, use the dollar 
amount for the previous tax year. Prorate the dollar 
amount for the number of days in the lease term that fall 
within the tax year.
Example. On August 16, 2022, you leased a car with a 
fair market value of $64,500 for 3 years. Y ou used the car 
exclusively in your data processing business. On Novem-
ber 6, 2023, you closed your business and went to work 
for a company where you aren’t required to use a car for 
business. Using Appendix A-5, you figured your inclusion 
amount for 2022 and 2023 as shown in the following table 
and reduced your deductions for lease payments by those 
amounts.
T ax year Dollar amount Proration Business use
Inclusion 
amount
2022 $11 137/365  100%  $4
2023  11  309/365  100%   9
Leased car changed from personal to business use. 
If you lease a car for personal use and, in a later year, 
change it to business use, you must determine the car's 
fair market value on the date of conversion. Then figure 
the inclusion amount using the rules explained earlier un-
der Figuring the inclusion amount . Use the fair market 
value on the date of conversion.
Example. In March 2021, you leased a truck for 4 
years for personal use. On June 1, 2023, you started 
working as a self -employed advertising consultant and 
started using the leased truck for business purposes. Y our 
records show that your business use for June 1 through 
December 31 was 60%. T o figure your inclusion amount 
for 2023, you obtained an appraisal from an independent 
car leasing company that showed the fair market value of 
your 2021 truck on June 1, 2023, was $62,650. Using Ap-
pendix A-6, you figured your inclusion amount for 2023 as 
shown in the following table.
T ax year
Dollar 
amount Proration Business use
Inclusion 
amount
2023 $13 214/365 60% $5
Reporting inclusion amounts.  For information on re-
porting inclusion amounts, employees should see Car 
rentals under Completing Forms 2106 in chapter 6. Sole 
proprietors should see the Instructions for Schedule C 
(Form 1040), and farmers should see the Instructions for 
Schedule F (Form 1040).
Disposition of a Car
If you dispose of your car, you may have a taxable gain or 
a deductible loss. The portion of any gain that is due to 
depreciation (including any section 179 deduction, 
clean-fuel vehicle deduction (for vehicles placed in service 
before January 1, 2006), and special depreciation allow-
ance) that you claimed on the car will be treated as ordi-
nary income. However, you may not have to recognize a 
gain or loss if you dispose of the car because of a casualty 
or theft.
This section gives some general information about dis-
positions of cars. For information on how to report the dis-
position of your car, see Pub. 544.
Note. Like-kind exchanges completed after December 
31, 2017, are generally limited to exchanges of real prop-
erty not held primarily for sale.
Casualty or theft.  For a casualty or theft, a gain results 
when you receive insurance or other reimbursement that 
34 Chapter 4 T ransportation Publication 463 (2023)

Page 35 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is more than your adjusted basis in your car. If you then 
spend all of the proceeds to acquire replacement property 
(a new car or repairs to the old car) within a specified pe-
riod of time, you don’t recognize any gain. Y our basis in 
the replacement property is its cost minus any gain that 
isn’t recognized. See Pub. 547 for more information.
Trade-in. When you trade in an old car for a new one, the 
transaction is considered a like -kind exchange. Generally, 
no gain or loss is recognized. (For exceptions, see chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 544.) In a trade -in situation, your basis in the 
new property is generally your adjusted basis in the old 
property plus any additional amount you pay. (See Unad-
justed basis, earlier.)
Depreciation adjustment when you used the stand-
ard mileage rate.  If you used the standard mileage rate 
for the business use of your car, depreciation was inclu-
ded in that rate. The rate of depreciation that was allowed 
in the standard mileage rate is shown in the Rate of De-
preciation Allowed in Standard Mileage Rate  table, later. 
Y ou must reduce your basis in your car (but not below 
zero) by the amount of this depreciation.
If your basis is reduced to zero (but not below zero) 
through the use of the standard mileage rate, and you 
continue to use your car for business, no adjustment (re-
duction) to the standard mileage rate is necessary. Use 
the full standard mileage rate (65.5 cents ($0.655) per 
mile from January 1–December 31 for 2023) for business 
miles driven.
These rates don’t apply for any year in which the 
actual expenses method was used.
Rate of Depreciation Allowed in Standard Mileage 
Rate
Year(s) Depreciation Rate per Mile
. 
2023 0.28
2021–2022 0.26
2020 0.27
2019 0.26
2017–2018 0.25
2015–2016 0.24
2014 0.22
2012–2013 0.23
2011 0.22
2010 0.23
2008–2009 0.21
2007 0.19
2005–2006 0.17
2003–2004 0.16
2001–2002 0.15
2000 0.14
Example. In 2018, you bought and placed in service a 
car for exclusive use in your business. The car cost 
$25,500. From 2018 through 2023, you used the standard 
mileage rate to figure your car expense deduction. Y ou 
drove your car 14,100 miles in 2018, 16,300 miles in 
2019, 15,600 miles in 2020, 16,700 miles in 2021, 15,100 
miles in 2022, and 14,900 miles in 2023. The depreciation 
TIP
portion of your car expense deduction is figured as fol-
lows.
Year Miles x Rate Depreciation
2018  14,100 × $0.25 $3,525
2019 16,300 × 0.26  4,238
2020 15,600 × 0.27  4,212
2021 16,700 × 0.26  4,342
2022 15,100 × 0.26  3,926
2023 14,900 × 0.28  4,172
Total depreciation $24,415
At the end of 2023, your adjusted basis in the car is 
$1,085 ($25,500 − $24,415).
Depreciation deduction for the year of disposition.  If 
you deduct actual car expenses and you dispose of your 
car before the end of the recovery period (years 2 through 
5), you are allowed a reduced depreciation deduction in 
the year of disposition.
Use the depreciation tables in Pub. 946 to figure the re-
duced depreciation deduction for a car disposed of in 
2023.
The depreciation amounts computed using the depreci-
ation tables in Pub. 946 for years 2 through 5 that you own 
your car are for a full year’s depreciation. Y ears 1 and 6 
apply the half -year or mid -quarter convention to the com-
putation for you. If you dispose of the vehicle in years 2 
through 5 and the half -year convention applies, then the 
full year’s depreciation amount must be divided by 2. If the 
mid-quarter convention applies, multiply the full year’s de-
preciation by the percentage from the following table for 
the quarter that you disposed of the car.
Quarter Percentage
First ............................. 12.5%
Second ........................... 37.5
Third ............................. 62.5
Fourth ............................ 87.5
If the car is subject to the Depreciation Limits , dis-
cussed earlier, reduce (but do not increase) the computed 
depreciation to this amount. See Sale or Other Disposition 
Before the Recovery Period Ends in chapter 4 of Pub. 946 
for more information.
5.
Recordkeeping
If you deduct travel, gift, or transportation expenses, you 
must be able to prove (substantiate) certain elements of 
expense. This chapter discusses the records you need to 
keep to prove these expenses.
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 5 Recordkeeping 35

Page 36 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you keep timely and accurate records, you will 
have support to show the IRS if your tax return is 
ever examined. Y ou will also have proof of expen-
ses that your employer may require if you are reimbursed 
under an accountable plan. These plans are discussed in 
chapter 6 under Reimbursements.
How To Prove Expenses
T able 5-1 is a summary of records you need to prove each 
expense discussed in this publication. Y ou must be able to 
prove the elements listed across the top portion of the 
chart. Y ou prove them by having the information and re-
ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed in the first 
column.
Y ou can’t deduct amounts that you approximate or 
estimate.
Y ou should keep adequate records to prove your ex-
penses or have sufficient evidence that will support your 
own statement. Y ou must generally prepare a written re-
cord for it to be considered adequate. This is because 
written evidence is more reliable than oral evidence alone. 
However, if you prepare a record on a computer, it is con-
sidered an adequate record.
What Are Adequate Records?
Y ou should keep the proof you need in an account book, 
diary, log, statement of expense, trip sheets, or similar re-
cord. Y ou should also keep documentary evidence that, 
together with your record, will support each element of an 
expense.
Documentary evidence. Y ou must generally have docu-
mentary evidence such as receipts, canceled checks, or 
bills, to support your expenses.
Exception. Documentary evidence isn’t needed if any 
of the following conditions apply.
• Y ou have meals or lodging expenses while traveling 
away from home for which you account to your em-
ployer under an accountable plan, and you use a per 
diem allowance method that includes meals and/or 
lodging. (Accountable plans and per diem allowances 
are discussed in chapter 6.)
• Y our expense, other than lodging, is less than $75.
• Y ou have a transportation expense for which a receipt 
isn’t readily available.
Adequate evidence. Documentary evidence will ordi-
narily be considered adequate if it shows the amount, 
date, place, and essential character of the expense.
For example, a hotel receipt is enough to support ex-
penses for business travel if it has all of the following infor-
mation.
• The name and location of the hotel.
• The dates you stayed there.
RECORDS
CAUTION
!
• Separate amounts for charges such as lodging, 
meals, and telephone calls.
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an expense for 
a business meal if it has all of the following information.
• The name and location of the restaurant.
• The number of people served.
• The date and amount of the expense.
If a charge is made for items other than food and bever-
ages, the receipt must show that this is the case.
Canceled check.  A canceled check, together with a 
bill from the payee, ordinarily establishes the cost. How-
ever, a canceled check by itself doesn’t prove a business 
expense without other evidence to show that it was for a 
business purpose.
Duplicate information.  Y ou don‘t have to record infor-
mation in your account book or other record that dupli-
cates information shown on a receipt as long as your re-
cords and receipts complement each other in an orderly 
manner.
Y ou don’t have to record amounts your employer pays 
directly for any ticket or other travel item. However, if you 
charge these items to your employer, through a credit card 
or otherwise, you must keep a record of the amounts you 
spend.
Timely kept records. Y ou should record the elements of 
an expense or of a business use at or near the time of the 
expense or use and support it with sufficient documentary 
evidence. A timely kept record has more value than a 
statement prepared later when there is generally a lack of 
accurate recall.
Y ou don’t need to write down the elements of every ex-
pense on the day of the expense. If you maintain a log on 
a weekly basis that accounts for use during the week, the 
log is considered a timely kept record.
If you give your employer, client, or customer an ex-
pense account statement, it can also be considered a 
timely kept record. This is true if you copy it from your ac-
count book, diary, log, statement of expense, trip sheets, 
or similar record.
Proving business purpose. Y ou must generally provide 
a written statement of the business purpose of an ex-
pense. However, the degree of proof varies according to 
the circumstances in each case. If the business purpose 
of an expense is clear from the surrounding circumstan-
ces, then you don’t need to give a written explanation.
Example. If you are a sales representative who calls 
on customers on an established sales route, you don’t 
have to give a written explanation of the business purpose 
for traveling that route. Y ou can satisfy the requirements by 
recording the length of the delivery route once, the date of 
each trip at or near the time of the trips, and the total miles 
you drove the car during the tax year. Y ou could also es-
tablish the date of each trip with a receipt, record of deliv-
ery, or other documentary evidence.
36 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Publication 463 (2023)

Page 37 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Confidential information.  Y ou don’t need to put confi-
dential information relating to an element of a deductible 
expense (such as the place, business purpose, or busi-
ness relationship) in your account book, diary, or other re-
cord. However, you do have to record the information else-
where at or near the time of the expense and have it 
available to fully prove that element of the expense.
What if I Have Incomplete Records?
If you don’t have complete records to prove an element of 
an expense, then you must prove the element with:
• Y our own written or oral statement containing specific 
information about the element, and
• Other supporting evidence that is sufficient to estab-
lish the element.
If the element is the description of a gift, or the cost, 
time, place, or date of an expense, the supporting evi-
dence must be either direct evidence or documentary evi-
dence. Direct evidence can be written statements or the 
oral testimony of your guests or other witnesses setting 
forth detailed information about the element. Documen-
tary evidence can be receipts, paid bills, or similar evi-
dence.
If the element is either the business relationship of your 
guests or the business purpose of the amount spent, the 
supporting evidence can be circumstantial rather than di-
rect. For example, the nature of your work, such as making 
deliveries, provides circumstantial evidence of the use of 
your car for business purposes. Invoices of deliveries es-
tablish when you used the car for business.
Sampling. Y ou can keep an adequate record for parts of 
a tax year and use that record to prove the amount of busi-
ness or investment use for the entire year. Y ou must dem-
onstrate by other evidence that the periods for which an 
adequate record is kept are representative of the use 
throughout the tax year.
Example. Y ou use your car to visit the offices of cli-
ents, meet with suppliers and other subcontractors, and 
pick up and deliver items to clients. There is no other busi-
ness use of the car, but you and your family use the car for 
personal purposes. Y ou keep adequate records during the 
first week of each month that show that 75% of the use of 
the car is for business. Invoices and bills show that your 
business use continues at the same rate during the later 
weeks of each month. Y our weekly records are represen-
tative of the use of the car each month and are sufficient 
evidence to support the percentage of business use for 
the year.
Exceptional circumstances.  Y ou can satisfy the sub-
stantiation requirements with other evidence if, because of 
the nature of the situation in which an expense is made, 
you can’t get a receipt. This applies if all the following are 
true.
• Y ou were unable to obtain evidence for an element of 
the expense or use that completely satisfies the re-
quirements explained earlier under What Are Ade-
quate Records.
• Y ou are unable to obtain evidence for an element that 
completely satisfies the two rules listed earlier under 
What if I Have Incomplete Records.
T able 5-1. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have 
expenses 
for . . .
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements . . .
Amount Time Place or 
Description
Business Purpose
Business Relationship
Travel Cost of each separate 
expense for travel, 
lodging, and meals. 
Incidental expenses 
may be totaled in 
reasonable categories 
such as taxis, fees and 
tips, etc.
Dates you left 
and returned 
for each trip 
and number 
of days spent 
on business.
Destination or area of 
your travel (name of 
city, town, or other 
designation).
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the 
business benefit gained or expected to be gained.
 
Relationship: N/A
Gifts Cost of the gift. Date of the 
gift.
Description of the gift.
Transportation Cost of each separate 
expense. For car 
expenses, the cost of 
the car and any 
improvements, the date 
you started using it for 
business, the mileage 
for each business use, 
and the total miles for 
the year.
Date of the 
expense. For 
car 
expenses, the 
date of the 
use of the car.
Y our business 
destination.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
 
Relationship: N/A
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 5 Recordkeeping 37

Page 38 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Y ou have presented other evidence for the element 
that is the best proof possible under the circumstan-
ces.
Destroyed records.  If you can’t produce a receipt be-
cause of reasons beyond your control, you can prove a 
deduction by reconstructing your records or expenses. 
Reasons beyond your control include fire, flood, and other 
casualties.
Separating and Combining Expenses
This section explains when expenses must be kept sepa-
rate and when expenses can be combined.
Separating expenses. Each separate payment is gener-
ally considered a separate expense. For example, if you 
entertain a customer or client at dinner and then go to the 
theater, the dinner expense and the cost of the theater 
tickets are two separate expenses. Y ou must record them 
separately in your records.
Combining items. Y ou can make one daily entry in your 
record for reasonable categories of expenses. Examples 
are taxi fares, telephone calls, or other incidental travel 
costs. Nonentertainment meals should be in a separate 
category. Y ou can include tips for meal -related services 
with the costs of the meals.
Expenses of a similar nature occurring during the 
course of a single event are considered a single expense.
Car expenses.  Y ou can account for several uses of 
your car that can be considered part of a single use, such 
as a round trip or uninterrupted business use, with a single 
record. Minimal personal use, such as a stop for lunch on 
the way between two business stops, isn’t an interruption 
of business use.
Example. Y ou make deliveries at several different lo-
cations on a route that begins and ends at your employer's 
business premises and that includes a stop at the busi-
ness premises between two deliveries. Y ou can account 
for these using a single record of miles driven.
Gift expenses.  Y ou don’t always have to record the 
name of each recipient of a gift. A general listing will be 
enough if it is evident that you aren’t trying to avoid the 
$25 annual limit on the amount you can deduct for gifts to 
any one person. For example, if you buy a large number of 
tickets to local high school basketball games and give one 
or two tickets to each of many customers, it is usually 
enough to record a general description of the recipients.
Allocating total cost.  If you can prove the total cost of 
travel or entertainment but you can’t prove how much it 
costs for each person who participated in the event, you 
may have to allocate the total cost among you and your 
guests on a pro rata basis. T o do so, you must establish 
the number of persons who participated in the event.
If your return is examined.  If your return is examined, 
you may have to provide additional information to the IRS. 
This information could be needed to clarify or to establish 
the accuracy or reliability of information contained in your 
records, statements, testimony, or documentary evidence 
before a deduction is allowed.
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts
Y ou must keep records as long as they may be needed for 
the administration of any provision of the Internal Revenue 
Code. Generally, this means you must keep records that 
support your deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years 
from the date you file the income tax return on which the 
deduction is claimed. A return filed early is considered 
filed on the due date. For a more complete explanation of 
how long to keep records, see Pub. 583, Starting a Busi-
ness and Keeping Records.
Y ou must keep records of the business use of your car 
for each year of the recovery period. See 
More-than-50%-use test  in chapter 4 under Depreciation 
Deduction.
Reimbursed for expenses.  Employees who give their 
records and documentation to their employers and are re-
imbursed for their expenses generally don’t have to keep 
copies of this information. However, you may have to 
prove your expenses if any of the following conditions ap-
ply.
• Y ou claim deductions for expenses that are more than 
reimbursements.
• Y our expenses are reimbursed under a nonaccounta-
ble plan.
• Y our employer doesn’t use adequate accounting pro-
cedures to verify expense accounts.
• Y ou are related to your employer as defined under Per 
Diem and Car Allowances in chapter 6.
Reimbursements, adequate accounting, and nonaccount-
able plans are discussed in chapter 6.
Examples of Records
T able 5-2 and T able 5-3 are examples of worksheets that 
can be used for tracking business expenses.
 
 
 
 
38 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Publication 463 (2023)

Page 39 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
T able 5-2. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log
Name: 
Odometer Readings Expenses
Date
Destination
 (City, T own, or 
Area)
Business 
Purpose  Start  Stop
Miles
 this trip
 T ype
(Gas, oil, tolls, 
etc.) Amount
Weekly 
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 5 Recordkeeping 39

Page 40 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
T able 5-3. Weekly Traveling Expense Record 
From:  To:  Name: 
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
1. Travel Expenses:
Airlines
Excess Baggage
Bus – T rain
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
2.
Non-Entertainment-Related 
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
 Dinner
 Hotel and Motel 
(Detail in Schedule B)
3. Other Expenses: 
Postage
T elephone & T elegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s)
T rade Shows
4. Car Expenses: (List all car expenses—the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A (if applicable).)
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
5. Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A—Car
Mileage: End
Start
T otal
Business Mileage
Schedule B—Lodging
Hotel or Motel
Name
City
WEEKL Y REIMBURSEMENTS:
T ravel and transportation expenses.......  
Other reimbursements ..............  
TOTAL .......................  
40 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Publication 463 (2023)

Page 41 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6.
How To Report
This chapter explains where and how to report the expen-
ses discussed in this publication. It discusses reimburse-
ments and how to treat them under accountable and non-
accountable plans. It also explains rules for independent 
contractors and clients, fee -basis officials, certain per-
forming artists, Armed Forces reservists, and certain disa-
bled employees. The chapter ends with illustrations of 
how to report travel, gift, and car expenses on Forms 
2106.
Where To Report
This section provides general information on where to re-
port the expenses discussed in this publication.
Self-employed. Y ou must report your income and expen-
ses on Schedule C (Form 1040) if you are a sole proprie-
tor, or on Schedule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. Y ou 
don’t use Form 2106.
If you claim car or truck expenses, you must provide 
certain information on the use of your vehicle. Y ou provide 
this information on Schedule C (Form 1040) or Form 4562.
If you file Schedule C (Form 1040):
• Report your travel expenses, except meals, on 
line 24a;
• Report your deductible non-entertainment-related 
meals (actual cost or standard meal allowance) on 
line 24b;
• Report your gift expenses and transportation expen-
ses, other than car expenses, on line 27a; and
• Report your car expenses on line 9. Complete Part IV 
of the form unless you have to file Form 4562 for de-
preciation or amortization.
If you file Schedule F (Form 1040), do the following.
• Report your car expenses on line 10. Attach Form 
4562 and provide information on the use of your car in 
Part V of Form 4562.
• Report all other business expenses discussed in this 
publication on line 32. Y ou can only include 50% of 
your non-entertainment-related meals on that line.
See your form instructions for more information on how to 
complete your tax return.
Both self-employed and an employee.  If you are both 
self-employed and an employee, you must keep separate 
records for each business activity. Report your business 
expenses for self -employment on Schedule C (Form 
1040), or Schedule F (Form 1040), as discussed earlier. 
Report your business expenses for your work as an em-
ployee on Form 2106, as discussed next.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed Forces reserv-
ists, qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or 
local government officials, and employees with 
impairment-related work expenses. Due to the suspension 
of miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2% 
floor under section 67(a), employees who do not fit into 
one of the listed categories may not use Form 2106.
Employees. If you are an employee, you must generally 
complete Form 2106 to deduct your travel and transporta-
tion expenses.
• Y ou are an employee deducting expenses attributable 
to your job.
• Y ou weren’t reimbursed by your employer for your ex-
penses (amounts included in box 1 of your Form W-2 
aren’t considered reimbursements).
• If you claim car expenses, you use the standard mile-
age rate.
For more information on how to report your expenses 
on Form 2106, see Completing Form 2106, later.
Gifts. If you didn’t receive any reimbursements (or the 
reimbursements were all included in box 1 of your Form 
W-2), the only business expense you are claiming is for 
gifts, and the special rules discussed later don’t apply to 
you, don’t complete Form 2106.
Statutory employees.  If you received a Form W -2 
and the “Statutory employee” box in box 13 was checked, 
report your income and expenses related to that income 
on Schedule C (Form 1040). Don’t complete Form 2106.
Statutory employees include full -time life insurance 
salespersons, certain agent or commission drivers, travel-
ing salespersons, and certain homeworkers.
If you are entitled to a reimbursement from your 
employer but you don’t claim it, you can’t claim a 
deduction for the expenses to which that un-
claimed reimbursement applies.
Reimbursement for personal expenses.  If your em-
ployer reimburses you for nondeductible personal expen-
ses, such as for vacation trips, your employer must report 
the reimbursement as wage income in box 1 of your Form 
W-2. Y ou can’t deduct personal expenses.
Income-producing property. If you have travel or trans-
portation expenses related to income -producing property, 
report your deductible expenses on the form appropriate 
for that activity.
For example, if you have rental real estate income and 
expenses, report your expenses on Schedule E (Form 
1040), Supplemental Income and Loss. See Pub. 527, 
Residential Rental Property, for more information on the 
rental of real estate.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 6 How T o Report 41

Page 42 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Vehicle Provided by
Your Employer
If your employer provides you with a car, you may be able 
to deduct the actual expenses of operating that car for 
business purposes. The amount you can deduct depends 
on the amount that your employer included in your income 
and the business and personal miles you drove during the 
year. Y ou can’t use the standard mileage rate.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed Forces reserv-
ists, qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or 
local government officials, and employees with 
impairment-related work expenses. Due to the suspension 
of miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2% 
floor under section 67(a), employees who do not fit into 
one of the listed categories may not use Form 2106.
Value reported on Form W -2. Y our employer can figure 
and report either the actual value of your personal use of 
the car or the value of the car as if you used it only for per-
sonal purposes (100% income inclusion). Y our employer 
must separately state the amount if 100% of the annual 
lease value was included in your income. If you are unsure 
of the amount included on your Form W -2, ask your em-
ployer.
Full value included in your income. Y ou may be able to 
deduct the value of the business use of an employer -pro-
vided car if your employer reported 100% of the value of 
the car in your income. On your 2023 Form W -2, the 
amount of the value will be included in box 1, Wages, tips, 
other compensation; and box 14, Other.
T o claim your expenses, complete Form 2106, Part II, 
Sections A and C. Enter your actual expenses on line 23 
of Section C and include the entire value of the em-
ployer-provided car on line 25. Complete the rest of the 
form.
Less than full value included in your income.  If less 
than the full annual lease value of the car was included on 
your Form W -2, this means that your Form W -2 only in-
cludes the value of your personal use of the car. Don’t en-
ter this value on your Form 2106 because it isn’t deducti-
ble.
If you paid any actual costs (that your employer didn’t 
provide or reimburse you for) to operate the car, you can 
deduct the business portion of those costs. Examples of 
costs that you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-
plete Form 2106, Part II, Sections A and C. Enter your ac-
tual costs on line 23 of Section C and leave line 25 blank. 
Complete the rest of the form.
Reimbursements
This section explains what to do when you receive an ad-
vance or are reimbursed for any of the employee business 
expenses discussed in this publication.
If you received an advance, allowance, or reimburse-
ment for your expenses, how you report this amount and 
CAUTION
!
your expenses depends on whether your employer reim-
bursed you under an accountable plan or a nonaccounta-
ble plan.
This section explains the two types of plans, how per 
diem and car allowances simplify proving the amount of 
your expenses, and the tax treatment of your reimburse-
ments and expenses. It also covers rules for independent 
contractors.
No reimbursement.  Y ou aren’t reimbursed or given an 
allowance for your expenses if you are paid a salary or 
commission with the understanding that you will pay your 
own expenses. In this situation, you have no reimburse-
ment or allowance arrangement, and you don’t have to 
read this section on reimbursements. Instead, see Com-
pleting Form 2106 , later, for information on completing 
your tax return.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed Forces reserv-
ists, qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or 
local government officials, and employees with 
impairment-related work expenses. Due to the suspension 
of miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2% 
floor under section 67(a), employees who do not fit into 
one of the listed categories may not use Form 2106.
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A reimburse-
ment or other expense allowance arrangement is a system 
or plan that an employer uses to pay, substantiate, and re-
cover the expenses, advances, reimbursements, and 
amounts charged to the employer for employee business 
expenses. Arrangements include per diem and car allow-
ances.
A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of daily reim-
bursement your employer gives you for your lodging and 
M&IE when you are away from home on business. (The 
term “incidental expenses” is defined in chapter 1 under 
Standard Meal Allowance.) A car allowance is an amount 
your employer gives you for the business use of your car.
Y our employer should tell you what method of reim-
bursement is used and what records you must provide.
Employers. If you are an employer and you reimburse 
employee business expenses, how you treat this reim-
bursement on your employee's Form W -2 depends in part 
on whether you have an accountable plan. Reimburse-
ments treated as paid under an accountable plan, as ex-
plained next, aren’t reported as pay. Reimbursements 
treated as paid under nonaccountable plans, as explained 
later, are reported as pay. See Pub. 15 (Circular E), Em-
ployer's T ax Guide, for information on employee pay.
Accountable Plans
T o be an accountable plan, your employer's reimburse-
ment or allowance arrangement must include all of the fol-
lowing rules.
1. Y our expenses must have a business connec-
tion—that is, you must have paid or incurred deducti-
ble expenses while performing services as an em-
ployee of your employer.
CAUTION
!
42 Chapter 6 How T o Report Publication 463 (2023)

Page 43 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Y ou must adequately account to your employer for 
these expenses within a reasonable period of time.
3. Y ou must return any excess reimbursement or allow-
ance within a reasonable period of time.
Adequate accounting and returning excess reimburse-
ments are discussed later.
An excess reimbursement or allowance is any amount 
you are paid that is more than the business-related expen-
ses that you adequately accounted for to your employer.
Reasonable period of time. The definition of reason-
able period of time depends on the facts and circumstan-
ces of your situation. However, regardless of the facts and 
circumstances of your situation, actions that take place 
within the times specified in the following list will be trea-
ted as taking place within a reasonable period of time.
• Y ou receive an advance within 30 days of the time you 
have an expense.
• Y ou adequately account for your expenses within 60 
days after they were paid or incurred.
• Y ou return any excess reimbursement within 120 days 
after the expense was paid or incurred.
• Y ou are given a periodic statement (at least quarterly) 
that asks you to either return or adequately account for 
outstanding advances and you comply within 120 
days of the statement.
Employee meets accountable plan rules.  If you meet 
the three rules for accountable plans, your employer 
shouldn’t include any reimbursements in your income in 
box 1 of your Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim-
bursements, you don’t complete Form 2106. Y ou have no 
deduction since your expenses and reimbursements are 
equal.
If your employer included reimbursements in 
box 1 of your Form W-2 and you meet all the rules 
for accountable plans, ask your employer for a 
corrected Form W-2.
Accountable plan rules not met.  Even though you are 
reimbursed under an accountable plan, some of your ex-
penses may not meet all three rules. All reimbursements 
that fail to meet all three rules for accountable plans are 
generally treated as having been reimbursed under a non-
accountable plan (discussed later).
Failure to return excess reimbursements. If you are 
reimbursed under an accountable plan, but you fail to re-
turn, within a reasonable time, any amounts in excess of 
the substantiated amounts, the amounts paid in excess of 
the substantiated expenses are treated as paid under a 
nonaccountable plan. See Reasonable period of time , 
earlier, and Returning Excess Reimbursements, later.
Reimbursement of nondeductible expenses.  Y ou 
may be reimbursed under your employer's accountable 
plan for expenses related to that employer's business, 
some of which would be allowable as employee business 
expense deductions and some of which would not. The 
TIP
reimbursements you receive for the nondeductible expen-
ses don’t meet rule (1) for accountable plans, and they are 
treated as paid under a nonaccountable plan.
Example. Y our employer's plan reimburses you for 
travel expenses while away from home on business and 
also for meals when you work late at the office, even 
though you aren’t away from home. The part of the ar-
rangement that reimburses you for the nondeductible 
meals when you work late at the office is treated as paid 
under a nonaccountable plan.
The employer makes the decision whether to re-
imburse employees under an accountable plan or 
a nonaccountable plan. If you are an employee 
who receives payments under a nonaccountable plan, you 
can’t convert these amounts to payments under an ac-
countable plan by voluntarily accounting to your employer 
for the expenses and voluntarily returning excess reim-
bursements to the employer.
Adequate Accounting
One of the rules for an accountable plan is that you must 
adequately account to your employer for your expenses. 
Y ou adequately account by giving your employer a state-
ment of expense, an account book, a diary, or a similar re-
cord in which you entered each expense at or near the 
time you had it, along with documentary evidence (such 
as receipts) of your travel, mileage, and other employee 
business expenses. (See T able 5-1 in chapter 5 for details 
you need to enter in your record and documents you need 
to prove certain expenses.) A per diem or car allowance 
satisfies the adequate accounting requirement under cer-
tain conditions. See Per Diem and Car Allowances, later.
Y ou must account for all amounts you received from 
your employer during the year as advances, reimburse-
ments, or allowances. This includes amounts you charged 
to your employer by credit card or other method. Y ou must 
give your employer the same type of records and support-
ing information that you would have to give to the IRS if the 
IRS questioned a deduction on your return. Y ou must pay 
back the amount of any reimbursement or other expense 
allowance for which you don’t adequately account or that 
is more than the amount for which you accounted.
Per Diem and Car Allowances
If your employer reimburses you for your expenses using a 
per diem or a car allowance, you can generally use the al-
lowance as proof for the amount of your expenses. A per 
diem or car allowance satisfies the adequate accounting 
requirements for the amount of your expenses only if all 
the following conditions apply.
• Y our employer reasonably limits payments of your ex-
penses to those that are ordinary and necessary in the 
conduct of the trade or business.
• The allowance is similar in form to and not more than 
the federal rate (defined later).
TIP
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 6 How T o Report 43

Page 44 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Y ou prove the time (dates), place, and business pur-
pose of your expenses to your employer (as explained 
in T able 5-1) within a reasonable period of time.
• Y ou aren’t related to your employer (as defined next). 
If you are related to your employer, you must be able 
to prove your expenses to the IRS even if you have al-
ready adequately accounted to your employer and re-
turned any excess reimbursement.
If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allowance practi-
ces are not based on reasonably accurate estimates of 
travel costs (including recognition of cost differences in 
different areas for per diem amounts), you won’t be con-
sidered to have accounted to your employer. In this case, 
you must be able to prove your expenses to the IRS.
Related to employer. Y ou are related to your employer if:
1. Y our employer is your brother or sister, half brother or 
half sister, spouse, ancestor, or lineal descendant;
2. Y our employer is a corporation in which you own, di-
rectly or indirectly, more than 10% in value of the out-
standing stock; or
3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fiduciary, or 
beneficiary) exist between you, a trust, and your em-
ployer.
Y ou may be considered to indirectly own stock for purpo-
ses of (2) if you have an interest in a corporation, partner-
ship, estate, or trust that owns the stock or if a member of 
your family or your partner owns the stock.
The federal rate.  The federal rate can be figured using 
any one of the following methods.
1. For per diem amounts:
a. The regular federal per diem rate.
b. The standard meal allowance.
c. The high-low rate.
2. For car expenses:
a. The standard mileage rate.
b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
For per diem amounts, use the rate in effect for 
the locality where you stop for sleep or rest.
Regular federal per diem rate.  The regular federal 
per diem rate is the highest amount that the federal gov-
ernment will pay to its employees for lodging and M&IE (or 
M&IE only) while they are traveling away from home in a 
particular area. The rates are different for different locali-
ties. Y our employer should have these rates available. Y ou 
can also find federal per diem rates at GSA.gov/travel/
plan-book/per-diem-rates.
The standard meal allowance.  The standard meal 
allowance is the federal M&IE rate. For travel in 2023, the 
rate for most small localities in the United States is $59 
per day. Most major cities and many other localities qualify 
TIP
for higher rates. Y ou can find this information at GSA.gov/
travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates.
Y ou receive an allowance only for M&IE when your em-
ployer does one of the following.
• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in kind).
• Reimburses you, based on your receipts, for the ac-
tual cost of your lodging.
• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your lodging.
• Doesn’t have a reasonable belief that you had (or will 
have) lodging expenses, such as when you stay with 
friends or relatives or sleep in the cab of your truck.
• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to that used 
in figuring your compensation, such as number of 
hours worked or miles traveled.
High-low rate. This is a simplified method of figuring 
the federal per diem rate for travel within the continental 
United States. It eliminates the need to keep a current list 
of the per diem rates for each city.
Under the high -low method, the per diem amount for 
travel during January through September of 2023 is $297 
(which includes $74 for M&IE) for certain high -cost loca-
tions. All other areas have a per diem amount of $204 
(which includes $64 for M&IE). For more information, see 
Notice 2022 -44, which can be found at IRS.gov/irb/
2022-41_IRB#NOT -2022-44.
Effective October 1, 2023, the per diem rate for certain 
high-cost locations increased to $309 (which includes $74 
for M&IE). The rate for all other locations increased to 
$214 (which includes $64 for M&IE). For more information, 
see Notice 2023 -68, which can be found at IRS.gov/irb/
2023-41_IRB#NOT -2023-68, and Revenue Procedure 
2019-48 at IRS.gov/irb/2019-51_IRB#REV-
PROC-2019-48.
Employers who didn’t use the high -low method 
during the first 9 months of 2023 can’t begin to 
use it before 2024.
Prorating the standard meal allowance on partial 
days of travel. The standard meal allowance is for a full 
24-hour day of travel. If you travel for part of a day, such as 
on the days you depart and return, you must prorate the 
full-day M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your employer 
uses the regular federal per diem rate or the high-low rate.
Y ou can use either of the following methods to figure 
the federal M&IE for that day.
1. Method 1:
a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the standard 
meal allowance amount for that day.
b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the standard 
meal allowance amount for the preceding day.
2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal allowance using 
any method you consistently apply in accordance with 
reasonable business practice. For example, an em-
ployer can treat 2 full days of per diem (that includes 
M&IE) paid for travel away from home from 9 a.m. of 
one day to 5 p.m. of the next day as being no more 
CAUTION
!
44 Chapter 6 How T o Report Publication 463 (2023)

Page 45 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
than the federal rate. This is true even though a fed-
eral employee would be limited to a reimbursement of 
M&IE for only 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate.
The standard mileage rate. This is a set rate per mile 
that you can use to figure your deductible car expenses. 
For 2023, the standard mileage rate for the cost of operat-
ing your car for business use is 65.5 cents ($0.655) per 
mile.
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is an allowance 
your employer may use to reimburse your car expenses. 
Under this method, your employer pays an allowance that 
includes a combination of payments covering fixed and 
variable costs, such as a cents -per-mile rate to cover your 
variable operating costs (such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat 
amount to cover your fixed costs (such as depreciation (or 
lease payments), insurance, etc.). If your employer choo-
ses to use this method, your employer will request the 
necessary records from you.
Reporting your expenses with a per diem or car al-
lowance. If your reimbursement is in the form of an allow-
ance received under an accountable plan, the following 
facts affect your reporting.
• The federal rate.
• Whether the allowance or your actual expenses were 
more than the federal rate.
The following discussions explain where to report your ex-
penses depending upon how the amount of your allow-
ance compares to the federal rate.
Allowance less than or equal to the federal rate.  If 
your allowance is less than or equal to the federal rate, the 
allowance won’t be included in box 1 of your Form W -2. 
Y ou don’t need to report the related expenses or the allow-
ance on your return if your expenses are equal to or less 
than the allowance.
However, if your actual expenses are more than your al-
lowance, you can complete Form 2106. If you are using 
actual expenses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the 
total amount of your expenses and reimbursements for the 
entire year. If you are using the standard meal allowance 
or the standard mileage rate, you don’t have to prove that 
amount.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed Forces reserv-
ists, qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or 
local government officials, and employees with 
impairment-related work expenses. Due to the suspension 
of miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2% 
floor under section 67(a), employees who do not fit into 
one of the listed categories may not use Form 2106.
Example 1.  In April, a member of a reserve compo-
nent of the Armed Forces takes a 2 -day business trip to 
Denver. The federal rate for Denver is $278 ($199 lodging 
+ $79 M&IE) per day. As required by their employer's ac-
countable plan, they account for the time (dates), place, 
and business purpose of the trip. Their employer reimbur-
ses them $278 a day ($556 total) for living expenses. 
CAUTION
!
Their living expenses in Denver aren’t more than $278 a 
day.
Their employer doesn’t include any of the reimburse-
ment on their Form W -2 and they don’t deduct the expen-
ses on their return.
Example 2. In June, a fee-basis local government offi-
cial takes a 2 -day business trip to Boston. Their employer 
uses the high -low method to reimburse employees. Be-
cause Boston is a high -cost area, they are given an ad-
vance of $297 (which includes $74 for M&IE) a day ($594 
total) for their lodging and M&IE. Their actual expenses to-
taled $700.
Since their $700 of expenses are more than their $594 
advance, they include the excess expenses when they 
itemize their deductions. They complete Form 2106 
(showing all of their expenses and reimbursements). They 
must also allocate their reimbursement between their 
meals and other expenses as discussed later under Com-
pleting Form 2106.
Example 3.  A fee -basis state government official 
drives 10,000 miles during 2023 for business. Under their 
employer's accountable plan, they account for the time 
(dates), place, and business purpose of each trip. Their 
employer pays them a mileage allowance of 40 cents 
($0.40) a mile.
Because their $6,550 expense figured under the stand-
ard mileage rate (10,000 miles x 65.5 cents ($0.655) per 
mile) is more than their $4,000 reimbursement (10,000 
miles × 40 cents ($0.40)), they itemize their deductions to 
claim the excess expense. They complete Form 2106 
(showing all their expenses and reimbursements) and en-
ter $2,550 ($6,550 − $4,000) as an itemized deduction.
Allowance more than the federal rate.  If your allow-
ance is more than the federal rate, your employer must in-
clude the allowance amount up to the federal rate under 
code L in box 12 of your Form W-2. This amount isn’t taxa-
ble. However, the excess allowance will be included in 
box 1 of your Form W -2. Y ou must report this part of your 
allowance as if it were wage income.
If your actual expenses are less than or equal to the 
federal rate, you don’t complete Form 2106 or claim any of 
your expenses on your return.
However, if your actual expenses are more than the 
federal rate, you can complete Form 2106 and deduct 
those excess expenses. Y ou must report on Form 2106 
your reimbursements up to the federal rate (as shown un-
der code L in box 12 of your Form W -2) and all your ex-
penses. Y ou should be able to prove these amounts to the 
IRS.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed Forces reserv-
ists, qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or 
local government officials, and employees with 
impairment-related work expenses. Due to the suspension 
of miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2% 
floor under section 67(a), employees who do not fit into 
one of the listed categories may not use Form 2106.
CAUTION
!
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 6 How T o Report 45

Page 46 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. Sasha, a performing artist, lives and works 
in Austin. In July, the employer sent Sasha to Albuquerque 
for 4 days on business. The employer paid the hotel di-
rectly for Sasha’s lodging and reimbursed $80 a day ($320 
total) for M&IE. Sasha’s actual meal expenses weren’t 
more than the federal rate for Albuquerque, which is $69 
per day.
The employer included the $44 that was more than the 
federal rate (($80 − $69) × 4) in box 1 of Sasha’s Form 
W-2. The employer shows $276 ($69 a day × 4) under 
code L in box 12 of Form W -2. This amount isn’t included 
in income. Sasha doesn’t have to complete Form 2106; 
however, Sasha must include the $44 in gross income as 
wages (by reporting the total amount shown in box 1 of 
their Form W-2).
Example 2. Another performing artist, Ari, also lives in 
Austin and works for the same employer as in Example 1. 
In May, the employer sent Ari to San Diego for 4 days and 
paid the hotel directly for the hotel bill. The employer reim-
bursed Ari $75 a day for M&IE. The federal rate for San 
Diego is $74 a day.
Ari can prove that actual non -entertainment-related 
meal expenses totaled $380. The employer's accountable 
plan won’t pay more than $75 a day for travel to San 
Diego, so Ari doesn’t give the employer the records that 
prove that the amount actually spent was $380. However, 
Ari does account for the time (dates), place, and business 
purpose of the trip. This is Ari’s only business trip this year.
Ari was reimbursed $300 ($75 × 4 days), which is $4 
more than the federal rate of $296 ($74 × 4 days). The 
employer includes the $4 as income on the employee’s 
Form W-2 in box 1. The employer also enters $296 under 
code L in box 12 of the employee’s Form W-2.
Ari completes Form 2106 to figure deductible expenses 
and enters the total of actual expenses for the year ($380) 
on Form 2106. Ari also enters the reimbursements that 
weren’t included in income ($296). Ari’s total deductible 
meals and beverages expense, before the 50% limit, is 
$96. Ari will include $48 as an itemized deduction.
Example 3. Palmer, a fee-basis state government offi-
cial, drives 10,000 miles during 2023 for business. Under 
the employer's accountable plan, Palmer gets reimbursed 
70 cents ($0.70) a mile, which is more than the standard 
mileage rate. The total reimbursement is $7,000.
The employer must include the reimbursement amount 
up to the standard mileage rate, $6,550 (10,000 miles x 
65.5 cents ($0.655) per mile), under code L in box 12 of 
the employee’s Form W-2. That amount isn’t taxable. The 
employer must also include $450 ($7,000 − $6,550) in 
box 1 of the employee's Form W -2. This is the reimburse-
ment that is more than the standard mileage rate.
If the expenses are equal to or less than the standard 
mileage rate, Palmer wouldn’t complete Form 2106. If the 
expenses are more than the standard mileage rate, 
Palmer would complete Form 2106 and report total expen-
ses and reimbursement (shown under code L in box 12 of 
their Form W -2). Palmer would then claim the excess ex-
penses as an itemized deduction.
Returning Excess Reimbursements
Under an accountable plan, you are required to return any 
excess reimbursement or other expense allowances for 
your business expenses to the person paying the reim-
bursement or allowance. Excess reimbursement means 
any amount for which you didn’t adequately account within 
a reasonable period of time. For example, if you received 
a travel advance and you didn’t spend all the money on 
business-related expenses or you don’t have proof of all 
your expenses, you have an excess reimbursement.
Adequate accounting  and reasonable period of time 
were discussed earlier in this chapter.
Travel advance. Y ou receive a travel advance if your em-
ployer provides you with an expense allowance before you 
actually have the expense, and the allowance is reasona-
bly expected to be no more than your expense. Under an 
accountable plan, you are required to adequately account 
to your employer for this advance and to return any excess 
within a reasonable period of time.
If you don’t adequately account for or don't return any 
excess advance within a reasonable period of time, the 
amount you don’t account for or return will be treated as 
having been paid under a nonaccountable plan  (dis-
cussed later).
Unproven amounts.  If you don’t prove that you ac-
tually traveled on each day for which you received a per 
diem or car allowance (proving the elements described in 
T able 5-1), you must return this unproven amount of the 
travel advance within a reasonable period of time. If you 
don’t do this, the unproven amount will be considered paid 
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
Per diem allowance more than federal rate.  If your 
employer's accountable plan pays you an allowance that 
is higher than the federal rate, you don’t have to return the 
difference between the two rates for the period you can 
prove business-related travel expenses. However, the dif-
ference will be reported as wages on your Form W -2. This 
excess amount is considered paid under a nonaccounta-
ble plan (discussed later).
Example. Y our employer sends you on a 5 -day busi-
ness trip to Phoenix in March 2023 and gives you a $400 
($80 × 5 days) advance to cover your M&IE. The federal 
per diem for M&IE for Phoenix is $69. Y our trip lasts only 3 
days. Under your employer's accountable plan, you must 
return the $160 ($80 × 2 days) advance for the 2 days you 
didn’t travel. For the 3 days you did travel, you don’t have 
to return the $33 difference between the allowance you re-
ceived and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 − $69) × 3 
days). However, the $33 will be reported on your Form 
W-2 as wages.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or expense al-
lowance arrangement that doesn’t meet one or more of 
the three rules listed earlier under Accountable Plans.
46 Chapter 6 How T o Report Publication 463 (2023)

Page 47 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
In addition, even if your employer has an accountable 
plan, the following payments will be treated as being paid 
under a nonaccountable plan.
• Excess reimbursements you fail to return to your em-
ployer. 
• Reimbursement of nondeductible expenses related to 
your employer's business. See Reimbursement of 
nondeductible expenses, earlier, under Accountable 
Plans.
An arrangement that repays you for business expenses by 
reducing the amount reported as your wages, salary, or 
other pay will be treated as a nonaccountable plan. This is 
because you are entitled to receive the full amount of your 
pay whether or not you have any business expenses.
If you aren’t sure if the reimbursement or expense al-
lowance arrangement is an accountable or nonaccounta-
ble plan, ask your employer.
Reporting your expenses under a nonaccountable 
plan. Y our employer will combine the amount of any reim-
bursement or other expense allowance paid to you under 
a nonaccountable plan with your wages, salary, or other 
pay. Y our employer will report the total in box 1 of your 
Form W-2.
Y ou must complete Form 2106 and itemize your deduc-
tions to deduct your expenses for travel, transportation, or 
non-entertainment-related meals. Y our meal and enter-
tainment expenses will be subject to the 50% Limit  dis-
cussed in chapter 2.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed Forces reserv-
ists, qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or 
local government officials, and employees with 
impairment-related work expenses. Due to the suspension 
of miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2% 
floor under section 67(a), employees who do not fit into 
one of the listed categories may not use Form 2106.
Example 1. Y our employer gives you $1,000 a month 
($12,000 total for the year) for your business expenses. 
Y ou don’t have to provide any proof of your expenses to 
your employer, and you can keep any funds that you don’t 
spend.
Y ou are a performing artist and are being reimbursed 
under a nonaccountable plan. Y our employer will include 
the $12,000 on your Form W -2 as if it were wages. If you 
want to deduct your business expenses, you must com-
plete Form 2106 and itemize your deductions.
Example 2. Y ou are paid $2,000 a month by your em-
ployer. On days that you travel away from home on busi-
ness, your employer designates $50 a day of your salary 
as paid to reimburse your travel expenses. Because your 
employer would pay your monthly salary whether or not 
you were traveling away from home, the arrangement is a 
nonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a day designated 
by your employer is treated as paid under an accountable 
plan.
CAUTION
!
Rules for Independent Contractors 
and Clients
This section provides rules for independent contractors 
who incur expenses on behalf of a client or customer. The 
rules cover the reporting and substantiation of certain ex-
penses discussed in this publication, and they affect both 
independent contractors and their clients or customers.
Y ou are considered an independent contractor if you 
are self -employed and you perform services for a cus-
tomer or client.
Accounting to Your Client
If you received a reimbursement or an allowance for travel, 
or gift expenses that you incurred on behalf of a client, you 
should provide an adequate accounting of these expen-
ses to your client. If you don’t account to your client for 
these expenses, you must include any reimbursements or 
allowances in income. Y ou must keep adequate records of 
these expenses whether or not you account to your client 
for these expenses.
If you don’t separately account for and seek reimburse-
ment for meal and entertainment expenses in connection 
with providing services for a client, you are subject to the 
50% limit on those expenses. See 50% Limit in chapter 2.
Adequate accounting. As a self -employed person, you 
adequately account by reporting your actual expenses. 
Y ou should follow the recordkeeping rules in chapter 5.
How to report.  For information on how to report ex-
penses on your tax return, see Self-employed at the be-
ginning of this chapter.
Required Records for
Clients or Customers
If you are a client or customer, you generally don’t have to 
keep records to prove the reimbursements or allowances 
you give, in the course of your business, to an independ-
ent contractor for travel or gift expenses incurred on your 
behalf. However, you must keep records if:
• Y ou reimburse the contractor for entertainment expen-
ses incurred on your behalf, and
• The contractor adequately accounts to you for these 
expenses.
Contractor adequately accounts. If the contractor ade-
quately accounts to you for non -entertainment-related 
meal expenses, you (the client or customer) must keep re-
cords documenting each element of the expense, as ex-
plained in chapter 5. Use your records as proof for a de-
duction on your tax return. If non -entertainment-related 
meal expenses are accounted for separately, you are sub-
ject to the 50% limit on meals. If the contractor adequately 
accounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you don’t have 
to report the amounts on an information return.
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 6 How T o Report 47

Page 48 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Contractor doesn’t adequately account. If the contrac-
tor doesn’t adequately account to you for allowances or 
reimbursements of non -entertainment-related meal ex-
penses, you don’t have to keep records of these items. 
Y ou aren’t subject to the 50% limit on meals in this case. 
Y ou can deduct the reimbursements or allowances as pay-
ment for services if they are ordinary and necessary busi-
ness expenses. However, you must file Form 1099 -MISC 
to report amounts paid to the independent contractor if the 
total of the reimbursements and any other fees is $600 or 
more during the calendar year.
How To Use Per Diem
Rate Tables
This section contains information about the per diem rate 
substantiation methods available and the choice of rates 
you must make for the last 3 months of the year.
The Two Substantiation Methods
High-low method. IRS Notices list the localities that are 
treated under the high -low substantiation method as 
high-cost localities for all or part of the year. Notice 
2022-44, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2022-41_IRB#NOT -2022-44, lists the high -cost localities 
that are eligible for $297 (which includes $74 for meals 
and incidental expenses (M&IE)) per diem, effective Octo-
ber 1, 2022. For travel on or after October 1, 2022, all 
other localities within the continental United States 
(CONUS) are eligible for $204 (which includes $64 for 
M&IE) per diem under the high-low method.
Notice 2023 -68, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2023-41_IRB#NOT -2023-68, lists the high -cost localities 
that are eligible for $309 (which includes $74 for M&IE) 
per diem, effective October 1, 2023. For travel on or after 
October 1, 2023, the per diem for all other localities in-
creased to $214 (which includes $64 for M&IE).
Regular federal per diem rate method. Regular federal 
per diem rates are published by the General Services Ad-
ministration (GSA). Both tables include the separate rate 
for M&IE for each locality. The rates listed for FY2023 at 
GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates are effective Oc-
tober 1, 2022, and those listed for FY2024 are effective 
October 1, 2023. The standard rate for all locations within 
CONUS not specifically listed for FY2023 is $157 ($98 for 
lodging and $59 for M&IE). For FY2024, this rate increa-
ses to $166 ($107 for lodging and $59 for M&IE).
Transition Rules
The transition period covers the last 3 months of the cal-
endar year, from the time that new rates are effective (gen-
erally, October 1) through December 31. During this pe-
riod, you may generally change to the new rates or finish 
out the year with the rates you had been using.
High-low method. If you use the high -low substantiation 
method, when new rates become effective (generally, Oc-
tober 1), you can either continue with the rates you used 
for the first part of the year or change to the new rates. 
However, you must continue using the high -low method 
for the rest of the calendar year (through December 31). If 
you are an employer, you must use the same rates for all 
employees reimbursed under the high -low method during 
that calendar year. 
The new rates and localities for the high -low method 
are included each year in a notice that is generally pub-
lished in mid to late September. Y ou can find the notice in 
the weekly Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB) at IRS.gov/IRB, 
or visit IRS.gov and enter “Special Per Diem Rates” in the 
search box.
Federal per diem rate method.  New CONUS per diem 
rates become effective on October 1 of each year and re-
main in effect through September 30 of the following year. 
Employees being reimbursed under the per diem rate 
method during the first 9 months of a year (January 1–
September 30) must continue under the same method 
through the end of that calendar year (December 31). 
However, for travel by these employees from October 1 
through December 31, you can choose to continue using 
the same per diem rates or use the new rates.
The new federal CONUS per diem rates are published 
each year, generally early in September. Go to GSA.gov/
travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates.
Per diem rates for localities listed for FY2024 may 
change at any time. T o be sure you have the most 
current rate, check GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-
diem-rates.
Completing Form
2106
For tax years beginning after 2017, the Form 2106 will be 
used by Armed Forces reservists, qualified performing ar-
tists, fee-basis state or local government officials, and em-
ployees with impairment -related work expenses. Due to 
the suspension of miscellaneous itemized deductions 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a), employees 
who do not fit into one of the listed categories may not use 
Form 2106.
This section briefly describes how employees complete 
Forms 2106. T able 6-1 explains what the employer reports 
on Form W -2 and what the employee reports on Form 
2106. The instructions for the forms have more information 
on completing them.
If you are self-employed, don’t file Form 2106. Re-
port your expenses on Schedule C (Form 1040) 
or Schedule F (Form 1040). See the instructions 
for the form that you must file.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
48 Chapter 6 How T o Report Publication 463 (2023)

Page 49 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting Travel, Nonentertainment Meal, Gift, and Car Expenses and 
Reimbursements
T able 6-1.
IF the type of reimbursement (or 
other expense allowance)
 arrangement is under:
THEN the employer reports on Form 
W-2:
AND the employee
reports on
 Form 2106: 
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: Adequate accounting 
made and excess returned.
No amount. No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement: Adequate accounting and 
return of excess both required but excess not returned.
The excess amount as wages in box 1. No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the federal rate: 
Adequate accounting made and excess returned.
No amount. All expenses and reimbursements only if 
excess expenses are claimed. Otherwise, 
form is not filed.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the federal rate: 
Adequate accounting and return of excess both required 
but excess not returned.
The excess amount as wages in box 1. 
The amount up to the federal rate is 
reported only under code L in box 12 of 
Form W-2—it isn’t reported in box 1.
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the federal rate: 
Adequate accounting up to the federal rate only and 
excess not returned.
The excess amount as wages in box 1. 
The amount up to the federal rate is 
reported only under code L in box 12 of 
Form W-2—it isn’t reported in box 1.
All expenses (and reimbursements 
reported under code L in box 12 of Form 
W-2) only if expenses in excess of the 
federal rate are claimed. Otherwise, form 
isn’t filed.
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of excess, or both, 
not required by plan.
The entire amount as wages in box 1. All expenses.
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount as wages in box 1. All expenses.
Car expenses. If you used a car to perform your job as 
an employee, you may be able to deduct certain car ex-
penses. These are generally figured on Form 2106, Part II, 
and then claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, column A.
Information on use of cars.  If you claim any deduc-
tion for the business use of a car, you must answer certain 
questions and provide information about the use of the 
car. The information relates to the following items.
• Date placed in service.
• Mileage (total, business, commuting, and other per-
sonal mileage).
• Percentage of business use.
• After-work use.
• Use of other vehicles.
• Whether you have evidence to support the deduction.
• Whether or not the evidence is written.
Employees must complete Form 2106, Part II, Section A, 
to provide this information.
Standard mileage rate.  If you claim a deduction 
based on the standard mileage rate instead of your actual 
expenses, you must complete Form 2106, Part II, Sec-
tion B. The amount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to 
Form 2106, Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part I, line 2, you 
can deduct parking fees and tolls that apply to the busi-
ness use of the car. See Standard Mileage Rate  in chap-
ter 4 for information on using this rate.
Actual expenses. If you claim a deduction based on 
actual car expenses, you must complete Form 2106, Part 
II, Section C. In addition, unless you lease your car, you 
must complete Section D to show your depreciation de-
duction and any section 179 deduction you claim.
If you are still using a car that is fully depreciated, con-
tinue to complete Section C. Since you have no deprecia-
tion deduction, enter zero on line 28. In this case, don’t 
complete Section D.
Car rentals. If you claim car rental expenses on Form 
2106, line 24a, you may have to reduce that expense by 
an inclusion amount, as described in chapter 4. If so, you 
can show your car expenses and any inclusion amount as 
follows.
1. Figure the inclusion amount without taking into ac-
count your business-use percentage for the tax year.
2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) on Form 2106, 
Part II, line 24b.
3. Report on line 24c the net amount of car rental expen-
ses (total car rental expenses minus the inclusion 
amount figured in (1)).
The net amount of car rental expenses will be adjusted on 
Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect the percentage of 
business use for the tax year.
Transportation expenses. Show your transportation ex-
penses that didn’t involve overnight travel on Form 2106, 
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 6 How T o Report 49

Page 50 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
line 2, column A. Also include on this line business expen-
ses you have for parking fees and tolls. Don’t include ex-
penses of operating your car or expenses of commuting 
between your home and work.
Employee business expenses other than nonenter-
tainment meals.  Show your other employee business 
expenses on Form 2106, lines 3 and 4, column A. Don’t 
include expenses for nonentertainment meals on those 
lines. Line 4 is for expenses such as gifts, educational ex-
penses (tuition and books), office -in-the-home expenses, 
and trade and professional publications.
If line 4 expenses are the only ones you are claim-
ing, you received no reimbursements (or the reim-
bursements were all included in box 1 of your 
Form W-2), and the special rules discussed later don’t ap-
ply to you, don’t complete Form 2106.
Non-entertainment-related meal expenses.  Show the 
full amount of your expenses for nonentertainment busi-
ness-related meals on Form 2106, line 5, column B. In-
clude meals while away from your tax home overnight and 
other business meals. Enter 50% of the line 8, column B, 
meal expenses on line 9, column B.
“Hours of service” limits.  If you are subject to the 
Department of T ransportation's “hours of service” limits 
(as explained earlier under Individuals subject to “hours of 
service” limits  in chapter 2), use 80% instead of 50% for 
meals while away from your tax home.
Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7, the 
amounts your employer (or third party) reimbursed you 
that weren’t reported to you in box 1 of your Form W -2. 
This includes any amount reported under code L in box 12 
of Form W-2.
Allocating your reimbursement.  If you were reim-
bursed under an accountable plan and want to deduct ex-
cess expenses that weren’t reimbursed, you may have to 
allocate your reimbursement. This is necessary when your 
employer pays your reimbursement in the following man-
ner.
• Pays you a single amount that covers non-entertain-
ment-related meals and/or entertainment, as well as 
other business expenses.
• Doesn’t clearly identify how much is for deductible 
non-entertainment-related meals.
Y ou must allocate that single payment so that you know 
how much to enter on Form 2106, line 7, column A and 
column B.
Example. Y our employer paid you an expense allow-
ance of $12,000 this year under an accountable plan. The 
$12,000 payment consisted of $5,000 for airfare and 
$7,000 for non -entertainment-related meals, and car ex-
penses. Y our employer didn’t clearly show how much of 
the $7,000 was for the cost of deductible non -entertain-
ment-related meals. Y ou actually spent $14,000 during the 
year ($5,500 for airfare, $4,500 for non -entertainment-re-
lated meals, and $4,000 for car expenses).
TIP
Since the airfare allowance was clearly identified, you 
know that $5,000 of the payment goes in column A, line 7, 
of Form 2106. T o allocate the remaining $7,000, you use 
the worksheet from the Instructions for Form 2106. Y our 
completed worksheet follows.
Reimbursement Allocation Worksheet
(Keep for your records.)
1. Enter the total amount of reimbursements your 
employer gave you that weren’t reported to you 
in box 1 of Form W-2 ................ $7,000
2. Enter the total amount of your expenses for the 
periods covered by this reimbursement ..... 8,500
3. Enter the part of the amount on line 2 that was 
your total expense for 
non-entertainment-related meals ......... 4,500
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the result as a 
decimal (rounded to at least three places) .... 0.529 
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter the result here 
and in column B, line 7 ............... 3,703
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter the result here 
and in column A, line 7 ............... $3,297
On line 7 of Form 2106, you enter $8,297 ($5,000 airfare 
and $3,297 of the $7,000) in column A and $3,703 (of the 
$7,000) in column B.
After you complete the form.  If you are a government 
official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, an Armed 
Forces reservist, or a disabled employee with impair-
ment-related work expenses, see Special Rules, later.
Limits on employee business expenses.  Y our em-
ployee business expenses may be subject to either of the 
limits described next. They are figured in the following or-
der on the specified form.
1. Limit on meals and entertainment.  Certain 
non-entertainment-related meal expenses are subject to a 
50% limit. Generally, entertainment expenses are nonde-
ductible if paid or incurred after December 2017. If you are 
an employee, you figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106. 
(See 50% Limit in chapter 2.)
2. Limit on total itemized deductions. Limitations on 
itemized deductions are suspended for tax years begin-
ning after 2017 and before tax year January 2026, per 
section 68(g).
Special Rules
This section discusses special rules that apply only to 
Armed Forces reservists, government officials who are 
paid on a fee basis, performing artists, and disabled em-
ployees with impairment -related work expenses. For tax 
years beginning after 2017, they are the only taxpayers 
who can use Form 2106.
Armed Forces Reservists Traveling More 
Than 100 Miles From Home
If you are a member of a reserve component of the Armed 
Forces of the United States and you travel more than 100 
miles away from home in connection with your 
50 Chapter 6 How T o Report Publication 463 (2023)

Page 51 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
performance of services as a member of the reserves, you 
can deduct your travel expenses as an adjustment to 
gross income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized de-
duction. The amount of expenses you can deduct as an 
adjustment to gross income is limited to the regular federal 
per diem rate (for lodging and M&IE) and the standard 
mileage rate (for car expenses) plus any parking fees, 
ferry fees, and tolls. See Per Diem and Car Allowances , 
earlier, for more information.
Member of a reserve component. Y ou are a member of 
a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United 
States if you are in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air 
Force, or Coast Guard Reserve; the Army National Guard 
of the United States; the Air National Guard of the United 
States; or the Reserve Corps of the Public Health Service.
How to report.  If you have reserve -related travel that 
takes you more than 100 miles from home, you should first 
complete Form 2106. Then include your expenses for re-
serve travel over 100 miles from home, up to the federal 
rate, from Form 2106, line 10, in the total on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 12.
Y ou can’t deduct expenses of travel that doesn’t take 
you more than 100 miles from home as an adjustment to 
gross income.
Officials Paid on a Fee Basis
Certain fee-basis officials can claim their employee busi-
ness expenses on Form 2106.
Fee-basis officials are persons who are employed by a 
state or local government and who are paid in whole or in 
part on a fee basis. They can deduct their business ex-
penses in performing services in that job as an adjustment 
to gross income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction.
If you are a fee -basis official, include your employee 
business expenses from Form 2106, line 10, in the total on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 12.
Expenses of Certain
Performing Artists
If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to deduct 
your employee business expenses as an adjustment to 
gross income. T o qualify, you must meet all of the following 
requirements.
1. During the tax year, you perform services in the per-
forming arts as an employee for at least two employ-
ers.
2. Y ou receive at least $200 each from any two of these 
employers.
3. Y our related performing-arts business expenses are 
more than 10% of your gross income from the per-
formance of those services.
4. Y our adjusted gross income isn’t more than $16,000 
before deducting these business expenses.
Special rules for married persons.  If you are married, 
you must file a joint return unless you lived apart from your 
spouse at all times during the tax year. If you file a joint re-
turn, you must figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) sepa-
rately for both you and your spouse. However, requirement 
(4) applies to your and your spouse's combined adjusted 
gross income.
Where to report.  If you meet all of the above require-
ments, you should first complete Form 2106. Then you in-
clude your performing -arts-related expenses from Form 
2106, line 10, in the total on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 12.
If you don’t meet all of the above requirements, you 
don’t qualify to deduct your expenses as an adjustment to 
gross income.
Impairment-Related Work Expenses of 
Disabled Employees
If you are an employee with a physical or mental disability, 
your impairment -related work expenses aren’t subject to 
the 2% -of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to 
most other employee business expenses. After you com-
plete Form 2106, enter your impairment -related work ex-
penses from Form 2106, line 10, on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 16, and identify the type and amount of this ex-
pense on the line next to line 16.
Impairment-related work expenses are your allowable 
expenses for attendant care at your workplace and other 
expenses in connection with your workplace that are nec-
essary for you to be able to work.
Y ou are disabled if you have:
• A physical or mental disability (for example, blindness 
or deafness) that functionally limits your being em-
ployed; or
• A physical or mental impairment (for example, a sight 
or hearing impairment) that substantially limits one or 
more of your major life activities, such as performing 
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breathing, learning, 
or working.
Y ou can deduct impairment-related expenses as busi-
ness expenses if they are:
• Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily;
• For goods and services not required or used, other 
than incidentally, in your personal activities; and
• Not specifically covered under other income tax laws.
Example 1. Y ou are blind. Y ou must use a reader to do 
your work. Y ou use the reader both during your regular 
working hours at your place of work and outside your reg-
ular working hours away from your place of work. The 
reader's services are only for your work. Y ou can deduct 
your expenses for the reader as business expenses.
Example 2.  Y ou are deaf. Y ou must use a sign lan-
guage interpreter during meetings while you are at work. 
Publication 463 (2023) Chapter 6 How T o Report 51

Page 52 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The interpreter's services are used only for your work. Y ou 
can deduct your expenses for the interpreter as business 
expenses.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need help prepar-
ing your tax return; or want to download free publications, 
forms, or instructions, go to IRS.gov to find resources that 
can help you right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After receiving all 
your wage and earnings statements (Forms W -2, W -2G, 
1099-R, 1099 -MISC, 1099 -NEC, etc.); unemployment 
compensation statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 1099 -G); 
and interest, dividend, and retirement statements from 
banks and investment firms (Forms 1099), you have sev-
eral options to choose from to prepare and file your tax re-
turn. Y ou can prepare the tax return yourself, see if you 
qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax professional to 
prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Y our options for pre-
paring and filing your return online or in your local com-
munity, if you qualify, include the following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare and file your 
federal individual income tax return for free using soft-
ware or Free File Fillable Forms. However, state tax 
preparation may not be available through Free File. Go 
to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify for free online 
federal tax preparation, e-filing, and direct deposit or 
payment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income T ax Assistance (VITA) 
program offers free tax help to people with 
low-to-moderate incomes, persons with disabilities, 
and limited-English-speaking taxpayers who need 
help preparing their own tax returns. Go to IRS.gov/
VITA, download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
800-906-9887 for information on free tax return prepa-
ration.
• TCE. The T ax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) pro-
gram offers free tax help for all taxpayers, particularly 
those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volun-
teers specialize in answering questions about pen-
sions and retirement-related issues unique to seniors. 
Go to IRS.gov/TCE or download the free IRS2Go app 
for information on free tax return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed Forces and quali-
fied veterans may use MilT ax, a free tax service of-
fered by the Department of Defense through Military 
OneSource. For more information, go to 
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/MilT ax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, which can be 
completed online and then e-filed regardless of income.
Using online tools to help prepare your return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/T ools for the following.
• The Earned Income T ax Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/
EITCAssistant) determines if you’re eligible for the 
earned income credit (EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) helps you 
get an employer identification number (EIN) at no 
cost.
• The T ax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/W4App) 
makes it easier for you to estimate the federal income 
tax you want your employer to withhold from your pay-
check. This is tax withholding. See how your withhold-
ing affects your refund, take-home pay, or tax due.
• The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account Look-up 
(IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool provides information on 
your repayments and account balance.
• The Sales T ax Deduction Calculator (IRS.gov/
SalesT ax) figures the amount you can claim if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax questions.  On 
IRS.gov, you can get up -to-date information on 
current events and changes in tax law.
• Go to IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you get 
answers to some of the most common tax questions.
• Go to IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive T ax Assistant, a 
tool that will ask you questions and, based on your in-
put, provide answers on a number of tax topics.
• Go to IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, and 
publications. Y ou will find details on the most recent 
tax changes and interactive links to help you find an-
swers to your questions.
• Y ou may also be able to access tax information in your 
e-filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return?  There are 
various types of tax return preparers, including enrolled 
agents, certified public accountants (CPAs), accountants, 
and many others who don’t have professional credentials. 
If you choose to have someone prepare your tax return, 
choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall substantive accu-
racy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax identification 
number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the return, 
you're ultimately responsible for providing all the 
information required for the preparer to accurately 
prepare your return and for the accuracy of every item re-
ported on the return. Anyone paid to prepare tax returns 
for others should have a thorough understanding of tax 
matters. For more information on how to choose a tax pre-
parer, go to Tips for Choosing a T ax Preparer on IRS.gov.
CAUTION
!
52 Publication 463 (2023)

Page 53 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employers can register to use Business Services On-
line. The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers on-
line service at SSA.gov/employer for fast, free, and secure 
W-2 filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled agents, 
and individuals who process Form W -2, Wage and T ax 
Statement, and Form W -2c, Corrected Wage and T ax 
Statement.
IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia to see the 
various social media tools the IRS uses to share the latest 
information on tax changes, scam alerts, initiatives, prod-
ucts, and services. At the IRS, privacy and security are our 
highest priority. We use these tools to share public infor-
mation with you. Don’t post your social security number 
(SSN) or other confidential information on social media 
sites. Always protect your identity when using any social 
networking site.
The following IRS Y ouT ube channels provide short, in-
formative videos on various tax -related topics in English, 
Spanish, and ASL.
• Y outube.com/irsvideos.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio presentations 
for individuals, small businesses, and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other languages.  Y ou can 
find information on IRS.gov/MyLanguage if English isn’t 
your native language.
Free Over -the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Service.  The 
IRS is committed to serving taxpayers with limited -English 
proficiency (LEP) by offering OPI services. The OPI Serv-
ice is a federally funded program and is available at T ax-
payer Assistance Centers (TACs), most IRS offices, and 
every VITA/TCE tax return site. The OPI Service is acces-
sible in more than 350 languages.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpayers with 
disabilities. T axpayers who need information about ac-
cessibility services can call 833 -690-0598. The Accessi-
bility Helpline can answer questions related to current and 
future accessibility products and services available in al-
ternative media formats (for example, braille, large print, 
audio, etc.). The Accessibility Helpline does not have ac-
cess to your IRS account. For help with tax law, refunds, or 
account-related issues, go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp.
Note. Form 9000, Alternative Media Preference, or 
Form 9000(SP) allows you to elect to receive certain types 
of written correspondence in the following formats.
• Standard Print.
• Large Print.
• Braille.
• Audio (MP3).
• Plain T ext File (TXT).
• Braille Ready File (BRF).
Disasters. Go to IRS.gov/DisasterRelief to review the 
available disaster tax relief.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to IRS.gov/
Forms to view, download, or print all the forms, instruc-
tions, and publications you may need. Or, you can go to 
IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an order.
Getting tax publications and instructions in eBook 
format. Download and view most tax publications and in-
structions (including the Instructions for Form 1040) on 
mobile devices as eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
IRS eBooks have been tested using Apple's iBooks for 
iPad. Our eBooks haven’t been tested on other dedicated 
eBook readers, and eBook functionality may not operate 
as intended.
Access your online account (individual taxpayers 
only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to securely access infor-
mation about your federal tax account.
• View the amount you owe and a breakdown by tax 
year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a new payment 
plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of payment history 
and any pending or scheduled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key data from your 
most recent tax return, and transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests from tax pro-
fessionals.
• View your address on file or manage your communica-
tion preferences.
Get a transcript of your return. With an online account, 
you can access a variety of information to help you during 
the filing season. Y ou can get a transcript, review your 
most recently filed tax return, and get your adjusted gross 
income. Create or access your online account at IRS.gov/
Account.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax professional 
submit an authorization request to access your individual 
taxpayer IRS online account. For more information, go to 
IRS.gov/T axProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The safest and easiest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to e -file and choose direct deposit, 
which securely and electronically transfers your refund di-
rectly into your financial account. Direct deposit also 
avoids the possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
destroyed, or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 
10 taxpayers use direct deposit to receive their refunds. If 
you don’t have a bank account, go to IRS.gov/
DirectDeposit for more information on where to find a bank 
or credit union that can open an account online.
Publication 463 (2023) 53

Page 54 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related identity 
theft issues. 
• T ax-related identity theft happens when someone 
steals your personal information to commit tax fraud. 
Y our taxes can be affected if your SSN is used to file a 
fraudulent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with taxpayers by 
email, text messages (including shortened links), tele-
phone calls, or social media channels to request or 
verify personal or financial information. This includes 
requests for personal identification numbers (PINs), 
passwords, or similar information for credit cards, 
banks, or other financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Identity Theft 
Central webpage, for information on identity theft and 
data security protection for taxpayers, tax professio-
nals, and businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of tax-related 
identity theft, you can learn what steps you should 
take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP PINs are 
six-digit numbers assigned to taxpayers to help pre-
vent the misuse of their SSNs on fraudulent federal in-
come tax returns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return with your 
SSN. T o learn more, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your mobile de-
vice to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 800-829-1954.
The IRS can’t issue refunds before mid -February 
for returns that claimed the EIC or the additional 
child tax credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire 
refund, not just the portion associated with these credits.
Making a tax payment.  Payments of U.S. tax must be 
remitted to the IRS in U.S. dollars. Digital assets are not 
accepted. Go to IRS.gov/Payments for information on how 
to make a payment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill or estimated 
tax payment directly from your checking or savings ac-
count at no cost to you.
• Debit Card, Credit Card, or Digital Wallet: Choose an 
approved payment processor to pay online or by 
phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a payment 
when filing your federal taxes using tax return prepara-
tion software or through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal T ax Payment System: Best option 
for businesses. Enrollment is required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment to the ad-
dress listed on the notice or instructions.
• Cash: Y ou may be able to pay your taxes with cash at 
a participating retail store.
CAUTION
!
• Same-Day Wire: Y ou may be able to do same-day 
wire from your financial institution. Contact your finan-
cial institution for availability, cost, and time frames.
Note. The IRS uses the latest encryption technology to 
ensure that the electronic payments you make online, by 
phone, or from a mobile device using the IRS2Go app are 
safe and secure. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/Payments for 
more information about your options.
• Apply for an online payment agreement (IRS.gov/
OPA) to meet your tax obligation in monthly install-
ments if you can’t pay your taxes in full today. Once 
you complete the online process, you will receive im-
mediate notification of whether your agreement has 
been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier to see if 
you can settle your tax debt for less than the full 
amount you owe. For more information on the Offer in 
Compromise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  Go to IRS.gov/Form1040X 
for information and updates.
Checking the status of your amended return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of Form 1040 -X amen-
ded returns.
It can take up to 3 weeks from the date you filed 
your amended return for it to show up in our sys-
tem, and processing it can take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter you’ve re-
ceived. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find additional informa-
tion about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
Responding to an IRS notice or letter.  Y ou can now 
upload responses to all notices and letters using the 
Document Upload T ool. For notices that require additional 
action, taxpayers will be redirected appropriately on 
IRS.gov to take further action. T o learn more about the 
tool, go to IRS.gov/Upload.
Note. Y ou can use Schedule LEP (Form 1040), Re-
quest for Change in Language Preference, to state a pref-
erence to receive notices, letters, or other written commu-
nications from the IRS in an alternative language. Y ou may 
not immediately receive written communications in the re-
quested language. The IRS’s commitment to LEP taxpay-
ers is part of a multi -year timeline that began providing 
translations in 2023. Y ou will continue to receive communi-
cations, including notices and letters, in English until they 
are translated to your preferred language.
Contacting your local TAC.  Keep in mind, many ques-
tions can be answered on IRS.gov without visiting a TAC. 
Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp for the topics people ask about 
most. If you still need help, TACs provide tax help when a 
tax issue can’t be handled online or by phone. All TACs 
now provide service by appointment, so you’ll know in ad-
vance that you can get the service you need without long 
CAUTION
!
54 Publication 463 (2023)

Page 55 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
wait times. Before you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to 
find the nearest TAC and to check hours, available serv-
ices, and appointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, 
under the Stay Connected tab, choose the Contact Us op-
tion and click on “Local Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) 
Is Here To Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer rights. TAS strives 
to ensure that every taxpayer is treated fairly and that you 
know and understand your rights under the T axpayer Bill 
of Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your Taxpayer 
Rights?
The T axpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic rights that 
all taxpayers have when dealing with the IRS. Go to 
T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to help you understand what 
these rights mean to you and how they apply. These are 
your rights. Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do For You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you can’t resolve 
with the IRS. And their service is free. If you qualify for 
their assistance, you will be assigned to one advocate 
who will work with you throughout the process and will do 
everything possible to resolve your issue. TAS can help 
you if:
• Y our problem is causing financial difficulty for you, 
your family, or your business;
• Y ou face (or your business is facing) an immediate 
threat of adverse action; or
• Y ou’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS but no one 
has responded, or the IRS hasn’t responded by the 
date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of Columbia, 
and Puerto Rico. T o find your advocate’s number:
• Go to T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us;
• Download Pub. 1546, The T axpayer Advocate Service 
Is Y our Voice at the IRS, available at IRS.gov/pub/irs-
pdf/p1546.pdf;
• Call the IRS toll free at 800-TAX-FORM 
(800-829-3676) to order a copy of Pub. 1546;
• Check your local directory; or
• Call TAS toll free at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that affect 
many taxpayers. If you know of one of these broad issues, 
report it to TAS at IRS.gov/SAMS. Be sure to not include 
any personal taxpayer information.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS and TAS. LITCs rep-
resent individuals whose income is below a certain level 
and who need to resolve tax problems with the IRS. LITCs 
can represent taxpayers in audits, appeals, and tax collec-
tion disputes before the IRS and in court. In addition, 
LITCs can provide information about taxpayer rights and 
responsibilities in different languages for individuals who 
speak English as a second language. Services are offered 
for free or a small fee. For more information or to find an 
LITC near you, go to the LITC page at 
T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/LITC or see IRS Pub. 4134, 
Low Income T axpayer Clinic List, at IRS.gov/pub/irs-pdf/
p4134.pdf.
Appendices
Appendices A -1 through A -6 show the lease inclusion 
amounts that you may need to report if you first leased a 
passenger automobile (including a truck and van) in 2018 
through 2023 for 30 days or more.
If any of these apply to you, use the appendix for the 
year you first leased the car. (See Leasing a Car in chap-
ter 4.)
Publication 463 (2023) 55

Page 56 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2018
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $50,000  $51,000  $1  $3  $5  $5  $6
 51,000  52,000 4 9 13 16 19
 52,000  53,000 7 15 22 27 31
 53,000  54,000 10 21 31 37 44
 54,000  55,000 12 27 40 48 56
 55,000  56,000 15 33 49 59 68
 56,000  57,000 18 39 58 69 81
 57,000  58,000 20 45 67 80 93
 58,000  59,000 23 51 76 91 105
 59,000  60,000 26 57 85 101 117
 60,000  62,000 30 66 98 118 135
 62,000  64,000 36 78 116 139 160
 64,000  66,000 41 90 134 160 185
 66,000  68,000 46 102 152 181 210
 68,000  70,000 52 114 169 203 235
 70,000  72,000 57 126 187 225 259
 72,000  74,000 63 138 205 246 284
 74,000  76,000 68 150 223 267 309
 76,000  78,000 74 162 241 288 333
 78,000  80,000 79 174 259 310 357
 80,000  85,000 89 195 290 347 401
 85,000  90,000 102 225 335 400 463
 90,000  95,000 116 255 379 454 525
 95,000  100,0002 130 285 423 508 586
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2018-25 (2018-18 I.R.B. 543), available at https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-18-25.pdf.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2019
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $50,000  $51,000  $0  $1  $1  $3  $3
 51,000  52,000  4  11  15  20  23
 52,000  53,000  9  20  30  36  43
 53,000  54,000  13  30  44  53  63
 54,000  55,000  17  40  58  70  83
 55,000  56,000  22  49  72  88  102
 56,000  57,000  26  59  86  105  122
 57,000  58,000  31  68  101  122  142
 58,000  59,000  35  78  115  139  161
 59,000  60,000  39  88  129  156  181
 60,000  62,000  46  102  151  181  211
 62,000  64,000  55  121  179  216  250
 64,000  66,000  63  140  208  251  289
 66,000  68,000  72  160  236  284  329
 68,000  70,000  81  179  265  318  369
 70,000  72,000  90  198  293  353  408
 72,000  74,000  98  217  322  387  448
 74,000  76,000  107  236  351  421  487
 76,000  78,000  116  255  379  456  526
 78,000  80,000  125  275  407  489  567
 80,000  85,000  140  308  458  549  635
 85,000  90,000  162  356  529  635  734
 90,000  95,000  184  404  600  720  833
 95,000  100,0002  206  452  671  806  931
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2019-26 (2019-24 I.R.B. 1323), available at https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-19-26.pdf.
56 Publication 463 (2023)

Page 57 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2020
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $50,000  $51,000  $0  $1  $0  $2  $2
51,000 52,000 2 6 9 10 13
52,000 53,000 5 11 17 20 24
53,000 54,000 7 17 24 30 35
54,000 55,000 10 22 32 39 46
55,000 56,000 12 27 41 48 57
56,000 57,000 15 32 49 58 68
57,000 58,000 17 38 56 68 79
58,000 59,000 19 44 64 77 90
59,000 60,000 22 49 72 87 100
60,000 62,000 26 56 84 102 117
62,000 64,000 30 68 99 121 139
64,000 66,000 35 78 116 139 161
66,000 68,000 40 89 131 159 183
68,000 70,000 45 99 148 177 205
70,000 72,000 50 110 163 197 227
72,000 74,000 55 121 179 215 249
74,000 76,000 60 131 195 235 271
76,000 78,000 64 142 211 254 293
78,000 80,000 69 153 227 272 315
80,000 85,000 78 172 254 306 353
85,000 90,000 90 198 295 353 408
90,000 95,000 102 225 334 401 463
95,000 100,0002 114 252 373 449 518
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2020-37 (2020-33 I.R.B. 381), available at https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-20-37.pdf.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2021
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $51,000  $52,000  $0  $0  $1  $0  $1
52,000 53,000 1 1 1 2 2
53,000 54,000 1 2 2 3 4
54,000 55,000 1 3 3 5 5
55,000 56,000 2 3 5 6 6
56,000 57,000 2 4 6 7 8
57,000 58,000 2 5 7 8 10
58,000 59,000 3 5 8 10 11
59,000 60,000 3 6 9 11 13
60,000 62,000 3 7 11 13 15
62,000 64,000 4 9 13 15 18
64,000 66,000 5 10 15 18 21
66,000 68,000 5 12 17 21 24
68,000 70,000 6 13 20 23 27
70,000 72,000 7 14 22 26 30
72,000 74,000 7 16 24 29 33
74,000 76,000 8 18 26 31 36
76,000 78,000 9 19 28 34 39
78,000 80,000 9 21 30 37 42
80,000 85,000 11 23 34 41 48
85,000 90,000 12 27 40 47 55
90,000 95,000 14 30 45 55 62
95,000 100,0002 16 34 50 61 70
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2021-31 (2021-34 I.R.B. 324), available at https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-21-31.pdf.
Publication 463 (2023) 57

Page 58 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2022
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $56,000  $57,000  $1  $1  $1  $2  $2
57,000 58,000 2 4 5 7 7
58,000 59,000 3 7 9 11 13
59,000 60,000 4 9 14 16 19
60,000 62,000 6 13 20 23 28
62,000 64,000 9 19 27 34 38
64,000 66,000 11 24 36 43 50
66,000 68,000 14 30 43 53 61
68,000 70,000 16 35 52 63 72
70,000 72,000 19 40 61 72 83
72,000 74,000 21 46 68 82 95
74,000 76,000 24 51 77 91 106
76,000 78,000 26 57 85 101 117
78,000 80,000 29 62 93 111 128
80,000 85,000 33 72 107 128 148
85,000 90,000 39 86 127 152 176
90,000 95,000 45 100 147 177 204
95,000 100,0002 52 113 167 201 233
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2022-17 (2022-13 I.R.B. 930), available at IRS.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-22-17.pdf.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2023
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
60,000 62,000 0 0 1 3 5
62,000 64,000 13 29 43 54 63
64,000 66,000 26 57 86 104 122
66,000 68,000 39 86 128 154 181
68,000 70,000 52 114 170 206 239
70,000 72,000 65 143 212 256 297
72,000 74,000 78 171 255 306 356
74,000 76,000 91 200 296 358 414
76,000 78,000 104 228 339 408 473
78,000 80,000 117 257 381 459 531
80,000 85,000 140 306 455 548 634
85,000 90,000 172 378 560 674 780
90,000 95,000 204 449 666 801 926
95,000 100,0002 237 520 772 927 1,073
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2023-14 (2023-6 I.R.B. 466), available at https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-23-14.pdf.
58 Publication 463 (2023)

Page 59 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T o help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
"Hours of service" limits 17
Form 2106 50
50% limit on meals 7
A
Accountable plans 42-46
Accounting to employer 42
Adequate accounting 43
Independent contractors 47
Adequate records 36
Advertising:
Car display 20
Expenses 17
Signs, display racks, or other 
promotional material to be used 
on recipient's business 
premises 18
Airline clubs 15
Allocating costs 6, 38
Allowance (See Reimbursements)
Armed forces:
Assigned overseas 4
Assistance (See T ax help)
Athletic clubs 15
B
Basis of car 26
(See also Depreciation of car)
Bona fide business purpose 7
Business travel 9
Outside U.S. 10
Business use of car 22
More-than-50%-use test. 26
Qualified business use 26
C
Canceled checks:
As evidence of business 
expenses 36
Car expenses 21-34
Actual expenses 22
Allowances for 43-46
Business and personal use 22
Combining expenses 38
Disposition of car 34
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 
allowance 45
Form 2106 49
Leasing a car, truck, or van 33, 34
Mileage rate (See Standard mileage 
rate)
T axes paid on car23
T raffic tickets23
Car pools 20
Car rentals 34
Form 2106 49
Car, defined 23
Car, truck, or van rentals 33, 34
Casualty and theft losses:
Cars 23
Depreciation 34
Club dues 15
Commuting expenses 20
Conventions 13
Country clubs 15
Cruise ships 13
D
Daily business mileage and 
expense log (Table 5-2) 39
Depreciation of car 23
(See also Section 179 deductions)
Adjustment for using standard 
mileage rate 35
Basis 26
Sales taxes 23
Unrecovered basis 30
Casualty or theft, effect 34
Deduction 23, 35
Excess depreciation 31
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS) 28
T rade-in, effect27, 35
T rucks and vans30
Depreciation of Car:
Section 179 deduction 30
Disabled employees:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 51
Documentary evidence 36
E
Employer-provided vehicles 22
Reporting requirements 42
Entertainment expenses 18
50% limit:
Determination of applicability 
(Figure A) 16
Entertainment, defined 14
Form 2106 50
Estimates of expenses 36
Exceptions to the 50% Limit 17
Excess reimbursements 
(See Reimbursements)
F
Fair market value of car 33
Farmers:
Form 1040, Schedule F 41
Federal crime investigations or 
prosecutions:
Federal employees engaged in 5
Federal rate for per diem 8, 44
Fee-basis officials 51
Fees you pay 20
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 
allowance 45
Form 1040, Schedule C 41
Form 1040, Schedule F 41
Form 2106 24, 41, 42, 47, 48
Form 4562 41
Form 4797 31
Form W-2:
Employer-provided vehicles 42
Reimbursement of personal 
expenses 41
Statutory employees 41
G
Gifts 15, 17
$25 limit 18
Combining for recordkeeping 
purposes 38
Reporting requirements 41
Golf clubs 15
H
Hauling tools 20
High-low method:
Introduction 48
T ransition rules48
High-low rate method 44
Home office 20
Hotel clubs 15
I
Identity theft 54
Impairment-related work 
expenses 51
Incidental expenses:
Defined 8
Gifts 18
No meals, incidentals only 8
Income-producing property 41
Incomplete records 37
Indefinite job assignment 5
Independent contractors 47
Interest on car loans 23
Itinerants 4
L
Leasing a car, truck, or van 33, 34
Luxury water travel 12
M
MACRS (Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System) 28
2023 chart (T able 4-1)32
Main place of business or work 4
Married taxpayers:
Performing artists 51
Meal expenses 7
50% limit 16
Determination of applicability 
(Figure A) 16
Publication 463 (2023) 59

Page 60 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exceptions 17
Actual cost method 7
Form 2106 50
Major cities with higher 
allowances 8
Standard meal allowance 7, 8, 44
Meals and Entertainment 
expenses 14
Mileage rate (See Standard mileage 
rate)
Military (See Armed forces)
Missing children, photographs of 2
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS) 28
2023 chart (T able 4-1)32
N
Nonaccountable plans 46
O
Office in the home 20
Officials paid on fee basis 51
Overseas travel:
Conventions 13
Meal allowance 8
Part of trip outside U.S. 9
P
Parking fees 20, 22
Per diem allowances 43-46
Defined 42
Federal rate for 44
Per diem rates:
High-cost localities 48
High-low method 48
Regular federal method 48
Standard rate for unlisted 
localities 48
T ransition rules48
Performing artists 51
Personal property taxes 22, 23
Personal trips 9
Outside U.S. 12
Placed in service, cars 26
Probationary work period 6
Proving business purpose 36
Public transportation:
Outside of U.S. travel 9
Publications (See T ax help)
R
Recordkeeping requirements 35-38
Adequate records 36
Daily business mileage and 
expense log (T able 5-2)39
Destroyed records 38
How to prove expenses 
(T able 5-1)37
Incomplete records 37
Reimbursed expenses 38
Sampling to prove expenses 37
Separating and combining 
expenses 38
Three-year period of retention 38
Weekly traveling expense record 
(T able 5-3)40
Regular federal method:
Introduction 48
T ransition rules48
Reimbursements 42-48
Accountable plans 42
Excess 46, 47
Form 2106 50
Nonaccountable plans 46
Nondeductible expenses 43
Personal expenses 41
Recordkeeping 38
Reporting (T able 6-1)49
Unclaimed 41
Reporting requirements 41
Per diem or car allowance 45
Reimbursements 42-48
Reservists:
T ransportation expenses20
T raveling more than 100 miles from 
home 50
Returning excess 
reimbursements 46
S
Section 179 deduction:
Amended return 25
Deduction 23
Limits 24
Self-employed persons 17
Reporting requirements 41
Spouse, expenses for 6
Standard meal allowance 7, 8, 44
Standard mileage rate 2, 21, 45
Depreciation adjustment for 
using 35
Form 2106 49
Statutory employees 41
T
Tables and figures:
50% limit determination (Figure 
A) 16
Daily business mileage and 
expense log (T able 5-2)39
Maximum depreciation deduction 
for cars placed in service prior to 
2018 table 29
Maximum depreciation deduction 
for Passenger Automobiles 
(Including T rucks and Vans) 
acquired after September 27, 
2017, and placed in service 
during 2018 or later 29
Maximum depreciation deduction 
for Passenger Automobiles 
(Including T rucks and Vans) 
acquired before September 28, 
2017, and placed in service 
during 2018–2023 29
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS) 2023 
chart (T able 4-1)32
Proving expenses (T able 5-1)37
Reporting reimbursements 
(T able 6-1)49
T ransportation expenses, 
determination of deductibility 
(Figure B) 18, 19
T ravel expenses, determination of 
deductibility (T able 1-1)7
Weekly traveling expense record 
(T able 5-3)40
Tax help 52
Tax home, determination of 4
Temporary job assignments 5
Temporary work location 19
Tickets:
T raffic violations23
Tools:
Hauling tools 20
Trade-in of car 27, 35
Traffic tickets 23
Transients 4
Transition rules 48
Example:
High-low method 48
High-low method 48
Regular federal method 48
Transportation expenses 18
Car expenses 21-34
Deductible (Figure B) 18, 19
five or more cars 22
Form 2106 49
Transportation workers 8, 17
Travel advance 42, 46
(See also Reimbursements)
Travel expenses 3-14
Another individual accompanying 
taxpayer 6
Away from home 4, 5
Deductible 6, 14
Summary of (T able 1-1)7
Defined 3
Going home on days off 6
In U.S. 9
Lodging 8
Luxury water travel 12
Outside U.S. 10
T ravel to family home5
Trucks and vans:
Depreciation 30
T ransportation workers17
T ransportation workers' expenses8
Two places of work 20
60 Publication 463 (2023)

Page 61 of 61  Fileid: … tions/p463/2023/a/xml/cycle05/source 15:51 - 29-Jan-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
U
Unclaimed reimbursements 41
Unions:
T rips from union hall to place of 
work 20
Unrecovered basis of car 30
V
Volunteers 3
W
Weekly traveling expense record 
(Table 5-3) 40
Publication 463 (2023) 61