Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -35% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P463.SGM (16-Dec-2004) (Init. & date)
Filename: F:\04pub463_indexed.sgm
Page 1 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
What’s New ..................... 2Department
of the Reminder ...................... 2Travel,Treasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Entertainment, 1. Travel....................... 3Service
Traveling Away From Home........ 3
Travel to Family Home........ 3Gift, and Car Tax Home ................. 3
Temporary Assignment or Job...... 4
What Travel Expenses AreExpenses
Deductible?................ 4
Meals .................... 5
Travel in the United States...... 6
Travel Outside the UnitedFor use in preparing
States................. 7
Luxury Water Travel.......... 82004 Returns Conventions............... 9
2. Entertainment.................. 9
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Deductible?............. 10
Directly-Related Test......... 11
Associated Test............. 11
50% Limit.................... 12
Exceptions to the 50% Limit..... 12
3. Gifts........................ 13
4. Transportation................. 13
Car Expenses................. 15
Standard Mileage Rate........ 15
Actual Car Expenses......... 16
Leasing a Car.............. 24
Disposition of a Car............. 24
5. Recordkeeping................. 25
How To Prove Expenses.......... 25
What Are Adequate
Records? .............. 25
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? .............. 26
Separating and Combining
Expenses .............. 27
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts...... 27
Examples of Records......... 27
6. How To Report................. 27
Where To Report............... 27
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer .............. 28
Reimbursements ............... 28
Accountable Plans........... 28
Nonaccountable Plans........ 31
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients..... 32
Completing Forms 2106 and
2106-EZ .................. 32Get forms and other information Special Rules.............. 33
faster and easier by: Illustrated Examples.......... 34
7. How To Get Tax Help............ 40Internet • www.irs.gov
Appendices ..................... 41
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine)
Index.......................... 55

Page 2 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• What records you need to prove your ex- be able to deduct some of your costs as a
penses, and charitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-What’s New penses in Giving Services in Publication 526,• How to treat any expense reimbursements
Charitable Contributions, for information on theyou may receive.Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- expenses you can deduct.age rate for the cost of operating your car in
Who should use this publication. You2004 is 371/2 cents a mile for all business miles.
should read this publication if you are an em-Comments and suggestions. We welcomeBeginning in 2004, you can use the standardployee or a sole proprietor who has business-re-your comments about this publication and yourmileage rate to figure the deductible costs oflated travel, entertainment, gift, or transportationsuggestions for future editions.operating up to four cars at the same time. Inexpenses. You can write to us at the following address:earlier years, you could not use the standard
Users of employer-provided vehicles.Ifmileage rate if you used two or more cars at the
an employer-provided vehicle was available forsame time. Internal Revenue Serviceyour use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener-Individual Forms and Publications BranchCar expenses and use of the standard mile-ally, your employer must include the value of theage rate are explained in chapter 4. SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Iuse or availability in your income as pay. How-
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406ever, there are exceptions if the use of the vehi-Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, and Washington, DC 20224cle qualifies as a working condition fringe benefitvans. The total section 179 deduction and de-(such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal usepreciation (including the special depreciation al-vehicle).lowance) you can claim on cars, trucks, and We respond to many letters by telephone.vans you use for business purposes has de- A working condition fringe benefit is anyTherefore, it would be helpful if you would in-creased for vehicles first placed in service inproperty or service provided to you by your em-clude your daytime phone number, including the2004. See Depreciation limits in chapter 4. ployer for which you could deduct the cost as anarea code, in your correspondence.employee business expense if you had paid forMeal expenses when subject to “hours of You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Theit.service” limits.Generally, you can deduct asterisk must be included in the address.)only 50% of your business-related meal ex- A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is onePlease put “Publications Comment” on the sub-penses while traveling away from your tax homethat is not likely to be used more than minimallyject line. Although we cannot respond individu-for business purposes. You can deduct a higherfor personal purposes because of its design.ally to each email, we do appreciate yourpercentage if the meals take place during orDelivery trucks with seating only for the driver, orfeedback and will consider your comments asincident to any period subject to the Departmentonly for the driver plus a folding jump seat, arewe revise our tax products.of Transportation’s “hours of service” limits.qualified nonpersonal use vehicles.(These limits apply to certain workers who are Tax questions. If you have a tax question,under certain federal regulations.) The percent-For information on how to report your carvisit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. Weage is 70% for 2004. Business meal expensesexpenses that your employer did not provide orcannot answer tax questions at either of theare covered in chapter 1. reimburse you for (such as when you pay for gasaddresses listed above.and maintenance for a car your employer pro-
vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your EmployerOrdering forms and publications. Visit
in chapter 6. www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write toReminder
one of the three addresses shown under How ToWho does not need to use this publication.
Get Tax Help in the back of this publication.Partnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ-Photographs of missing children.The Inter-
ers who reimburse their employees for businessnal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
expenses should refer to their tax form instruc-Useful ItemsNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
tions and chapter 13 of Publication 535, Busi-dren. Photographs of missing children selected You may want to see:ness Expenses, for information on deductingby the Center may appear in this publication on
travel, meals, entertainment, and transportationpages that would otherwise be blank. You can Publicationexpenses.help bring these children home by looking at the ❏ 225 Farmer’s Tax Guidephotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST If you are an employee, you will not need to(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductionsread this publication if all of the following are
true. ❏ 535 Business Expenses
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
1. You fully accounted to your employer for❏ 1542 Per Diem RatesIntroduction your work-related expenses.
You may be able to deduct the ordinary and2. You received full reimbursement for yourForm (and Instructions)necessary business-related expenses you haveexpenses. ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemizedfor:
3. Your employer required you to return any Deductions
excess reimbursement and you did so.• Travel, ❏ Schedule C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss
4. There is no amount shown with a code “L”• Entertainment, From Business
in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and
• Gifts, or ❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040)Net ProfitTax Statement.
From Business• Transportation. If you meet these four conditions, there is no
❏ Schedule F (Form 1040)Profit or Lossneed to show the expenses or the reimburse-An ordinary expense is one that is common and
From Farmingments on your return. If you would like moreaccepted in your field of trade, business, or
information on reimbursements and accountingprofession. A necessary expense is one that is ❏ 2106 Employee Business Expensesto your employer, see chapter 6.helpful and appropriate for your business. An
❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employeeexpense does not have to be required to be If you meet these conditions and your Business Expensesconsidered necessary. employer included reimbursements on
your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-❏ 4562 Depreciation and AmortizationThis publication explains:
TIP
ployer for a corrected Form W-2. See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help, for
• What expenses are deductible, information about getting these publications andVolunteers. If you perform services as a
forms.• How to report them on your return, volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may
Page 2 Chapter 

Page 3 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
traveling away from home. You cannot deduct  If you do not have a regular place of busi-
your expenses for meals and lodging. You can- ness or post of duty and there is no place where
not deduct these expenses even if you have to you regularly live, you are considered a transient
1. maintain a home in the United States for your (an itinerant) and your tax home is wherever you
family members who are not allowed to accom- work. As a transient, you cannot claim a travel
pany you overseas. If you are transferred from expense deduction because you are never con-
one permanent duty station to another, you may sidered to be traveling away from home.
Travel have deductible moving expenses, which are
Main place of business or work.If you haveexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
If you temporarily travel away from your tax more than one place of work, consider the fol-A naval officer assigned to permanent duty
home, you can use this chapter to determine if lowing when determining which one is your mainaboard a ship that has regular eating and living
you have deductible travel expenses. place of business or work. facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel
This chapter discusses: expense purposes. 1. The total time you ordinarily spend in each
• Traveling away from home, place.
Travel to Family Home• Temporary assignment, and 2. The level of your business activity in each
place.If you (and your family) do not live at your tax• What travel expenses are deductible.
home (defined later), you cannot deduct the cost3. Whether your income from each place isIt also discusses the standard meal allowance,of traveling between your tax home and your significant or insignificant.rules for travel inside and outside the Unitedfamily home. You also cannot deduct the cost of
States, luxury water travel, and deductible con-meals and lodging while at your tax home. See
vention expenses. Example. You live in Cincinnati where youExample 1 that follows.
have a seasonal job for 8 months each year andIf you are working temporarily in the sameTravel expenses defined.For tax purposes, earn $25,000. You work the other 4 months incity where you and your family live, you may betravel expenses are the ordinary and necessary Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $9,000.considered as traveling away from home. Seeexpenses of traveling away from home for your Cincinnati is your main place of work becauseExample 2, below.business, profession, or job. you spend most of your time there and earn
An ordinary expense is one that is common most of your income there.Example 1. You are a truck driver and youand accepted in your field of trade, business, orand your family live in Tucson. You are em-profession. A necessary expense is one that is No main place of business or work. Youployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal inhelpful and appropriate for your business. An may have a tax home even if you do not have aPhoenix. At the end of your long runs, you returnexpense does not have to be required to be regular or main place of work. Your tax hometo your home terminal in Phoenix and spend oneconsidered necessary. may be the home where you regularly live.night there before returning home. You cannot
You will find examples of deductible traveldeduct any expenses you have for meals and Factors used to determine tax home.Ifexpenses in Table 1-1, later. lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling fromyou do not have a regular or main place of
Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix isbusiness or work, use the following three factors
your tax home. to determine where your tax home is. 
Traveling Away From 1. You perform part of your business in theExample 2. Your family home is in Pitts-
area of your main home and use thatburgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The
Home home for lodging while doing business inrest of the year you work for the same employer
the area.in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants
You are traveling away from home if: and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the2. You have living expenses at your mainsame whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-home that you duplicate because your1. Your duties require you to be away frommore. business requires you to be away from thatthe general area of your tax home (definedBecause you spend most of your working home.later) substantially longer than an ordinarytime and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,day’s work, and 3. You have not abandoned the area in whichthat city is your tax home. You cannot deduct
both your historical place of lodging and2. You need to sleep or rest to meet the de- any expenses you have for meals and lodging
your claimed main home are located; youmands of your work while away from there. However, when you return to work in
have a member or members of your familyhome. Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax home
living at your main home; or you often useeven though you stay at your family home. YouThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merely that home for lodging.can deduct the cost of your round trip betweennapping in your car. You do not have to be awayBaltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deductIf you satisfy all three factors, your tax homefrom your tax home for a whole day or from duskyour part of your family’s living expenses foris the home where you regularly live. If youto dawn as long as your relief from duty is longmeals and lodging while you are living and work-satisfy only two factors, you may have a taxenough to get necessary sleep or rest. ing in Pittsburgh. home depending on all the facts and circum-
stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are aExample 1. You are a railroad conductor.
Tax Home transient; your tax home is wherever you workYou leave your home terminal on a regularly
and you cannot deduct travel expenses.scheduled round-trip run between two cities andTo determine whether you are traveling awayreturn home 16 hours later. During the run, youfrom home, you must first determine the locationExample 1. You are single and live in Bos-have 6 hours off at your turnaround point whereof your tax home. ton in an apartment you rent. You have workedyou eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get
Generally, your tax home is your regularfor your employer in Boston for a number ofnecessary sleep before starting the return trip.
place of business or post of duty, regardless ofyears. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-monthYou are considered to be away from home.
where you maintain your family home. It in-executive training program. You do not expect to
cludes the entire city or general area in whichreturn to work in Boston after you complete yourExample 2. You are a truck driver. You
your business or work is located. training.leave your terminal and return to it later the
If you have more than one regular place ofDuring your training, you do not do any worksame day. You get an hour off at your turn-
business, your tax home is your main place ofin Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andaround point to eat. Because you are not off to
business. See Main place of business or work,on-the-job training throughout the United States.get necessary sleep and the brief time off is not
later. You keep your apartment in Boston and return toan adequate rest period, you are not traveling
If you do not have a regular or a main place it frequently. You use your apartment to conductaway from home.
of business because of the nature of your work, your personal business. You also keep up your
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a then your tax home may be the place where you community contacts in Boston. When you com-
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- regularly live. See No main place of business orplete your training, you are transferred to Los
nent duty assignment overseas, you are notwork, later. Angeles.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You do not satisfy factor (1) because you did You can deduct your otherwise allowable travel ing that you will keep the job if your work is
not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be- expenses throughout the period of certification. satisfactory during a probationary period, the job
cause you had duplicate living expenses. You is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourDetermining temporary or indefinite.Youalso satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban- expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-must determine whether your assignment isdon your apartment in Boston as your main bationary period.temporary or indefinite when you start work. Ifhome, you kept your community contacts, andyou expect an assignment or job to last for oneyou frequently returned to live in your apartment.year or less, it is temporary unless there areYou have a tax home in Boston. facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.What Travel ExpensesAn assignment or job that is initially temporaryExample 2. You are an outside salespersonmay become indefinite due to changed circum-with a sales territory covering several states. Are Deductible?stances. A series of assignments to the sameYour employer’s main office is in Newark, butlocation, all for short periods but that togetheryou do not conduct any business there. Your Once you have determined that you are travel-cover a long period, may be considered an in-work assignments are temporary, and you have ing away from your tax home, you can determinedefinite assignment.no way of knowing where your future assign- what travel expenses are deductible.The following examples illustrate whether anments will be located. You have a room in your You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-assignment or job is temporary or indefinite.married sister’s house in Dayton. You stay there penses you have when you travel away from
for one or two weekends a year, but you do no home on business. The type of expense you canExample 1. You are a construction worker.work in the area. You do not pay your sister for deduct depends on the facts and your circum-You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. Youthe use of the room. stances.are a member of a trade union in Los AngelesYou do not satisfy any of the three factors Table 1-1 summarizes travel expenses youthat helps you get work in the Los Angeles area.listed earlier. You are a transient and have no may be able to deduct. You may have otherBecause of a shortage of work, you took a job ontax home. deductible travel expenses that are not covereda construction project in Fresno. Your job wasthere, depending on the facts and your circum-scheduled to end in 8 months. The job actuallystances.lasted 10 months.
When you travel away from home onYou realistically expected the job in FresnoTemporary business, you should keep records ofto last 8 months. The job actually did last less
all the expenses you have and anythan 1 year. The job is temporary and your taxRECORDS
Assignment or Job advances you receive from your employer. Youhome is still in Los Angeles.
can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherYou may regularly work at your tax home andExample 2. The facts are the same as inwritten record to keep track of your expenses.also work at another location. It may not beExample 1, except that you realistically ex-The types of expenses you need to record,practical to return to your tax home from thispected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. Thealong with supporting documentation, are de-other location at the end of each work day.job actually was completed in 10 months. scribed in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).
Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign-Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you
Separating costs.If you have one expensement. If your assignment or job away fromrealistically expected the work to last longer than
that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,your main place of work is temporary, your tax1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1
and other services (such as lodging or transpor-home does not change. You are considered toyear. You cannot deduct any travel expenses
tation), you must allocate that expense betweenbe away from home for the whole period you areyou had in Fresno because Fresno became your
the cost of meals and entertainment and the costaway from your main place of work. You cantax home.
of other services. You must have a reasonablededuct your travel expenses if they otherwise
basis for making this allocation. For example,qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporaryExample 3. The facts are the same as in
you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-assignment in a single location is one that isExample 1, except that you realistically ex-
cludes one or more meals in its room charge.realistically expected to last (and does in factpected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. After
last) for one year or less. 8 months, however, you were asked to remainTravel expenses for another individual.If aHowever, if your assignment or job is indefi-for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withnite, the location of the assignment or job be-months). you (or your employee) on a business trip or to acomes your new tax home and you cannot Initially, you realistically expected the job inbusiness convention, you generally cannot de-deduct your travel expenses while there. AnFresno to last for only 9 months. However, dueduct his or her travel expenses.assignment or job in a single location is consid-to changed circumstances occurring after 8
Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to lastmonths, it was no longer realistic for you to
penses of someone who goes with you if thatfor more than one year, whether or not it actuallyexpect that the job in Fresno would last for one
person:lasts for more than one year. year or less. You can only deduct your travel
If your assignment is indefinite, you mustexpenses for the first 8 months. You cannot1. Is your employee,include in your income any amounts you receivededuct any travel expenses you had after that
from your employer for living expenses, even iftime because Fresno became your tax home 2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the
they are called travel allowances and you ac-when the job became indefinite. travel, and
count to your employer for them. You may beGoing home on days off. If you go back to 3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct theable to deduct the cost of relocating to your newyour tax home from a temporary assignment ontravel expenses.tax home as a moving expense. See Publicationyour days off, you are not considered away from521 for more information. home while you are in your hometown. You Business associate.If a business associ-
Exception for federal crime investigations orcannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-ate travels with you and meets the conditions in
prosecutions. If you are a federal employeeing there. However, you can deduct your travel(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel
participating in a federal crime investigation orexpenses, including meals and lodging, whileexpenses you have for that person. A business
prosecution, you are not subject to the one-yeartraveling between your temporary place of workassociate is someone with whom you could rea-
rule. This means you may be able to deductand your tax home. You can claim these ex-sonably expect to actively conduct business. A
travel expenses even if you are away from yourpenses up to the amount it would have cost youbusiness associate can be a current or prospec-
tax home for more than one year. to stay at your temporary place of work. tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier,
For you to qualify, the Attorney General mustIf you keep your hotel room during your visitemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi-
certify that you are traveling: home, you can deduct the cost of your hotelsor.
room. In addition, you can deduct your ex- Bona fide business purpose.A bona fide1. For the federal government, penses of returning home up to the amount youbusiness purpose exists if you can prove a realwould have spent for meals had you stayed at2. In a temporary duty status, and business purpose for the individual’s presence.your temporary place of work.3. To investigate or prosecute, or provide Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-
support services for the investigation orProbationary work period.If you take a jobsisting in entertaining customers, are not
prosecution of, a federal crime. that requires you to move, with the understand- enough to make the expenses deductible.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Actual CostTable 1-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
You can use the actual cost of your meals toThis chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from homefigure the amount of your expense before reim-for business purposes. bursement and application of the 50% deduction
limit. If you use this method, you must keepIF you have records of your actual cost.expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of...
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
Standard Meal Allowancebusiness destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are
riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your
Generally, you can use the “standard meal al-cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise
lowance” method as an alternative to the actualShips (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits.
cost method. It allows you to use a set amount
taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take youfor your daily meals and incidental expenses
bus, and airport between: (M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-
limousine 1) The airport or station and your hotel, and tual costs. The set amount varies depending on
2) The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, yourwhere and when you travel. In this publication,
business meeting place, or your temporary work location. “standard meal allowance” refers to the federal
rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount ofbaggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your regularstandard meal allowance. If you use the stan-shipping and temporary work locations. dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-
ords to prove the time, place, and businesscar operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on
purpose of your travel. See the recordkeepingbusiness. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a carrules for travel in chapter 5.
while away from home on business, you can deduct only the
business-use portion of the expenses. Incidental expenses.The term “incidental ex-
penses” means:lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform your• Fees and tips given to porters, baggage
duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, andcarriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewards
related tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits. or stewardesses and others on ships, and
hotel servants in foreign countries,cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
• Transportation between places of lodgingtelephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes businessor business and places where meals arecommunication by fax machine or other communication devices. taken, if suitable meals cannot be ob-
tained at the temporary duty site, andtips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
• Mailing costs associated with filing travelother other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your vouchers and payment of employer-spon-business travel. These expenses might include transportation to orsored charge card billings.from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, computer rental
fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer. Incidental expenses do not include expenses for
laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-
ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-Lavish or extravagant.You cannot deduct calls.
expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is
Incidental expenses only method.You cangant. An expense is not considered lavish ornot Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally types
use an optional method (instead of actual cost)extravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsnotes, performs similar services, and accompa-
for deducting incidental expenses only. Theand circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- amount of the deduction is $3 a day for inciden-lowed merely because they are more than aformance of these services does not establish tal expenses paid or incurred for travel awayfixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-that her presence on the trip is necessary to the from home in 2004. You can use this methodtaurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.conduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses are only if you did not pay or incur any meal ex-50% limit on meals. You can figure yournot deductible. penses. You cannot use this method on any daymeals expense using either of the following twoJerry pays $115 a day for a double room. A that you use the standard meal allowance. Thismethods. method is subject to the proration rules for par-single room costs $90 a day. He can deduct the
tial days. See Travel for days you depart andtotal cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,1. Actual cost.
return, later in this chapter.but only $90 a day for his hotel room. If he uses2. The standard meal allowance.public transportation, he can deduct only his Federal employees should refer to the
Both of these methods are explained below. But,fare. Federal Travel Regulations at
regardless of the method you use, you generally www.gsa.gov, click on “Travel,” then
CAUTION
!
can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed coston “Federal Travel Regulation (FTR) Overview”Meals of your meals. for changes affecting their claims for reimburse-
If you are reimbursed for the cost of yourYou can deduct the cost of meals in either of the ment of these expenses.
meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends onfollowing two situations.
whether your employer’s reimbursement plan
50% limit may apply.If you use the standardwas accountable or nonaccountable. If you are1. It is necessary for you to stop for substan- meal allowance method for meal expenses andnot reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whethertial sleep or rest to properly perform your you are not reimbursed or you are reimbursedthe unreimbursed meal expense is for businessduties while traveling away from home on under a nonaccountable plan, you can generallytravel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-business. deduct only 50% of the standard meal allow-cusses the 50% limit in more detail, and chapter
ance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta-2. The meal is business-related entertain-6 discusses accountable and nonaccountable
ble plan and you are deducting amounts that areplans.ment. more than your reimbursements, you can de-
Business-related entertainment is discussed in duct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50%
chapter 2. The following discussion deals only limit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and
with meals that are not business-related enter- accountable and nonaccountable plans are dis-
tainment. cussed in chapter 6.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
There is no optional standard lodging You can also order it by calling theTrip Primarily for Business
amount similar to the standard meal Government Printing Office at
You can deduct all of your travel expenses ifallowance. Your allowable lodging ex- 1-202-512-1800 (not a toll-free num-CAUTION
!
your trip was entirely business related. If yourpense deduction is your actual cost. ber).
trip was primarily for business and, while at your
Special rate for transportation workers.business destination, you extended your stay forWho can use the standard meal allowance. You can use a special standard meal allowancea vacation, made a personal side trip, or hadYou can use the standard meal allowance if you work in the transportation industry. Youother personal activities, you can deduct yourwhether you are an employee or self-employed,are in the transportation industry if your work:business-related travel expenses. These ex-and whether or not you are reimbursed for your penses include the travel costs of getting to andtraveling expenses. 1. Directly involves moving people or goodsfrom your business destination and anyby airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, orbusiness-related expenses at your businesstruck, andUse of the standard meal allowance for other destination.travel.You can use the standard meal allow-2. Regularly requires you to travel away fromance to figure your meal expenses when you Example. You work in Atlanta and take ahome and, during any single trip, usuallytravel in connection with investment and other business trip to New Orleans. On your wayinvolves travel to areas eligible for differentincome-producing property. You can also use it home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.standard meal allowance rates.to figure your meal expenses when you travel for You spend $1,070 for the 9 days you are awayIf this applies to you, you can claim a standardqualifying educational purposes. You cannot from home for travel, meals, lodging, and othermeal allowance of $41 a day ($46 for traveluse the standard meal allowance to figure the travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-outside the continental United States) for 2004.cost of your meals when you travel for medical bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, andUsing the special rate for transportationor charitable purposes. your total cost would have been $920. You canworkers eliminates the need for you to deter-deduct $920 for your trip, including the cost ofmine the standard meal allowance for everyAmount of standard meal allowance. The round-trip transportation to and from New Orle-area where you stop for sleep or rest. If youstandard meal allowance is the federal M&IE ans. The deduction for your meals is subject tochoose to use the special rate for any trip, yourate. For travel in 2004, the rate for most small the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.must use the special rate (and not use the regu-localities in the United States is $31 a day for alllar standard meal allowance rates) for all tripsof 2004. you take that year. Trip Primarily forMost major cities and many other localities in
Personal ReasonsTravel for days you depart and return.Forthe United States are designated as high-cost
both the day you depart for and the day youareas, qualifying for higher standard meal al- If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,return from a business trip, you must prorate thelowances. These rates are listed in Publication such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is astandard meal allowance (figure a reduced1542, which is available on the Internet at nondeductible personal expense. However, youamount for each day). You can do so by one ofwww.irs.gov. can deduct any expenses you have while at yourtwo methods.You can also find this information on destination that are directly related to your busi-
• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan-the Internet at www.gsa.gov. Click on ness.
dard meal allowance.“Per Diem Rates,” then click on “Visit A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be a
Now,” then on “2004 Domestic Per Diem Rates” vacation even if the promoter advertises that it is• Method 2: You can prorate using anyfor the period January 1, 2004 - September 30, primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-method that you consistently apply and2004, and on “2005 Domestic Per Diem Rates” dental business activities during a trip, such asthat is in accordance with reasonable busi-for the period October 1, 2004 - December 31, viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingness practice.
2004. However, you can apply the rates in effect with general subjects, will not change what is
before October 1, 2004, for expenses of all really a vacation into a business trip.Example. Jen is employed in New Orleanstravel within the United States for 2004 insteadas a convention planner. In March, her employerof the updated rates. You must consistently usesent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, toeither the rates for the first 9 months of 2004 or Part of Trip Outsideattend a planning seminar. She left her home inthe updated rates for the period of October 1, the United StatesNew Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and2004, through December 31, 2004. arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. AfterIf part of your trip is outside the United States,If you travel to more than one location in onespending two nights there, she flew back to Newuse the rules described later in this chapterday, use the rate in effect for the area where youOrleans on Friday and arrived back home atunder Travel Outside the United States for thatstop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amountpart of the trip. For the part of your trip that istation industry, however, see Special rate forto cover her expenses and included it with herinside the United States, use the rules for traveltransportation workers, later. wages. in the United States. Travel outside the United
Under Method 1, Jen can claim 21/2 days ofStandard meal allowance for areas outside States does not include travel from one point in
the standard meal allowance for Washington,the continental United States.The standard the United States to another point in the United
DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andmeal allowance rates do not apply to travel in States. The following discussion can help you
Friday (the days she departed and returned),determine whether your trip was entirely withinAlaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outside
and the full daily rate for Thursday. the United States.the continental United States. The federal per
Under Method 2, Jen could also use anydiem rates for these locations are published
method that she applies consistently and that isPublic transportation.If you travel by publicmonthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al-
in accordance with reasonable business prac-transportation, any place in the United Stateslowances for Foreign Areas.
tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of thewhere that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is aYou can access foreign per diem ratesstandard meal allowance even though a federalpoint in the United States. Once the vehicleat www.state.gov/m/a/als/prdm. employee would have to use Method 1 and be leaves the last scheduled stop in the United
limited to only 21/2 days. States on its way to a point outside the United
States, you apply the rules under Travel Outside
the United States.Travel in the United StatesYour employer may have these rates
available, or you can purchase the Example. You fly from New York to PuertoThe following discussion applies to travel in the
publication from the:
Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You returnUnited States. For this purpose, the United
to New York nonstop. The flight from New YorkStates includes the 50 states and the District of
to Miami is in the United States, so only the flightColumbia. The treatment of your travel ex-
Superintendent of Documents from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the Unitedpenses depends on how much of your trip was
U.S. Government Printing Office States. Because there are no scheduled stopsbusiness related and on how much of your trip
P.O. Box 371954 between Puerto Rico and New York, all of theoccurred within the United States. See Part of
Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954 return trip is outside the United States.Trip Outside the United States, later.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Private car.Travel by private car in the UnitedExample. You traveled to Brussels primarily must allocate your travel time on a day-to-day
States is travel between points in the United for business. You left Denver on Tuesday andbasis between business days and nonbusiness
States, even though you are on your way to a flew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew fromdays. The days you depart from and return to the
destination outside the United States. New York to Brussels, arriving the next morning.United States are both counted as days outside
On Thursday and Friday, you had business dis-the United States.
Example. You travel by car from Denver tocussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, youTo figure the deductible amount of your
Mexico City and return. Your travel from Denverwere sightseeing. You flew back to New York,round-trip travel expenses, use the following
to the border and from the border back to Den-arriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday,fraction. The numerator (top number) is the total
ver is travel in the United States, and the rules inyou flew back to Denver. number of business days outside the United
this section apply. The rules under Travel Although you were away from your home inStates. The denominator (bottom number) is theOutside the United States apply to your trip fromDenver for more than a week, you were nottotal number of travel days outside the Unitedthe border to Mexico City and back to the border.outside the United States for more than a week.States.
This is because the day you depart does not
count as a day outside the United States.Travel Outside Counting business days. Your businessYou can deduct your cost of the round-tripdays include transportation days, days yourthe United States flight between Denver and Brussels. You canpresence was required, days you spent on busi-also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels forIf any part of your business travel is outside the ness, and certain weekends and holidays.Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi-United States, some of your deductions for the Transportation day.Count as a businessness. However, you cannot deduct the cost ofcost of getting to and from your destination may day any day you spend traveling to or from ayour stay in Brussels from Saturday throughbe limited. For this purpose, the United States business destination. However, if because of aTuesday because those days were spent onincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum- nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a directnonbusiness activities.bia. route, your business days are the days it wouldHow much of your travel expenses you canException 3 - Less than 25% of time on take you to travel a reasonably direct route todeduct depends in part upon how much of yourpersonal activities.Your trip is consideredyour business destination. Extra days for sidetrip outside the United States was business re-entirely for business if: trips or nonbusiness activities cannot belated. counted as business days.1. You were outside the United States for
more than a week, and Presence required. Count as a business
Travel Entirely for Business or day any day your presence is required at a2. You spent less than 25% of the total timeConsidered Entirely for Business particular place for a specific business purpose.you were outside the United States on
Count it as a business day even if you spendnonbusiness activities.You can deduct all your travel expenses of get- most of the day on nonbusiness activities.ting to and from your business destination if yourFor this purpose, count both the day your trip
Day spent on business. If your principaltrip is entirely for business or considered entirelybegan and the day it ended.
activity during working hours is pursuit of yourfor business.
trade or business, count the day as a businessExample. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo,Travel entirely for business.If you travel day. Also, count as a business day any day youwhere you spent 14 days on business and 5outside the United States and you spend the are prevented from working because of circum-days on personal matters. You then flew back toentire time on business activities, you can de- stances beyond your control.Seattle. You spent one day flying in each direc-duct all of your travel expenses. tion. Certain weekends and holidays. Count
Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of yourweekends, holidays, and other necessaryTravel considered entirely for business. total time abroad was for nonbusiness activities,standby days as business days if they fall be-Even if you did not spend your entire time onyou can deduct as travel expenses what it wouldtween business days. But if they follow yourbusiness activities, your trip is considered en-have cost you to make the trip if you had notbusiness meetings or activity and you remain attirely for business if you meet at least one of theengaged in any nonbusiness activity. The your business destination for nonbusiness orfollowing four exceptions. amount you can deduct is the cost of the personal reasons, do not count them as busi-Exception 1 - No substantial control. round-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-ness days.Your trip is considered entirely for business ifject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other related
you did not have substantial control over arrang-expenses. Example 1. Your tax home is New Yorking the trip. The fact that you control the timing of City. You travel to Quebec, where you have aException 4 - Vacation not a major consid-your trip does not, by itself, mean that you have business appointment on Friday. You have an-eration. Your trip is considered entirely forsubstantial control over arranging your trip. other appointment on the following Monday. Be-business if you can establish that a personalYou do not have substantial control over cause your presence was required on bothvacation was not a major consideration, even ifyour trip if you: Friday and Monday, they are business days.you have substantial control over arranging the
Because the weekend is between businesstrip.1. Are an employee who was reimbursed or days, Saturday and Sunday are counted aspaid a travel expense allowance, business days. This is true even though you use
2. Are not related to your employer, and the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, orTravel Primarily for Business
other nonbusiness activity.3. Are not a managing executive. If you travel outside the United States primarily
“Related to your employer” is defined later infor business but spend some of your time onExample 2. If, in Example 1, you had no
chapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances.other activities, you generally cannot deduct allbusiness in Quebec after Friday, but stayed until
A “managing executive” is an employee whoof your travel expenses. You can only deduct theMonday before starting home, Saturday and
has the authority and responsibility, without be-business portion of your cost of getting to andSunday would be nonbusiness days.
ing subject to the veto of another, to decide onfrom your destination. You must allocate the
the need for the business travel. costs between your business and other activitiesNonbusiness activity on the way to or from
A self-employed person generally has sub-to determine your deductible amount. See your business destination.If you stopped
stantial control over arranging business trips.Travel allocation rules, later. for a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei-
ther on the way from the United States to yourException 2 - Outside United States no You do not have to allocate your travelbusiness destination, or on the way back to themore than a week. Your trip is considered expenses if you meet one of the fourUnited States from your business destination,entirely for business if you were outside the exceptions listed earlier under Travel
TIP
you must allocate part of your travel expenses toUnited States for a week or less, combiningconsidered entirely for business. In those cases,the nonbusiness activity.business and nonbusiness activities. One weekyou can deduct the total cost of getting to and
The part you must allocate is the amount itmeans seven consecutive days. In counting thefrom your destination.
would have cost you to travel between the pointdays, do not count the day you leave the United
where travel outside the United States beginsStates, but do count the day you return to theTravel allocation rules.If your trip outside the
and your nonbusiness destination and a returnUnited States. United States was primarily for business, you
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to the point where travel outside the United None of your travel expenses for nonbusi- You can participate in this program since you
States ends. ness activities at, near, or beyond your business are a member of the alumni association. You
You determine the nonbusiness portion of destination are deductible. and your family take one of the trips. You spend
that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.
Example. Assume that the dates are thenumerator of the fraction is the number of non- The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-
same as in the previous example but that in-business days during your travel outside the ing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1
stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you flyUnited States and the denominator is the total week.to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.number of days you spend outside the United Your travel expenses for the trip are notYou cannot deduct any part of the cost ofStates. deductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-your trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris.tion. However, registration fees and any otherExample. You live in New York. On May 4 In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfareincidental expenses you have for the fiveyou flew to Paris to attend a business confer- and other expenses from New York to Paris andplanned sessions you attended that are directlyence that began on May 5. The conference back to New York. related and beneficial to your business are de-ended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew You can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip plane
ductible business expenses. These expensesto Dublin where you visited with friends until the fare and other travel expenses from New York to
should be specifically stated in your records toafternoon of May 21, when you flew directly Paris, plus your meals (subject to the 50% limit),
ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-home to New York. The primary purpose for the lodging, and any other business expenses you
ness expenses.trip was to attend the conference. had in Paris. (Assume these expenses total
If you had not stopped in Dublin, you would $900). If the round-trip plane fare and other
have arrived home the evening of May 14. You travel-related expenses (such as food during theLuxury Water Travel
did not meet any of the exceptions that would trip) are $800 from New York to Paris, you can
If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or otherallow you to consider your travel entirely for deduct travel costs of $489 (11/18 × $800), plus
form of luxury water transportation for businessbusiness. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are the full $900 for the expenses you had in Paris.
business days and May 15 through May 21 (7 purposes, there is a daily limit on the amountOther methods. You can use another methoddays) are nonbusiness days. you can deduct. The limit is twice the highestof counting business days if you establish that itYou can deduct the cost of your meals (sub- federal per diem rate allowable at the time ofmore clearly reflects the time spent on otherject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem isthan business activities outside the Unitedbusiness-related travel expenses while in Paris. the amount paid to federal government employ-States.You cannot deduct your expenses while in ees for daily living expenses when they travel
Dublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it away from home, but in the United States, for
would have cost you to travel round-trip between business purposes.)Travel Primarily for PersonalNew York and Dublin.
ReasonsYou paid $450 to fly from New York to Paris, Daily limit on luxury water travel.The high-$200 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $500 to fly est federal per diem rate allowed and the dailyIf you travel outside the United States primarilyfrom Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfare limit for luxury water travel in 2004 is shown infor vacation or for investment purposes, the en-from New York to Dublin would have been $850.tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personalthe following table.You figure the deductible part of your airexpense. If you spend some time attending brieftravel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of the Highest Daily Limitprofessional seminars or a continuing educationround-trip fare and other expenses you would 2004 Federal on Luxuryprogram, you can deduct your registration feeshave had in traveling directly between New York Dates Per Diem Water Traveland other expenses you have that are directlyand Dublin ($850 × 7/18 = $331) from your total Jan. 1 – Dec. 31 $259 $518related to your business.expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to
Dublin and back to New York ($450 + $200 + Example. The university from which you Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveled$500 = $1,150). graduated has a continuing education programby ocean liner from New York to London, Eng-Your deductible air travel expense is $819for members of its alumni association. This pro-land, on business in May. Her expense for the($1,150 − $331). gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-6-day cruise was $3,500. Caroline’s deductionNonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond tries where academic exercises and for the cruise cannot exceed $3,108 (6 days ×business destination.If you had a vacation conferences are set up to acquaint individuals in$518 daily limit).or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond most occupations with selected facilities in sev-
your business destination, you must allocate eral regions of the world. However, none of theMeals and entertainment.If your expensespart of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness conferences are directed toward specific occu-for luxury water travel include separately statedactivity. pations or professions. It is up to each partici- amounts for meals or entertainment, thoseThe part you must allocate is the amount it pant to seek out specialists and organizational
amounts are subject to the 50% limit on mealswould have cost you to travel between the point settings appropriate to his or her occupational
and entertainment before you apply the dailywhere travel outside the United States begins interests.
limit. For a discussion of the 50% limit, seeand your business destination and a return to Three-hour sessions are held each day over
chapter 2.the point where travel outside the United States a 5-day period at each of the selected overseas
ends. facilities where participants can meet with indi-
Example. In the previous example,You determine the nonbusiness portion of vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-
Caroline’s luxury water travel had a total cost ofthat expense by multiplying it by a fraction. Theposed of a variety of activities including
$3,500. Of that amount, $1,600 was separatelynumerator of the fraction is the number of non- workshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-
stated as meals and entertainment. Caroline,business days during your travel outside the velopment, and exercises. Professional confer-
who is self-employed, is not reimbursed for anyUnited States and the denominator is the totalence directors schedule and conduct the
of her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de-number of days you spend outside the United sessions. Participants can choose those ses-
ductible travel expenses as follows.States. sions they wish to attend.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Meals and entertainment...... $1,600 North American area. The North American tion or group sponsoring the meeting that
50% limit................ × .50 area includes the following locations. includes:
Allowable meals & entertainment $  800
Other travel expenses....... +  1,900 a. A schedule of the business activities ofAmerican Samoa Johnston Island
Allowable cost before the daily limit.... $2,700 Antigua and Barbuda1 Kingman Reef each day of the meeting, and
Baker Island Marshall IslandsDaily limit for May 2004...... $5 1 8 b. The number of hours you attended theBarbados MexicoTimes number of days....... × 6 scheduled business activities.Bermuda MicronesiaMaximum luxury water travel deduction $3,108
Canada Midway IslandsAmount of allowable deduction..... $2,700 Costa Rica Northern Mariana
Dominica IslandsCaroline’s deduction for her cruise is limited toDominican Republic Palau
$2,700, even though the limit on luxury waterGrenada Palmyra
Guam Puerto Ricotravel is higher.
Guyana Saint LuciaNot separately stated.If your meal or en-Honduras Trinidad and Tobago 2.tertainment charges are not separately stated orHowland Island USA
Jamaica U.S. Virgin Islandsare not clearly identifiable, you do not have to
Jarvis Island Wake Islandallocate any portion of the total charge to meals
or entertainment. Entertainment1Antigua and Barbuda are included in this list only for
expenses incurred in attending conventions that began
after February 9, 2003.
You may be able to deduct business-relatedExceptions The North American area also includes U.S.entertainment expenses you have for entertain-
islands, cays, and reefs that are possessions ofThe daily limit on luxury water travel (discussed ing a client, customer, or employee. The rules
the United States and not part of the fifty statesand definitions are summarized in Table 2-1.earlier) does not apply to expenses you have to
or the District of Columbia. You can deduct entertainment expensesattend a convention, seminar, or meeting on
only if they are both ordinary and necessary andboard a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships under
Reasonableness test. The following factorsmeet one of the following two tests.Conventions Held Outside the North Americanare taken into account to determine if it wasArea. 1. Directly-related test.reasonable to hold the meeting outside the
North American area. 2. Associated test.Conventions
1. The purpose of the meeting and the activi-Both of these tests are explained later underYou can deduct your travel expenses when youties taking place at the meeting. What Entertainment Expenses Are Deductible.attend a convention if you can show that your An ordinary expense is one that is common2. The purposes and activities of the spon-attendance benefits your trade or business. You and accepted in your field of trade, business, orsoring organizations or groups.cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam- profession. A necessary expense is one that isily. 3. The homes of the active members of thehelpful and appropriate for your business. An
sponsoring organizations and the places atIf the convention is for investment, political, expense does not have to be required to be
which other meetings of the sponsoring or-social, or other purposes unrelated to your trade considered necessary.
ganizations or groups have been or will beor business, you cannot deduct the expenses. The amount you can deduct for enter-held. tainment expenses may be limited.Your appointment or election as a dele-
4. Other relevant factors you may present. Generally, you can deduct only 50% ofgate does not, in itself, determine CAUTION
!
your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.whether you can deduct travel ex-CAUTION
!
This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.penses. You can deduct your travel expenses
only if your attendance is connected to your ownCruise Ships
trade or business. Club dues and membership fees. You can-
You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of yournot deduct dues (including initiation fees) for
expenses of attending conventions, seminars,membership in any club organized for:
Convention agenda. The convention agenda or similar meetings held on cruise ships. All
1. Business,or program generally shows the purpose of theships that sail are considered cruise ships.
convention. You can show your attendance atYou can deduct these expenses only if all2. Pleasure,the convention benefits your trade or businessfive of the following requirements are met.3. Recreation, orby comparing the agenda with the official duties
and responsibilities of your position. The agenda1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di-4. Other social purpose.
does not have to deal specifically with your offi-rectly related to your trade or business.
This rule applies to any membership organiza-cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered intion if one of its principal purposes is either:if the agenda is so related to your position that itthe United States.shows your attendance was for business pur- 1. To conduct entertainment activities for3. All of the cruise ship’s ports of call are inposes. members or their guests, orthe United States or in possessions of the
United States. 2. To provide members or their guests with
access to entertainment facilities, dis-Conventions Held Outside 4. You attach to your return a written state-cussed later.the North American Area ment signed by you that includes informa-
tion about: The purposes and activities of a club, not itsYou cannot deduct expenses for attending a name, will determine whether or not you canconvention, seminar, or similar meeting helda. The total days of the trip (not includingdeduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paidoutside the North American area unless: the days of transportation to and fromto:
the cruise ship port),
1. The meeting is directly related to your 1. Country clubs,b. The number of hours each day that youtrade or business, and devoted to scheduled business activi-2. Golf and athletic clubs,
2. It is as reasonable to hold the meeting ties, and 3. Airline clubs,outside the North American area as in it.c. A program of the scheduled business4. Hotel clubs, andIf the meeting meets these requirements, you activities of the meeting.
also must satisfy the rules for deducting ex- 5. Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
penses for business trips in general, discussed5. You attach to your return a written state- cumstances generally considered to be
earlier under Travel Outside the United States. ment signed by an officer of the organiza- conducive to business discussions.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Entertainment facilities.Generally, you can- You cannot claim the cost of your mealexample, you cannot deduct service fees you
not deduct any expense for the use of an enter- both as an entertainment expense andpay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
tainment facility. This includes expenses for as a travel expense. over the face value of the tickets you pay toCAUTION
!
depreciation and operating costs such as rent, scalpers.
utilities, maintenance, and protection. Meals sold in the normal course of yourException for events that benefit charita-business are not considered entertain-An entertainment facility is any property you ble organizations.Different rules apply whenment.own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples
TIP
the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits ainclude a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, charitable organization. You can take into ac-Deduction may depend on your type ofswimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itbusiness. Your kind of business may deter-airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a is more than the face value, if all of the followingmine if a particular activity is considered enter-vacation resort. conditions apply. tainment. For example, if you are a dressOut-of-pocket expenses.You can deduct designer and have a fashion show to introduce1. The event’s main purpose is to benefit aout-of-pocket expenses, such as for food andyour new designs to store buyers, the show qualified charitable organization.beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, thatgenerally is not considered entertainment. Thisyou provided during entertainment at a facility. 2. The entire net proceeds go to the charity.is because fashion shows are typical in yourThese are not expenses for the use of an enter-business. But, if you are an appliance distributor3. The event uses volunteers to perform sub-tainment facility. However, these expenses areand hold a fashion show for the spouses of yourstantially all the event’s work.subject to the directly-related and associatedretailers, the show generally is considered en-tests and to the 50% limit, all discussed later.tertainment. The 50% limit on entertainment does
not apply to any expense for a packageGift or entertainment.Any item that might beSeparating costs.If you have one expense
deal that includes a ticket to such aconsidered either a gift or entertainment gener-
TIP
that includes the costs of entertainment, and
charitable sports event.ally will be considered entertainment. However,other services (such as lodging or transporta-
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-tion), you must allocate that expense between
ages that you intend the customer to use at a Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golfthe cost of entertainment and the cost of other
later date, treat it as a gift. tournament organized by the local volunteer fireservices. You must have a reasonable basis for
company. All net proceeds will be used to buyIf you give a customer tickets to a theatermaking this allocation. For example, you must
new fire equipment. The volunteers will run theperformance or sporting event and you do not goallocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-
tournament. You can deduct the entire cost ofwith the customer to the performance or event,tainment in its lounge on the same bill with your
the tickets as a business expense if they other-you have a choice. You can treat the tickets asroom charge.
wise qualify as an entertainment expense.either a gift or entertainment, whichever is toTaking turns paying for meals or entertain-your advantage. ment. If a group of business acquaintancesExample 2.  You purchase tickets to a col-You can change your treatment of the ticketstake turns picking up each others’ meal or enter-lege football game through a ticket broker. Afterat a later date by filing an amended return.tainment checks without regard to whether anyhaving a business discussion, you take a clientGenerally, an amended return must be filedbusiness purposes are served, no member ofto the game. Net proceeds from the game go towithin 3 years from the date the original returnthe group can deduct any part of the expense.colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax
However, since the colleges also pay individualswas paid, whichever is later. Lavish or extravagant expenses.You can-
to perform services, such as coaching andnot deduct expenses for entertainment that areIf you go with the customer to the event, you recruiting, you can only use the face value of thelavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid-must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- tickets in determining your business deduction.ered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonablement expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
considering the facts and circumstances. Ex-to treat the tickets as a gift.
penses will not be disallowed just because theySkyboxes and other private luxury boxes.If
are more than a fixed dollar amount or take you rent a skybox or other private luxury box for
place at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs, more than one event at the same sports arena,
or resorts. you generally cannot deduct more than the price
What Entertainment of a nonluxury box seat ticket.Allocating between business and To determine whether a skybox has beenExpenses nonbusiness. If you entertain business andrented for more than one event, count eachnonbusiness individuals at the same event, youAre Deductible? game or other performance as one event. Formust divide your entertainment expenses be-example, renting a skybox for a series of playofftween business and nonbusiness. You can de-This section explains different types of entertain- games is considered renting it for more than oneduct only the business part. If you cannotment expenses that you may be able to deduct. event. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,establish the part of the expense for each per-It also explains the directly-related test and the along with any rentals by related parties, areson participating, allocate the expense to eachassociated test. considered in making this determination.participant on a pro rata basis.
Related parties include:Entertainment. Entertainment includes any Example. You entertain a group of individu-activity generally considered to provide enter- 1. Family members (spouses, ancestors, andals that includes yourself, three business pros-tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples lineal descendants),pects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of theinclude entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-expense qualifies as a business entertainment2. Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; atexpense. You cannot deduct the expenses for rangement involving the sharing ofsporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-the seven social guests because those costs areskyboxes,ing, vacation, and similar trips. nonbusiness expenses.Entertainment also may include meeting per- 3. Related corporations,
Trade association meetings.You can de-sonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such 4. A partnership and its principal partners,duct entertainment expenses that are directlyas providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to andrelated to and necessary for attending businesscustomers or their families.
meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-5. A corporation and a partnership with com-A meal as a form of entertainment.Enter- nizations if the expenses of your attendance aremon ownership.tainment includes the cost of a meal you providerelated to your active trade or business. Theseto a customer or client, whether the meal is aorganizations include business leagues, cham-Example. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seatpart of other entertainment or by itself. A mealbers of commerce, real estate boards, tradeskybox at Team Stadium for three baseballexpense includes the cost of food, beverages,associations, and professional associations.games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seatstaxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an
at each event is $20 a seat. You can deductentertainment-related meal, you or your em-Entertainment tickets.Generally, you cannot
(subject to the 50% limit) $600 ((10 seats × $20ployee must be present when the food or bever-deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
each) × 3 events).ages are provided. ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ing of a new hotel or play when the pur-
pose is to get business publicity rather
than to create or maintain the goodwill of
the persons entertained.
Expenses not considered directly related.
Entertainment expenses generally are not con-
sidered directly related if you are not there or in
situations where there are substantial distrac-
tions that generally prevent you from actively
conducting business. The following are exam-
ples of situations where there are substantial
distractions. 
1. A meeting or discussion at a nightclub,
theater, or sporting event.
2. A meeting or discussion during what is es-
sentially a social gathering, such as a
cocktail party.
3. A meeting with a group that includes per-
sons who are not business associates at
places such as cocktail lounges, country
clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation
resorts.
Associated Test
Even if your expenses do not meet the
directly-related test, they may meet the associ-
ated test.
To meet the associated test for entertain-
ment expenses (including entertainment-related
meals), you must show that the entertainment is:
1. Associated with the active conduct of your
trade or business, and
2. Directly before or after a substantial busi-
ness discussion (defined later).
Table 2-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
Definitions
Tests to be met
Other rules
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a
client, customer, or employee if the expenses meet the
directly-related test or the associated test.
● Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to
provide entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes
meals provided to a customer or client.
● An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your
field of business, trade, or profession.
● A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate,
although not necessarily required, for your business.
Directly-related test
● Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
● Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of
business, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or
some other specific business benefit.
Associated test
● Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
● Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
● You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment
expense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
● You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under
the circumstances.
● You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed
entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
You did engage in business with the person during the
entertainment period, and
Food and beverages in skybox seats.If You must consider all the facts, including theAssociated with trade or business.Gener-nature of the business transacted and the rea-expenses for food and beverages are separately ally, an expense is associated with the activesons for conducting business during the enter-stated, you can deduct these expenses in addi- conduct of your trade or business if you cantainment. It is not necessary to devote more timetion to the amounts allowable for the skybox, show that you had a clear business purpose forto business than to entertainment. However, ifsubject to the requirements and limits that apply. having the expense. The purpose may be to getthe business discussion is only incidental to theThe amounts separately stated for food and new business or to encourage the continuationentertainment, the entertainment expenses dobeverages must be reasonable. You cannot in- of an existing business relationship.not meet the directly-related test.flate the charges for food and beverages to
Substantial business discussion.WhetherYou do not have to show that businessavoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals.
income or other business benefit actu-a business discussion is substantial depends on
ally resulted from each entertainmentthe facts of each case. A business discussion
TIP
Directly-Related Test expense. will not be considered substantial unless you
can show that you actively engaged in the dis-To meet the directly-related test for entertain-
Clear business setting.If the entertainmentcussion, meeting, negotiation, or other businessment expenses (including entertainment-related
takes place in a clear business setting and is fortransaction to get income or some other specificmeals), you must show that: your business or work, the expenses are consid-business benefit.
ered directly related to your business or work.The meeting does not have to be for any1. The main purpose of the combined busi-The following situations are examples of enter-specified length of time, but you must show thatness and entertainment was the activetainment in a clear business setting. the business discussion was substantial in rela-conduct of business, tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-1. Entertainment in a hospitality room at a2. You did engage in business with the per- sary that you devote more time to business thanconvention where business goodwill is cre-son during the entertainment period, and to entertainment. You do not have to discussated through the display or discussion ofbusiness during the meal or entertainment.3. You had more than a general expectation business products.
Meetings at conventions.You are consid-of getting income or some other specific2. Entertainment that is mainly a price rebateered to have a substantial business discussion ifbusiness benefit at some future time. on the sale of your products (such as ayou attend meetings at a convention or similarBusiness is generally not considered to be restaurant owner providing an occasionalevent, or at a trade or business meeting spon-free meal to a loyal customer).the main purpose when business and entertain- sored and conducted by a business or profes-
ment are combined on hunting or fishing trips, or sional organization. However, your reason for3. Entertainment of a clear business nature
on yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you attending the convention or meeting must be tooccurring under circumstances where
show that business was the main purpose, you further your trade or business. The organizationthere is no meaningful personal or social
generally cannot deduct the expenses for the that sponsors the convention or meeting mustrelationship between you and the persons
use of an entertainment facility. See Entertain- schedule a program of business activities that isentertained. An example is entertainment
the main activity of the convention or meeting.ment facilities earlier in this chapter. of business and civic leaders at the open-
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The 50% limit applies to business meals or
entertainment expenses you have while:
1. Traveling away from home (whether eating
alone or with others) on business,
2. Entertaining customers at your place of
business, a restaurant, or other location, or
3. Attending a business convention or recep-
tion, business meeting, or business lunch-
eon at a club.
Included expenses. Expenses subject to the
50% limit include:
1. Taxes and tips relating to a business meal
or entertainment activity,
2. Cover charges for admission to a night-
club,
3. Rent paid for a room in which you hold a
dinner or cocktail party, and
4. Amounts paid for parking at a sports
arena.
However, the cost of transportation to and from
a business meal or a business-related entertain-
ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
Application of 50% limit.The 50% limit on
meal and entertainment expenses applies if the
expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal
and entertainment expenses that are not busi-
ness related. It applies to meal and entertain-
ment expenses you have for the production of
income, including rental or royalty income. It
also applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit.You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
have to determine the amount of meal and en-
tertainment expenses that would be deductible
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
Directly before or after business discussion. under the other rules discussed in this publica-personal or social purpose, for providing the
tion.If the entertainment is held on the same day asentertainment.
the business discussion, it is considered to be
Example 1. You spend $100 for aExample. You entertain a customer. Theheld directly before or after the business discus-
business-related meal. If $40 of that amount iscost is an ordinary and necessary business ex-sion.
not allowable because it is lavish and extrava-pense and is allowed under the entertainmentIf the entertainment and the business discus- gant, the remaining $60 is subject to the 50%rules. The customer’s spouse joins you becausesion are not held on the same day, you must limit. Your deduction cannot be more than $30it is impractical to entertain the customer withoutconsider the facts of each case to see if the (50% × $60).the spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter-associated test is met. Among the facts to con-
taining the customer’s spouse. If your spousesider are the place, date, and duration of the Example 2. You purchase two tickets to ajoins the party because the customer’s spousebusiness discussion. If you or your business concert and give them to a client. You pur-is present, the cost of the entertainment for yourassociates are from out of town, you must also chased the tickets through a ticket agent. Youspouse is also deductible.consider the dates of arrival and departure, and paid $150 for the two tickets, which had a facethe reasons the entertainment and the discus- value of $60 each ($120 total). Your deductionsion did not take place on the same day. cannot be more than $60 (50% × $120).
Example. A group of business associates50% Limit Exceptions to the 50% Limitcomes from out of town to your place of busi-
ness to hold a substantial business discussion.In general, you can deduct only 50% of yourGenerally, business-related meal and entertain-If you entertain those business guests on thebusiness-related meal and entertainment ex-ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.evening before the business discussion, or onpenses. (If you are subject to the Department ofFigure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
the evening of the day following the business applies to you.Transportation’s “hours of service” limits, youdiscussion, the entertainment generally is con-can deduct a higher percentage. See IndividualsExpenses not subject to 50% limit.Yoursidered to be held directly before or after thesubject to “hours of service” limits, later.) meal or entertainment expense is not subject todiscussion. The expense meets the associated
The 50% limit applies to employees or theirthe 50% limit if the expense meets one of thetest.
employers, and to self-employed persons (in-following exceptions.
cluding independent contractors) or their clients,Expenses for spouses.You generally cannot 1 - Employee’s reimbursed expenses.Ifdepending on whether the expenses are reim-deduct the cost of entertainment for your spouse you are an employee, you are not subject to thebursed.or for the spouse of a customer. However, you 50% limit on expenses for which your employer
can deduct these costs if you can show that youFigure A summarizes the general rules ex-reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
had a clear business purpose, rather than aplained in this section. countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2 - Self-employed. If you are self-em- 3. Certain railroad employees (such as engi- a. Has your name clearly and permanently
ployed, your deductible meal and entertainment neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- imprinted on the gift, and
expenses are not subject to the 50% limit if all ers, and control operations personnel) whob. Is one of a number of identical itemsthree of the following requirements are met. are under Federal Railroad Administration you widely distribute.regulations.
1. You have these expenses as an indepen- Examples include pens, desk sets, and4. Certain merchant mariners who are underdent contractor. plastic bags and cases.Coast Guard regulations.
2. Your customer or client reimburses you or 2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional
gives you an allowance for these expenses material to be used on the business prem-
in connection with services you perform. ises of the recipient.
3. You provide adequate records of these ex-
penses to your customer or client. (See Gift or entertainment.Any item that might be
chapter 5.) considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
ally will be considered entertainment. However,3.In this case, your client or customer is sub- if you give a customer packaged food or bever-ject to the 50% limit on the expenses. ages that you intend the customer to use at a
later date, treat it as a gift.Example. You are a self-employed attorneyGifts If you give a customer tickets to a theaterwho adequately accounts for meal and enter-
performance or sporting event and you do not gotainment expenses to a client who reimburses
If you give gifts in the course of your trade orwith the customer to the performance or event,you for these expenses. You are not subject to
business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.you have a choice. You can treat the cost of thethe directly-related or associated test, nor are
This chapter explains the limits and rules fortickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-you subject to the 50% limit. If the client can
deducting the costs of gifts. ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.deduct the expenses, the client is subject to the
50% limit. You can change your treatment of the tickets$25 limit.You can deduct no more than $25If you (the contractor) have expenses for at a later date by filing an amended return.for business gifts you give directly or indirectly tomeals and entertainment related to providing Generally, an amended return must be filedany one person during your tax year. A gift to aservices for a client but do not adequately ac- within 3 years from the date the original returncompany that is intended for the eventual per-count for and seek reimbursement from the cli- was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxsonal use or benefit of a particular person or aent for those expenses, you are subject to the was paid, whichever is later.limited class of people will be considered andirectly-related or associated test and to the  If you go with the customer to the event, youindirect gift to that particular person or to the50% limit. must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-individuals within that class of people who re-ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,3 - Advertising expenses.You are not sub-ceive the gift. to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.ject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, enter-If you give a gift to a member of a customer’s
tainment, or recreational facilities to the generalfamily, the gift is generally considered to be an
public as a means of advertising or promotingindirect gift to the customer. This rule does not
goodwill in the community. For example, neitherapply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-
the expense of sponsoring a television or radioness connection with that family member and
show nor the expense of distributing free foodthe gift is not intended for the customer’s even-
and beverages to the general public is subject totual use.
the 50% limit. If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of4.you are treated as one taxpayer. It does not4 - Sale of meals or entertainment.You
matter whether you have separate businesses,are not subject to the 50% limit if you actually
are separately employed, or whether each ofsell meals, entertainment, goods and services,
you has an independent connection with theor use of facilities to the public. For example, if Transportationrecipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-you run a nightclub, your expense for the enter-
ship and the partners are treated as one tax-tainment you furnish to your customers, such as This chapter discusses expenses you can de-payer.a floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit. duct for business transportation when you are
5 - Charitable sports event.You are not not traveling away from home as defined inExample. Bob Jones sells products to Local
subject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package chapter 1. These expenses include the cost ofCompany. He and his wife, Jan, gave Local
deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita- transportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and theCompany three cheese packages to thank them
ble sports event. For the conditions the sports cost of driving and maintaining your car.for their business. They paid $80 for each pack-
event must meet, see Exception for events thatage, or $240 total. Three of Local Company’sTransportation expenses include the ordi-
benefit charitable organizations under Entertain- executives took the packages home for theirnary and necessary costs of all of the following.
ment tickets, earlier. families’ use. Bob and Jan have no independent• Getting from one workplace to another inbusiness relationship with any of the executives’Individuals subject to “hours of service” the course of your business or professionother family members. They can deduct a totallimits.You can deduct a higher percentage of when you are traveling within the city orof $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the cheese packages.your meal expenses while traveling away from general area that is your tax home. Tax
your tax home if the meals take place during or home is defined in chapter 1.Incidental costs.Incidental costs, such asincident to any period subject to the Departmentengraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,• Visiting clients or customers.of Transportation’s “hours of service” limits. Theand mailing, are generally not included in deter-percentage is 70% for 2004, and it gradually • Going to a business meeting away frommining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25increases to 80% by the year 2008. your regular workplace.limit.Individuals subject to the Department of A cost is incidental only if it does not add• Getting from your home to a temporaryTransportation’s “hours of service” limits includesubstantial value to the gift. For example, theworkplace when you have one or morethe following persons. cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-regular places of work. These temporary
ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket forworkplaces can be either within the area1. Certain air transportation workers (such as
packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if theof your tax home or outside that area.pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and
value of the basket is substantial compared tocontrol tower operators) who are under Transportation expenses do not include ex-the value of the fruit.Federal Aviation Administration regula- penses you have while traveling away fromtions. home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-Exceptions. The following items are not con-
penses which are discussed in chapter 1. How-2. Interstate truck operators and bus driverssidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. 
ever, if you use your car while traveling awaywho are under Department of Transporta-
from home overnight, use the rules in this chap-tion regulations. 1. An item that costs $4 or less and:
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 13

Page 14 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
ductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work.If you work at two places
in one day, whether or not for the same em-
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
from one workplace to the other. However, if for
some personal reason you do not go directly
from one location to the other, you cannot de-
duct more than the amount it would have cost
you to go directly from the first location to the
second.
Transportation expenses you have in going
between home and a part-time job on a day off
from your main job are commuting expenses.
You cannot deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists.A meeting of an
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of
business if the meeting is held on a day on which
you work at your regular job. You can deduct the
expense of getting from one workplace to the
other as just discussed under Two places of
work.
You usually cannot deduct the expense if the
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you
do not work at your regular job. In this case, your
transportation generally is a nondeductible com-
muting expense. However, you can deduct your
transportation expenses if the location of the
meeting is temporary and you have one or more
regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
itan area but not at any specific location and the
reserve meeting is held at a temporary location
outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct
your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to
attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can
deduct your travel expenses. These expenses
are discussed in chapter 1.
If you travel more than 100 miles away from
home in connection with your performance of
services as a member of the reserves, you may
be able to deduct some of your reserve-related
travel costs as an adjustment to gross income
rather than as an itemized deduction. For more
information, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav-
eling More Than 100 Miles From Home under
Special Rules, in chapter 6.
Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Neverdeductible
onadayofffrom
regularormainjob
Deductibleif youhavea
regular or mainjob
at another location Always deductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home. )
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi,ter to figure your car expense deduction. See whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year. If
or of driving a car between your home and yourCar Expenses, later. employment at a work location initially is realisti-
main or regular place of work. These costs arecally expected to last for 1 year or less, but at
personal commuting expenses. You cannot de-Illustration of transportation expenses. some later date the employment is realistically
duct commuting expenses no matter how farFigure B illustrates the rules that apply for de-expected to last more than 1 year, that employ-
your home is from your regular place of work.ducting transportation expenses when you havement will be treated as temporary (unless there
You cannot deduct commuting expenses even ifa regular or main job away from your home. Youare facts and circumstances that would indicate
you work during the commuting trip.may want to refer to it when deciding whetherotherwise) until your expectation changes. It will
you can deduct your transportation expenses.not be treated as temporary after the date youExample. You had a telephone installed indetermine it will last more than 1 year.Temporary work location.If you have one or your car. You sometimes use that telephone toIf the temporary work location is beyond themore regular work locations away from your make business calls while commuting to andgeneral area of your regular place of work andhome and you commute to a temporary work from work. Sometimes business associates rideyou stay overnight, you are traveling away fromlocation in the same trade or business, you can with you to and from work, and you have ahome. You may have deductible travel ex-deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip business discussion in the car. These activitiespenses as discussed in chapter 1.transportation between your home and the tem- do not change the trip from personal to busi-
porary location, regardless of distance. No regular place of work.If you have no ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex-
If your employment at a work location is regular place of work but ordinarily work in thepenses.
realistically expected to last (and does in fact metropolitan area where you live, you can de-Parking fees.Fees you pay to park your carlast) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo- duct daily transportation costs between homeat your place of business are nondeductiblerary unless there are facts and circumstances and a temporary work site outside that metropol-commuting expenses. You can, however, de-that would indicate otherwise. itan area. duct business-related parking fees when visitingIf your employment at a work location is Generally, a metropolitan area includes thea customer or client.realistically expected to last for more than 1 year area within the city limits and the suburbs that
or if there is no realistic expectation that the are considered part of that metropolitan area.Advertising display on car.Putting display
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em- You cannot deduct daily transportation costs material that advertises your business on your
ployment is not temporary, regardless of between your home and temporary work sites car does not change the use of your car from
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
personal use to business use. If you use this car ally can use one of the two following methods toments, maintenance and repairs, gasoline (in-
figure your deductible expenses. cluding gasoline taxes), oil, insurance, andfor commuting or other personal uses, you still
vehicle registration fees. See Choosing thecannot deduct your expenses for those uses.• Standard mileage rate. standard mileage rate and Standard mileageCar pools. You cannot deduct the cost of • Actual car expenses. rate not allowed,  later.using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not
You generally can use the standard mileageinclude payments you receive from the passen-If you use actual expenses to figure your de-rate whether or not you are reimbursed andgers in your income. These payments are con-duction for a car you lease, there are rules thatwhether or not any reimbursement is more orsidered reimbursements of your expenses. affect the amount of your lease payments thatless than the amount figured using the standardHowever, if you operate a car pool for a profit,you can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later. mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more informationyou must include payments from passengers in In this publication, “car” includes a van,on reimbursements.your income. You can then deduct your carpickup, or panel truck. For the definition of “car”expenses (using the rules in this publication).for depreciation purposes, see Car defined Choosing the standard mileage rate.If you
under Actual Car Expenses, later.Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling want to use the standard mileage rate for a car
tools or instruments in your car while commuting you own, you must choose to use it in the first
You may be entitled to a tax credit forto and from work does not make your car ex- year the car is available for use in your business.
an electric vehicle or a deduction frompenses deductible. However, you can deduct Then in later years, you can choose to use either
gross income for a part of the cost of aany additional costs you have for hauling tools or the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.
TIP
clean-fuel vehicle that you place in service dur-instruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow If you want to use the standard mileage rateing the year. The vehicle must meet certainwith your car). for a car you lease, you must use it for the entirerequirements, and you do not have to use it inlease period. For leases that began on or beforeUnion members’ trips from a union hall.If your business to qualify for the credit or theDecember 31, 1997, the standard mileage rateyou get your work assignments at a union halldeduction. However, you must reduce your ba-must be used for the entire portion of the leaseand then go to your place of work, the costs ofsis for depreciation of the electric vehicle orperiod (including renewals) that is after 1997.getting from the union hall to your place of workclean-fuel vehicle property by the amount of theIf you choose to use the standard mileageare nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-credit or deduction you claim. See Depreciation rate, you are considered to have chosen not tothough you need the union to get your workDeduction, later, under Actual Car Expenses. use the depreciation methods discussed later.assignments, you are employed where you For more information on electric or clean-fuelThis is because the standard mileage rate in-work, not where the union hall is located.vehicles, see chapter 12 of Publication 535.cludes an allowance for depreciation that is not
expressed in terms of years. If you change to theOffice in the home.If you have an office inRural mail carriers.If you are a rural mailactual expenses method in a later year, butyour home that qualifies as a principal place ofcarrier, you may be able to treat the qualifiedbefore your car is fully depreciated, you have tobusiness, you can deduct your daily transporta-reimbursement you received as your allowableestimate the remaining useful life of the car andtion costs between your home and another workexpense. Because the qualified reimbursementuse straight line depreciation. For more informa-location in the same trade or business. (Seeis treated as paid under an accountable plan,tion about depreciation included in the standardPublication 587, Business Use of Your Home,your employer should not include the reimburse-mileage rate, see Exception under Methods offor information on determining if your home of-ment in your income. depreciation under Depreciation Deduction,fice qualifies as a principal place of business.)If your vehicle expenses are more than thelater.amount of your reimbursement, you can deductExamples of deductible transportation.The
the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-Standard mileage rate not allowed. Youfollowing examples show when you can deduct
duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You mustcannot use the standard mileage rate if you:transportation expenses based on the location
complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Formof your work and your home.
1040. 1. Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
A “qualified reimbursement” is the reim-Example 1. You regularly work in an office 2. Use five or more cars at the same time (asbursement you receive that meets both of thein the city where you live. Your employer sends in fleet operations),following conditions. you to a one-week training session at a different
3. Claimed a depreciation deduction for theoffice in the same city. You travel directly from1. It is given as an equipment maintenance car using any method other than straightyour home to the training location and returnallowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S. line, for example, MACRS (as discussedeach day. You can deduct the cost of your dailyPostal Service. later under Methods of depreciation underround-trip transportation between your home
Depreciation Deduction),and the training location. 2. It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-
lective bargaining agreement. Any later4. Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis-Example 2. Your principal place of businessagreement cannot increase the qualified cussed later) on the car,is in your home. You can deduct the cost of reimbursement amount by more than the
5. Claimed the special depreciation allow-round-trip transportation between your qualify-rate of inflation.
ance (discussed later) on the car,ing home office and your client’s or customer’sSee your employer for information on your reim-place of business. 6. Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 forbursement.
a car you leased, orExample 3. You have no regular office, and If you are a rural mail carrier and re-
7. Are a rural mail carrier who received ayou do not have an office in your home. In this ceived a qualified reimbursement, you
qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mailcase, the location of your first business contactcannot use the standard mileage rate.CAUTION
!
carriers under Car Expenses, earlier.)is considered your office. Transportation ex-
penses between your home and this first contact
Five or more cars.If you own or lease fiveStandard Mileage Rateare nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-
or more cars that are used for business at theportation expenses between your last business
You may be able to use the standard mileagesame time, you cannot use the standard mile-contact and your home are also nondeductible
rate to figure the deductible costs of operatingage rate for the business use of any car. How-commuting expenses. Although you cannot de-
your car for business purposes. For 2004, theever, you may be able to deduct your actualduct the costs of these trips, you can deduct the
standard mileage rate is 371/2 cents a mile for allexpenses for operating each of the cars in yourcosts of going from one client or customer to
business miles. This rate is adjusted periodi-business. See Actual Car Expenses, later, foranother.
cally. information on how to figure your deduction.
You are not using five or more cars for busi-If you use the standard mileage rate for
ness at the same time if you alternate using (usea year, you cannot deduct your actual
at different times) the cars for business.car expenses for that year. You cannotCar Expenses CAUTION
!
The following examples illustrate the rulesdeduct the special depreciation allowance (and
If you use your car for business purposes, you for when you can and cannot use the standardyou do not need to make the election not to
ordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener- mileage rate for five or more cars.claim the allowance), depreciation, or lease pay-
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns section 179 deduction (the deduction allowed byActual Car Expenses
three cars and two vans that she alternates section 179 of the Internal Revenue Code), the
using for calling on her customers. She can use special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-If you do not use the standard mileage rate, you
the standard mileage rate for the business mile- tion deductions. Depreciation allows you to re-may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.
age of the three cars and the two vans because cover the cost over more than one year byIf you qualify to use both methods, youshe does not use them at the same time. deducting part of it each year. The section 179may want to figure your deduction bothdeduction, special depreciation allowance, andways to see which gives you a larger
TIP
Example 2. Tony and his employees use the depreciation deduction are discussed later.deduction.his four pickup trucks in his landscaping busi- Generally, there are limits on these deduc-
Actual car expenses include:ness. During the year, he traded in two of his old tions. Special rules apply if you use your car
trucks for two newer ones. Tony can use the 50% or less in your work or business.Depreciation Lease Registrationstandard mileage rate for the business mileage You can claim a section 179 deduction, theLicenses payments feesof all six of the trucks he owned during the year. special depreciation allowance, and use a de-Gas Insurance Repairs preciation method other than straight line only ifOil Garage rent TiresExample 3. Chris owns a repair shop and you do not use the standard mileage rate toTolls Parking fees
an insurance business. He and his employees figure your business-related car expenses in theIf you have fully depreciated a car that youuse his two pickup trucks and van for the repair year you first place a car in service.still use in your business, you can continue toshop. Chris alternates using his two cars for the If you claim either a section 179 deduction,claim your other actual car expenses. Continueinsurance business. No one else uses the cars the special depreciation allowance, or deprecia-to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5.for business purposes. Chris can use the stan- tion using a method other than straight line for its
dard mileage rate for the business use of the estimated useful life in the year you first place aBusiness and personal use.If you use your
pickup trucks, van, and the cars because he car in service, you cannot use the standardcar for both business and personal purposes,
never has more than four vehicles used for busi- mileage rate on that car in any future year.you must divide your expenses between busi-
ness at the same time. ness and personal use. You can divide yourCar defined.For depreciation purposes, a carexpense based on the miles driven for eachis any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck orExample 4. Maureen owns a car and fourpurpose. van) that is made primarily for use on publicvans that are used in her housecleaning busi-
streets, roads, and highways. Its unloaded grossness. Her employees use the vans and she usesExample. You are a sales representativevehicle weight (gross vehicle weight in the casethe car to travel to various customers. Maureenfor a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000of a truck or van) must not be more than 6,000cannot use the standard mileage rate for the carmiles during the year: 12,000 miles for businesspounds. A car includes any part, component, oror the vans. This is because all five vehicles areand 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claimother item that is physically attached to it or isused in Maureen’s business at the same time.only 60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of oper-usually included in the purchase price.She must use actual expenses for all vehicles.ating your car as a business expense. A car does not include: 
Employer-provided vehicle.If you use a ve-Interest.If you are an employee, you cannot
1. An ambulance, hearse, or combinationhicle provided by your employer for businessdeduct any interest paid on a car loan. This
ambulance-hearse used directly in a busi-purposes, you can deduct your actual un-applies even if you use the car 100% for busi-
ness, orreimbursed car expenses. You cannot use theness as an employee.
standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided byHowever, if you are self-employed and use 2. A vehicle used directly in the business ofYour Employer in chapter 6.your car in your business, you can deduct that transporting persons or property for pay orpart of the interest expense that represents your hire.Interest on car loans.If you are an employee,business use of the car. For example, if you useyou cannot deduct any interest paid on a car3. A truck or van that is a qualified nonper-your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60%loan. This interest is treated as personal interestsonal use vehicle.of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). Youand is not deductible. If you are self-employedcannot deduct the rest of the interest expense.and use your car in that business, see Interest, Trucks and vans. For purposes of depreci-earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate.If you use a home equity loan to ation, the term “trucks and vans” refers to pas-purchase your car, you may be able to senger automobiles that are built on a truckTaxes paid on your car.If you are an em-deduct the interest. See Publication
TIP
chassis, including minivans and sport utility ve-ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, for hicles (SUVs) that are built on a truck chassis.paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Entermore information. the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (FormElectric car.For purposes of depreciation,1040). the term “electric car” refers to passenger auto-Personal property taxes.If you itemize your
mobiles designed to be propelled primarily bydeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you canSales taxes.Generally, sales taxes on your
electricity and built by an original equipmentdeduct on line 7 state and local personal prop-car are part of your car’s basis and are recov-
manufacturer.erty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take thisered through depreciation, discussed later.
deduction even if you use the standard mileageHowever, to the extent the car is not used in yourMore information. See Special Deprecia-rate or if you do not use the car for business.trade or business, you can choose to deduct thetion Allowance, later, for more information onIf you are self-employed and use your car innonbusiness part of the sales tax deduction onhow to depreciate your vehicle.your business, you can deduct the business partSchedule A (Form 1040). You can only choose
Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles.of state and local personal property taxes onto deduct state and local sales taxes as an
These are vehicles that by their nature are notmotor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ,itemized deduction if you choose not to deduct
likely to be used more than a minimal amount foror Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize yourstate and local income taxes.
personal purposes. They include trucks anddeductions, you can include the remainder ofFines and collateral.You cannot deduct finesvans that have been specially modified so thatyour state and local personal property taxes onand collateral you pay for traffic violations.they are not likely to be used more than a mini-the car on Schedule A (Form 1040).
mal amount for personal purposes, such as byCasualty and theft losses.If your car is dam-
Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using installation of permanent shelving and paintingaged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able to
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any the vehicle to display advertising or thededuct part of the loss that is not covered by
business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parking company’s name. Delivery trucks with seatinginsurance. See Publication 547, Casualties, Di-
fees that you pay to park your car at your place only for the driver, or only for the driver plus asasters, and Thefts, for information on deducting
of work are nondeductible commuting ex- folding jump seat are qualified nonpersonal usea loss on your car.
penses.) vehicles.
Depreciation and section 179 deductions.
Sale, trade-in, or other disposition.If you Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and
sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car, improvements, is a capital expense. BecauseSection 179 Deduction
you may have a gain or loss on the transaction the benefits last longer than one year, you gen-
or an adjustment to the basis of your new car. erally cannot deduct a capital expense. How- The section 179 deduction allows you to treat
See Disposition of a Car, later. ever, you can recover this cost through the part or all of the business cost of a car as a
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
current expense rather than taking depreciation If you and your spouse file separate returns, amount is the basis in your car that you use to
deductions over a number of years. figure your depreciation deduction.you are treated as one taxpayer for the dollar
limit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after anyThe limit on total section 179 and de- When to choose. If you want to take the sec-reduction) between you.preciation deductions (discussed later) tion 179 deduction, you must make the choice inFor more information on the above sectionmay reduce or eliminate any benefit the tax year you both purchase the car and place
TIP
179 deduction limits, see Publication 946.from claiming the section 179 deduction. it in service for business or work.
Limit for sport utility and certain other ve-You can claim the section 179 deduction How to choose. Employees use Form 2106 tohicles. For sport utility and certain other vehi-only in the year you place the car in service. For make this choice and report the section 179cles placed in service after October 22, 2004,this purpose, a car is placed in service when it is deduction. All others use Form 4562.the portion of the vehicle’s cost taken into ac-ready and available for a specific use, whether in File the appropriate form with either of thecount in figuring your section 179 deduction isa trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, a following.limited to $25,000. This rule applies to anypersonal activity, or for the production of in-
4-wheeled vehicle primarily designed or used tocome. Even if you are not using the property, it is • Your original tax return filed for the year
carry passengers over public streets, roads, orin service when it is ready and available for its the property was placed in service
highways, that is not subject to any of the pas-specific use. (whether or not you file it timely).
senger automobile limits explained under De-A car first used for personal purposes cannot • For tax years beginning after 2002, anpreciation Limits, later, and that is rated at noqualify for the deduction in a later year when its amended return for the applicable taxmore than 14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.use changes to business. year. An election made on an amendedHowever, the $25,000 limit does not apply to anyreturn must specify the item of section 179Example. In 2003 you bought a new car andvehicle: property to which the election applies andplaced it in service for personal purposes. This the part of the cost of each such item to be• Designed to have a seating capacity ofyear, you began to use it for business. Changing taken into account. The amended returnmore than nine persons behind theits use to business use does not qualify the cost must be filed within the time prescribed bydriver’s seat,of your car for a section 179 deduction this year. law for the applicable tax year. TheHowever, you can claim a depreciation deduc-• Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6 amended return must also include any re-tion for the business use of the car. See Depreci- feet in interior length that is an open areasulting adjustments to taxable income.ation Deduction, later. or is designed for use as an open area but
is enclosed by a cap and is not readilyMore than 50% business use requirement. You must keep records that show theaccessible directly from the passengerYou must use the property more than 50% for specific identification of each piece ofcompartment, orbusiness to claim any section 179 deduction. If qualifying section 179 property. TheseCAUTION
!
you used the property more than 50% for busi-• That has an integral enclosure, fully en-records must show how you acquired the prop-ness, multiply the cost of the property by theclosing the driver compartment and loaderty, the person you acquired it from, and whenpercentage of business use. The result is thecarrying device, does not have seatingyou placed it in service.cost of the property that can qualify for the sec-rearward of the driver’s seat, and has no
tion 179 deduction. body section protruding more than 30 in-Revoking an election.An election (or any
ches ahead of the leading edge of thespecification made in the election) to take a
Example. Peter purchased a car in April windshield. section 179 deduction for a tax year beginning
2004 for $19,500 and he used it 60% for busi- after 2002 can be revoked by filing an amended
ness. The total cost of Peter’s car that qualifies return. The amended return must be filed withinLimit on total section 179 and deprecia-for the section 179 deduction is $11,700 the time prescribed by law for the applicable taxtion deductions.Generally, the total amount($19,500 cost × 60% business use). But see year. The amended return must also include anyof section 179 and depreciation deductions thatLimit on total section 179 and depreciation de- resulting adjustment to taxable income. Onceyou can claim for a qualified car that you placedductions, discussed later. made, the revocation is irrevocable.in service in 2004, cannot be more than
Limits. There are limits on: $10,610. The limit is $2,960 if you elect not toReduction in business use.To be eligible to
claim the special depreciation allowance for theclaim the section 179 deduction, you must use1. The amount of the section 179 deduction,car or the car is not qualified property as ex-your car more than 50% for business or work in
plained later under Special Depreciation Allow-2. The section 179 deduction for sport utility the year you acquired it. If your business use of
ance. The limit is reduced if your business use ofand certain other vehicles, and the car is 50% or less in a later tax year during
the car is less than 100%. See Depreciation the recovery period, you have to recapture (in-3. The total amount of the section 179 deduc-Limits, later, for more information. clude in income) in that later year any excesstion plus the depreciation deduction (dis- depreciation. Any section 179 deductioncussed later) you can claim for a qualifiedExample. In the earlier example under claimed on the car is included in calculating theproperty. More than 50% business use requirement, Peter excess depreciation. For information on this cal-
had a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes ofculation, see Excess depreciation later in thisLimit on the amount of the section 179 the section 179 deduction) of $11,700. How-chapter under Car Used 50% or Less for Busi-deduction. For 2004, the total amount youever, Peter’s total section 179 and depreciationness.can choose to deduct under section 179 gener-deduction is limited. If Peter claims the specialally cannot be more than $102,000. Dispositions.If you dispose of a car on whichdepreciation deduction (discussed later), the to-If the cost of your qualifying section 179 you had claimed the section 179 deduction, thetal of the two deductions cannot be more thanproperty placed in service in 2004 is over amount of that deduction is treated as a depreci-$6,366 ($10,610 limit x 60% business use).$410,000, you must reduce the $102,000 dollar ation deduction for recapture purposes. You
limit (but not below zero) by the amount of cost treat any gain on the disposition of the propertyCost of car.For purposes of the section 179over $410,000. If the cost of your section 179 as ordinary income up to the amount of thededuction, the cost of the car does not includeproperty placed in service during 2004 is section 179 deduction and any allowable depre-any amount figured by reference to any other$512,000 or more, you cannot take a section ciation (unless you establish the amount actuallyproperty held by you at any time. For example, if179 deduction. allowed). For information on the disposition of ayou buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car toThe total amount you can deduct under sec- car, see Disposition of a Car, later.use in your business, your cost for purposes oftion 179 each year after you apply the limitsthe section 179 deduction does not include yourlisted above cannot be more than the taxableadjusted basis in the car you trade in for the newincome from the active conduct of any trade or Special Depreciation Allowancecar. Your cost includes only the cash you paid.business during the year.
Basis of car for depreciation.The amountIf you are married and file a joint return, you The special depreciation allowance is a deduc-
of the section 179 deduction reduces your basisand your spouse are treated as one taxpayer in tion equal to 50% (or you can choose 30%) of
in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc-determining any reduction to the dollar limit, the depreciable basis of qualified property. If
tion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc-regardless of which of you purchased the prop- your car qualifies for this deduction, you must
tion from the cost of your car. The resultingerty or placed it in service. reduce the car’s adjusted basis by the amount of
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Car placed in service and disposed of inthe allowance, unless you elect not to claim the If you elect not to claim the special deprecia-
the same year. If you place a car in serviceallowance, as discussed later. You figure the tion allowance or to claim the 30% allowance,
and dispose of it in the same tax year, youamount of the special depreciation allowance rather than the 50% allowance, for a car that is
cannot claim any depreciation deduction for thatafter any section 179 deduction you choose to qualified property, the election also applies to
car.claim, but before figuring your regular deprecia- any other 5-year property placed in service dur-
tion deduction under MACRS. ing the same year.
Methods of depreciation.Generally, you fig-You can claim the special depreciation allow-Unless you elect not to claim the spe-ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-ance only for the year the qualified property iscial depreciation allowance, you mustcelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS).placed in service. reduce the car’s adjusted basis by theCAUTION
!
MACRS is discussed later in this chapter.amount of the allowance, even if the allowanceQualified property.Qualified property in-was not claimed. Exception. If you used the standard mile-cludes a car (see Car defined earlier, under age rate in the first year of business use andActual Car Expenses) that meets all of the fol-When to make election. Generally, you change to the actual expenses method in a laterlowing requirements. must make the election on a timely filed taxyear, you cannot depreciate your car under thereturn (including extensions) for the year inMACRS rules. You must use straight line depre-1. You bought the car new after Septemberwhich you place the property in service. ciation over the estimated remaining useful life10, 2001 (after May 5, 2003, to be eligibleHowever, if you timely filed your return for theof the car.for the 50% special depreciation allow-year without making the election, you can stillTo figure depreciation under the straight lineance). make the election by filing an amended returnmethod, you must reduce your basis in the carwithin 6 months of the due date of the original2. You placed the car in service for business (but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for allreturn (not including extensions). Attach thein 2004, and miles for which you used the standard mileageelection statement to the amended return. Onrate. The rate per mile varies depending on the3. You used the car more than 50% in a qual-the amended return, write “Filed pursuant toyear(s) you used the standard mileage rate. Forified business use. section 301.9100-2.” the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustmentFor more information on other depreciable prop- when you used the standard mileage rate undererty that may qualify for the special depreciation Disposition of a Car, later.Depreciation Deductionallowance, see Publication 946. This reduction of basis is in addition to those
basis adjustments described later under Unad-If you use actual car expenses to figure yourExample. Bob bought a new car in June justed basis. You must use your adjusted basisdeduction for a car you own and use in your2004 for $20,000 and placed it in service imme- in your car to figure your depreciation deduction.business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-diately, using it 75% for business. Bob’s car is For additional information on the straight linetion: that is, you can deduct a certain amountqualified property. method of depreciation, see Publication 946.each year as a recovery of your cost or otherBob chooses not to take a section 179 de-basis in your car. You cannot use the standardduction for the car. Bob first must figure the car’s More-than-50%-use test. Generally, youmileage rate if you decide to take a depreciationdepreciable basis, which is $15,000 ($20,000 × must use your car more than 50% for qualifieddeduction in the year you first place the car in75%). He then figures the special depreciation business use (defined next) during the year toservice.allowance of $7,500 ($15,000 × 50%). use MACRS. You must meet thisIn addition, you may be able to claim theThe remaining depreciable basis of $7,500 more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov-special depreciation allowance for new cars($15,000 − $7,500) is depreciated using ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car.placed in service in 2004. See Special Deprecia-MACRS (200% declining balance method, If your business use is 50% or less, you musttion Allowance earlier.half-year convention) and results in a deduction use the straight line method to depreciate yourYou generally need to know the followingof $1,500 ($7,500 × 20%), for a total deprecia- car. This is explained later under Car Used 50%things about the car you intend to depreciate.tion deduction for 2004 of $9,000 ($7,500 + or Less for Business.$1,500). However, Bob’s depreciation deduction1. Your basis in the car.
is limited to $7,958 ($10,610 × 75%), as dis- Qualified business use.A qualified business2. The date you place the car in service.cussed next. use is any use in your trade or business. It does
3. The method of depreciation and recoverynot include use for the production of incomeDepreciation limit.The general limit on your period you will use. (investment use). However, you do combinedepreciation deduction for a car placed in serv- your business and investment use to computeice in 2004 is $10,610. It is $10,910 for a truck orBasis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-your depreciation deduction for the tax year.van and $31,830 for an electric car. ation is generally its cost. This includes anyHowever, if you use a car less than 100% in Use of your car by another person.Do notamount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-your business or work, the general limit must be treat any use of your car by another person aserty, or services.reduced by multiplying the limit by the percent- use in your trade or business unless that useGenerally, you figure depreciation using yourage of business and investment use during the meets one of the following three conditions. basis. However, in some situations (such as useyear. of the straight line method) you will use your1. It is directly connected with your business. For cars that do not qualify for (or for whichadjusted basis (your basis reduced by deprecia-you choose not to claim) the special deprecia- 2. It is properly reported by you as income totion allowed or allowable in earlier years). Fortion allowance, the limit is $2,960 ($3,260 for the other person (and, if you have to, youone of these situations see Exception undertrucks and vans, $8,880 for electric cars). See withhold tax on the income).Methods of depreciation, later.Depreciation Limits later. If you change the use of a car from personal3. It results in a payment of fair market rent.to business, your basis for depreciation is theThis includes any payment to you for theElection not to claim the 50% deduction. lesser of the fair market value or your adjusteduse of your car.You can elect not to claim the special deprecia-basis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-tion allowance for a car that is qualified property.tional rules concerning basis are discussed laterOr, you can elect to claim the 30% allowance Business use changes. If you used your carin this chapter under Unadjusted basis.instead of the 50% allowance. more than 50% in qualified business use in theTo make an election, attach a statement toPlaced in service.You generally place a caryear you placed it in service, but 50% or less in ayour timely filed return (including extensions)in service when it is available for use in yourlater year (including the year of disposition), youindicating the class of property for which you arework or business, in an income-producing activ-have to change to the straight line method ofmaking the election and that, for such class:ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation beginsdepreciation. See Qualified business use 50%
when the car is placed in service for use in youror less in a later year under Car Used 50% or• You are electing to claim the 30% specialwork or business or for the production of income.Less for Business, later.allowance instead of the 50% special al-For purposes of computing depreciation, iflowance for qualified property, or Property does not cease to be usedyou first start using the car only for personal use
more than 50% in qualified business• You are electing not to claim any special and later convert it to business use, you place
use by reason of a transfer at death.allowance for qualified property. the car in service on the date of conversion.
TIP
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use for more than one purpose.If you use property. It is treated as placed in service in the your adjusted basis in the old car, plus any
your car for more than one purpose during the year the improvement is made. It does not mat-additional amount you pay for the new car.
tax year, you must allocate the use to the vari- ter how old the car is when the improvement is
Example 1. Paul trades in a car that has anous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile- added. Follow the same steps for depreciating
adjusted basis of $3,000 for a new car. In addi-age. Figure the percentage of qualified business the improvement as you would for depreciating
use by dividing the number of miles you drive the original cost of the car. However, you musttion, he pays cash of $17,000 for the new car.
your car for business purposes during the year treat the improvement and the car as a wholeHis original basis of the new car is $20,000 (his
by the total number of miles you drive the car when applying the limits on the depreciation$3,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus the
during the year for any purpose. deductions. Your car’s depreciation deduction $17,000 cash paid). Paul’s unadjusted basis is
for the year (plus any section 179 deduction,$20,000 unless he claims the section 179 de-Change from personal to business use.If special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-duction, special depreciation allowance, or hasyou change the use of a car from 100% personaltion on any improvements) cannot be more thanother increases or decreases to his original ba-use to business use during the tax year, youthe depreciation limit that applies for that year.sis, discussed under Unadjusted basis, earlier.may not have mileage records for the timeSee Depreciation Limits, later.before the change to business use. In this case, Example 2. In October 2001, Marcia pur-you figure the percentage of business use forCar trade-in.If you traded one car (the “oldchased a car for $26,000 and placed it in servicethe year as follows. car”) in on another car (the “new car”) afterfor 100% use in her business. Marcia did notFebruary 27, 2004, there are two ways you canclaim a section 179 deduction but she did claim1. Determine the percentage of business usetreat the transaction. the special depreciation allowance. Marcia’s un-for the period following the change. Do this
adjusted basis for the car was $18,340 ($26,000by dividing business miles by total miles1. You can elect to treat the transaction as a− $7,660 (30% special depreciation allowance,driven during that period. tax-free disposition of the old car and the
up to the maximum amount allowed)). For 2001purchase of the new car. If you make this2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction. through 2003, Marcia figured her depreciationelection, you treat the old car as disposedThe numerator (top number) is the number deduction using the MACRS depreciation chartof at the time of the trade-in. The deprecia-of months the car is used for business and for those years.ble basis of the new car is the adjustedthe denominator (bottom number) is 12.
In September 2004, Marcia traded that car inbasis of the old car (figured as if 100% of
and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be usedthe car’s use had been for business pur-Example. You use a car only for personal 100% in her business. Marcia is allowedposes) plus any additional amount youpurposes during the first 6 months of the year.paid for the new car. You then figure yourone-half of the MACRS depreciation amountDuring the last 6 months of the year, you drivedepreciation deduction for the new car be-figured for 2004 for her old car. (See Dispositionthe car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000ginning with the date you placed it in serv-of a Car, later.)miles are for business. This gives you a busi-ice. You make this election by completingMarcia figures her basis in the new car asness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000) Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This methodfollows.for that period. Your business use for the year isis explained later, beginning at Effect of40% (80% × 6/12). trade-in on basis. Cost of old car $26,000
Less total depreciation allowed:Limits. The amount you can claim for section2. If you do not make the election described2004 — ($18,340 × .1152) × 1/2
179 and depreciation deductions may be limited.in (1), you must figure depreciation sepa-(Limit: $1,775) $1,056The maximum amount you can claim depends rately for the remaining basis of the old car2003 — ($18,340 × .192)on the year in which you placed your car in (Limit: $2,950) 2,950and for any additional amount you paid for
service. You have to reduce the maximum 2002 — ($18,340 × .32)the new car. You must apply two deprecia-
amount if you did not use the car exclusively for (Limit: $4,900) 4,900tion limits (see Depreciation Limits, later).
2001 — ($26,000 × .30) 1business. See Depreciation Limits, later. The limit that applies to the remaining ba- ($18,340 × .20)sis of the old car generally is the amountUnadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted (Limit: $7,660) 7,660that would have been allowed had you notbasis (often referred to as your basis or your Total depreciation allowed – 16,566
traded in the old car. The limit that appliesbasis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia-
to the additional amount you paid for theAdjusted basis of old car and basis oftion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex-
new car generally is the limit that appliespart of new car that is treated as newlyplained later under Modified Accelerated Cost purchased MACRS property $9,434for the tax year, reduced by the deprecia-Recovery System (MACRS). Your unadjusted
tion allowance for the remaining basis ofbasis for figuring depreciation is your original Additional basis (cash paid) for new carthe old car. You must use Form 4562, De-basis increased or decreased by certain that is treated as newly purchasedpreciation and Amortization, to computeamounts. MACRS property +14,200your depreciation deduction. You cannotTo figure your unadjusted basis, begin with
use Form 2106, Part II, Section D. Thisyour car’s original basis, which generally is its Total basis of new car $23,634
method is explained in Publication 946.cost. Cost includes sales taxes, destination
1 30% special depreciation allowance ($26,000 × 30% =charges, and dealer preparation. Increase yourIf you elect to use the method described in$7,800). Unadjusted basis of the car: ($26,000 − $7,660basis by any substantial improvements you(1), you must do so on a timely filed tax return= $18,340). Regular depreciation: ($18,340 × .20 =
make to your car, such as adding air condition- $3,668). Total depreciation ($7,800 + $3,668 =(including extensions). Otherwise, you must use$11,468) cannot exceed first year limit ($7,660).ing or a new engine. Decrease your basis by anythe method described in (2).
deductible casualty loss, section 179 deduction,
Effect of trade-in on basis.The discussion Traded car used partly in business.If youspecial depreciation allowance, diesel fuel tax
that follows applies to trade-ins of cars aftertrade in a car that you used partly in your busi-credit, gas guzzler tax, clean-fuel vehicle deduc-
February 27, 2004, where the election wasness for a new car that you will use in yourtion, and qualified electric vehicle credit. See
made to treat the transaction as a tax-free dispo-business, you must make a “trade-in” adjust-Publication 535 for more information on the
sition of the old car and the purchase of the newment for the personal use of the old car. Thisclean-fuel vehicle deduction and the qualified
car. For information on how to figure deprecia-adjustment has the effect of reducing your basiselectric vehicle credit.
tion for cars involved in a like-kind exchangein your old car, but not below zero, for purposesIf your business use later falls to 50%(trade-in) after February 27, 2004, for which theof figuring your depreciation deduction for theor less, you may have to recaptureelection was not made, see Publication 946. Ifnew car. (This adjustment is not used, however,(include in your income) any excessyou traded one car for another before February
CAUTION
!
when you determine the gain or loss on the laterdepreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for 28, 2004, you can use either method, or you candisposition of the new car. See Publication 544,Business, later, for more information. use any reasonable, consistent method of figur-Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets, for in-
If you acquired the car by gift or inheritance, ing depreciation. formation on how to report the disposition of
see Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor- your car.)Traded car used only for business.If youmation on your basis in the car. To figure the unadjusted basis of your newtrade in a car that you used only in your business
car for depreciation, first add to your adjustedImprovements. A major improvement to a for another car that will be used only in your
basis in the old car any additional amount youcar is treated as a new item of 5-year recovery business, your original basis in the new car is
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pay for the new car. Then subtract from that totaljustment when you used the standard mileage that switches to the straight line method
rate under Disposition of a Car, later.) when that method provides an equal orthe excess, if any, of:
On January 2, 2004, Rob traded in this cargreater deduction.
1. The total of the amounts that would haveand paid an additional $10,000 for his new car.3. The straight line method (SL) over a 5-yearbeen allowable as depreciation during theRob figures the unadjusted basis for his new carrecovery period.tax years before the trade if 100% of theas shown next.
use of the car had been business and in- If you use Table 4-1 (discussed laterCost of old car $15,000vestment use, over under MACRS depreciation chart) toLess: Total depreciation allowed:
determine your depreciation rate for2003 — 14,400 mi. × .16 $2,3042. The total of the amounts actually allowable
TIP
2002 — 12,000 mi. × .15 1,800 2004, you do not need to determine in what yearas depreciation during those years.
2001 — 9,600 mi. × .15 1,440 − 5,544 using the straight line method provides an equalFor information about figuring depreciation, seeAdjusted basis of old car or greater deduction. This is because the chartbefore trade-in adjustment $9,456Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System has the switch to the straight line method built(MACRS) , which follows Example 2, later. into its rates.Trade-in adjustment:
Depreciation at 100% business use: Before choosing a method, you may wish toExample 1. In March, Mark traded his 2000 2003 — 18,000 mi. × .16 $2,880 consider the following facts.van (placed in service in 2000) for a new 20042002 — 16,000 mi. × .15 2,400model. He used the old van 75% for business 2001 — 15,000 mi. × .15 2,250 1. Using the straight line method providesand he used the new van 75% for business inTotal $7,530 equal yearly deductions throughout the re-Less: Actual depreciation2004. Mark claimed actual expenses (including covery period.allowed − 5,544$10,184 depreciation expense) for the business
Excess of 100% over actual $1,986use of the old van since 2000. He did not claim a 2. Using the declining balance methods pro-
Less: Lesser of excess amountsection 179 deduction for the old or the new van. vides greater deductions during the earlier
($1,986) or adjusted basis recovery years with the deductions gener-Mark paid $15,500 for the 2000 van in June of old car ($9,456) − 1,986 ally getting smaller each year.2000. He paid an additional $9,800 when he
acquired the 2004 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 of Unadjusted basis of part of new car
the depreciation deduction amount (which is in-that is treated as newly purchased MACRS depreciation chart.A 2004 MACRSMACRS property $7,470cluded in the $10,184 depreciation expense to- Depreciation Chart and instructions are includedtal) for his old van for 2004, the year of in this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this table willAdditional basis (cash paid) for newdisposition, as explained later under Disposition make it easy for you to figure the 2004 deprecia-car that is treated as newlyof a Car. Mark does not claim the special depre-purchased MACRS property  $10,000 tion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap-ciation allowance. pears in the Instructions for Form 2106.
Mark figures the unadjusted basis for depre-Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System You may have to use the tables inciating his new van as shown next. (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re- Publication 946 instead of using thiscovery System (MACRS) is the name given to MACRS Depreciation Chart.Cost of old van $15,500 CAUTION
!
the tax rules for getting back (recovering)Less: Total depreciation allowed on the You must use the Depreciation Tables inthrough depreciation deductions the cost ofbusiness cost of old van, $11,625
Publication 946 rather than the 2004 MACRSproperty used in a trade or business or to pro-($15,500 × 75%), from 2000 – 2004−10,184
Adjusted basis of old van before Depreciation Chart in this publication if any oneduce income.
trade-in adjustment $ 5,316 of the following three conditions applies to you.The maximum amount you can deduct is
limited, depending on the year you placed yourTrade-in adjustment: 1. You file your return on a fiscal year basis.car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.Depreciation at 100% business use:
2. You file your return for a short tax year2004 — ($15,500 × .1152) × 1/2 Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are
(Limit: $1,775) $  893 (less than 12 months).classified as 5-year property. You actually de-2003 — 15,500 × .1152 preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a3. During the year, all of the following condi-(Limit: $1,775) 1,775 period of 6 calendar years. This is because yourtions apply.2002 — 15,500 × .192 car is generally treated as placed in service in(Limit: $2,950) 2,950
the middle of the year and you claim deprecia-a. You placed some property in service2001 — 15,500 × .32
tion for one-half of both the first year and the(Limit: $4,900) 4,900 from January through September.
2000 — 15,500 × .20 sixth year. b. You placed some property in service(Limit: $3,060) 3,060 Depreciation deduction for certain Indian from October through December.Total $13,578
reservation property.Shorter recovery peri-Less: Actual depreciation c. Your basis in the property you placed inods are provided under MACRS for qualifiedallowed −10,184 service from October through Decem-Indian reservation property placed in service onExcess of 100% over actual $ 3,394
ber (excluding nonresidential real prop-Indian reservations after 1993 and before 2005.Less: Lesser of excess amount ($3,394) erty, residential rental property, andThe recovery period that applies for aor adjusted basis of old van property placed in service and disposedbusiness-use car is 3 years instead of 5 years.($5,316) − 3,394
of in the same year) was more thanHowever, the depreciation limits, discussed
Unadjusted basis of part of new van 40% of your total bases in all propertylater, will still apply.
that is treated as newly purchased you placed in service during the year.For more information on the qualifications forMACRS property $1,922 this shorter recovery period and the percent-
ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-Depreciation in future years.If you useAdditional basis (cash paid) for new tion, see chapter 4 of Publication 946.van that is treated as newly the percentages from the chart, you generally
purchased MACRS property $9,800 must continue to use them for the entire recov-Depreciation methods. You can use one
ery period of your car. However, you cannotof the following three methods to depreciate
your car. continue to use the chart if your basis in your car
Example 2. Rob paid $15,000 for a new car is adjusted because of a casualty. In that case,
1. The 200% declining balance methodthat he placed in service in 2001. He used it for the year of the adjustment and the remaining
(200% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodpartly for business in 2001 (9,600 business recovery period, figure the depreciation withoutthat switches to the straight line methodmiles of 15,000 total miles), 2002 (12,000 busi- the chart using your adjusted basis in the car atwhen that method provides an equal orness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 2003 the end of the year of the adjustment and overgreater deduction.(14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used the the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the
standard mileage rate in those years to claim the Deduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 42. The 150% declining balance method
of Publication 946.business use of his car. (See Depreciation ad- (150% DB) over a 5-year recovery period
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4-1.
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below
to find the depreciation method and percentage to use for your
2004 return. If your car was placed in service before 1987, see
the depreciation chart in the Form 2106 instructions.
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the
car in service. Then select the depreciation method and
percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2004, you must use the same
method you used on last year’s return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line
method. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business. )
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in
the chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for
2004. (Also see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the
same year, you may have to use the Jan. 1—Sept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1—Dec. 31 percentage for your car.
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of t hat year
and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in  service
after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the enti re
year, use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of
Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2004 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2004, both used 100% in
your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30, 2004, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the
$20,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in
service during the year (40% /H11003 ($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
Date Placed In Service 200% Declining
Balance (200% DB)
1
150% Declining
Balancing (150% DB)
1
Straight Line
(SL)
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2004
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2004
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2003
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2003
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2002
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2002
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2001
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2001
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2000
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2000
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1999
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1999
Prior to 1999
200 DB 5.0%
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
20.0
38.0
32.0
22.8
19.2
13.68
11.52
10.94
11.52
9.58
5.76
150 DB 3.75%
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
15.0
28.88
25.5
20.21
17.85
16.4
16.66
16.41
16.66
14.35
8.33
SL 2.5%
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
10.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
17.5
10.0
(b)(a) (c)
You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to c laim depreciation. See
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
2004 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2004.)
If you made the election under Notice 2001-70 to use the higher percentage rate for vehicles placed in service January 1 throug h September 30, 2001,
use the percentage rate shown for vehicles placed in service January 1 through September 30, 2001.
2
CAUTION
3
1
2
3
In future years, do not use the chart indate that you first placed the car in service and 200% DB method to get the largest depreciation
this edition of the publication. Instead,the depreciation method that you are using. Mul- deduction in the early years.
use the chart in the publication or thetiply the unadjusted basis of your car (definedPhil used the MACRS depreciation chart in
TIP
form instructions for those future years.earlier) by that percentage to determine the2003 to find his percentage. The unadjusted
amount of your depreciation deduction. If youbasis of his truck equals its cost because PhilDisposition of car during recovery period.prefer to figure your depreciation deduction with-used it exclusively for business. He multiplied
If you dispose of the car before the end of theout the help of the chart, see Publication 946.the unadjusted basis of his truck, $9,200, by the
recovery period, you are generally allowed a half percentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2003Your deduction cannot be more thanyear of depreciation in the year of disposition depreciation deduction of $1,840.the maximum depreciation limit forunless you purchased the car during the last In 2004, Phil used the truck for personalcars. See Depreciation Limits, later.CAUTION
!
purposes when he repaired his father’s cabin.quarter of a year. See Depreciation deduction
His records show that the business use of hisfor the year of disposition under Disposition of a
Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru- truck was 90% in 2004. Phil used Table 4-1 toCar, later, for information on how to figure the
ary 2003 to use exclusively in his landscape find his percentage. Reading down the first col-depreciation allowed in the year of disposition.business. He paid $9,200 for the truck with no umn for the date placed in service and across to
How to use the 2004 chart.To figure yourtrade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de- the 200% DB column, he locates his percent-
depreciation deduction for 2004, find the per-duction, the truck does not qualify for the special age, 32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of
centage in the column of the chart based on the depreciation allowance, and he chose to use the his truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost × 90% business
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
use), by 32% to figure his 2004 depreciation cars. They are effective after August 5, 1997, forReduction for personal use.The deprecia-
deduction of $2,650. tion limits are reduced based on your percent-cars that run on clean fuel. Clean-fuel cars are
age of personal use. If you use a car less thandiscussed in chapter 12 of Publication 535. The
100% in your business or work, you must deter-exceptions follow.
Depreciation Limits mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-
1. Amounts you pay for retrofit parts andplying the limit amount by the percentage ofThere are limits on the amount you can deductcomponents to modify a car to run on business and investment use during the taxfor depreciation of your car, truck or van, orclean fuel are not subject to the deprecia-year.electric car. The section 179 deduction is treatedtion limit on cars. Only the cost of the car
as depreciation for purposes of the limits. Thebefore modification is subject to the limit.Example. In April 2004, Karl, an outside
maximum amount you can deduct each year dental supply salesman, purchased a new car2. If you place a car in service after August 5,depends on the year you place the car in serv- for $25,400 to make sales calls in a territory that1997, that was produced to run on electric-ice. These limits are shown in the following ta- extends 200 miles around his home base. Heity, your depreciation limit is increased.bles. uses his car 85% for his business. Karl does notThe amounts are shown in the followingclaim the section 179 deduction but, he doesMaximum tables. claim the special depreciation allowance, and heDepreciation Deduction
for Cars chooses the 200% DB method to figure his de-Maximum preciation deduction.Depreciation Deduction forDate 4th & In 2004, Karl figures his special depreciationElectric Cars Placed in ServicePlaced 1st 2nd 3rd Later allowance of $10,795 (($25,400 × 85%) × 50%).After August 5, 1997In Service Year Year Year Years He then figures his depreciation limit for 2004 to
2004 $10,610 1 $4,800 $2,850 $1,675 Date 4th & be $9,019 (2004 depreciation limit ($10,610)
 Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later multiplied by the business use percentage5/06/2003 – 10,7102 4,900 2,950 1,775 In Service Year Year Year Years (85%)). Karl next figures his unadjusted basis of12/31/2003 2004 $31,830 1 $14,300 $8,550 $5,125 $12,571 (($25,400 × 85%) − $9,019). Karl does1/01/2003 – 7,6603 4,900 2,950 1,775 5/06/2003 –  32,0302 14,600 8,750  5,225 not figure his regular MACRS depreciation de-5/05/2003 12/31/2003 duction for 2004 because he has already2002 7,660 3 4,900 2,950 1,775 reached the first year depreciation deduction1/01/2003 – 22,8803 14,600 8,750 5,225
2001 7,660 4 4,900 2,950 1,775 limit of $9,019.5/05/2003
Karl continues to use his car 85% for busi-2000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775 2002 22,980 3 14,700 8,750 5,325 ness. Depreciation in the next four years contin-1999 3,060 5,000 2,950 1,775 2001 23,080 4 14,800 8,850 5,325 ues to be subject to deduction limits. Karl figures
1998 3,160 5,000 2,950 1,775 2000 9,280 14,800 8,850 5,325 his depreciation limits for those years as follows.
1997 3,160 5,000 3,050 1,775 1999 9,280 14,900 8,950 5,325 Year Limit x Business Use Depreciation
1996 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775 1998 9,380 15,000 8,950 5,425 2005 $4,800 × 85% $4,080
1995 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775 1997 9,480 15,100 9,050 5,425 2006 2,850 × 85% 2,423
2007, 2008 1,675 × 85% 1,4241$2,960 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect1$8,880 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect
not to claim the special depreciation allowance. not to claim the special depreciation allowance.In 2009, using the rate from Table 4-1, Karl’s
2$7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $3,060 if2$22,880 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $9,080 ifMACRS deduction is $724 ($12,571 × 5.76%).
the car is not qualified property or if you elect not tothe car is not qualified property or if you elect not toSince that amount is less than the depreciationclaim any special depreciation allowance. claim any special depreciation allowance. limit of $1,424 ($1,675 × 85%), Karl’s deprecia-3$3,060 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect3$9,180 if the car is not qualified property or if you electtion deduction for 2009 is $724.not to claim the special depreciation allowance. not to claim the special depreciation allowance. If Karl continues to use his car for business4$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the car4$9,280 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the carafter 2009, he can continue to claim a deprecia-is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim theis not qualified property, or you elect not to claim thetion deduction for his unrecovered basis. How-special depreciation allowance. special depreciation allowance.
ever, he cannot deduct more than $1,675
multiplied by his business use percentage. SeeTrucks and vans. For 2004, the maximum The examples throughout this chapter
Deductions in years after the recovery period,depreciation deductions for trucks and vans and illustrate gas-fueled cars.
later.passenger vehicles such as minivans and sportCAUTION
!
utility vehicles that are built on a truck chassis Section 179 deduction.The section 179 de-are generally higher than those for cars. ForCar used less than full year.The deprecia- duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. Iftrucks and vans placed in service before 2003,tion limits are not reduced if you use a car foryou place a car that is not a truck, van, or electricuse the Maximum Depreciation Deduction forless than a full year. This means that you do notvehicle in service in 2004, use it only for busi-Cars table. reduce the limit when you either place a car inness, and choose the section 179 deduction, theservice or dispose of a car during the year.Maximum combined section 179 and depreciation deduc-However, the depreciation limits are reduced ifDepreciation Deduction tion for that car for 2004 is limited to $10,610for Trucks and Vans you do not use the car exclusively for business($2,960 if you elect not to claim the special
and investment purposes. See Reduction for depreciation allowance for the car or the car isDate 4th & personal use, later. not qualified property). Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later
In Service Year Year Year Years Example. Marie purchased a car in June Example. On September 4, 2004, Jack2004 $10,910 1 $5,300 $3,150 $1,875 2004 for $20,000 to use exclusively in her busi-bought a used car for $10,000 and placed it in
ness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc-2003 11,010 2,3 5,400 3,250 1,975 service. He used it 80% for his business and he
tion, but she does claim the special depreciationchooses to take a section 179 deduction for the1If the special depreciation allowance does not apply or
allowance, and she chooses the 200% DByou make the election not to claim the special car.
depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,260.method of depreciation. Before applying the limit, Jack figures his
Marie figures her special depreciation allow-2If the special depreciation allowance does not apply or maximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000.
you make the election not to claim the special ance of $10,000 (20,000 × 50%). This is the cost of his qualifying property (up todepreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,360.Marie’s MACRS depreciation (using the ratethe maximum $102,000 amount) multiplied by
3If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/03, the truckfrom Table 4-1) is $2,000 (($20,000 − $10,000) × his business use ($10,000 × 80%).or van is qualified property, and you claim the special20%) for a total depreciation deduction of Jack then figures that his section 179 deduc-depreciation allowance for the truck or van, the
$12,000 ($2,000 + $10,000). However, the max-tion for 2004 is limited to $2,368 (80% ofmaximum deduction is $7,960.
imum amount she can deduct for depreciation is$2,960). He then has an unadjusted basis of
$10,610. (See Deductions in years after the re-Exceptions for clean-fuel cars.There are $5,632 (($10,000 × 80%) − $2,368) for determin-
covery period, later.)two exceptions to the depreciation limits for ing his depreciation deduction. Since he has
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
already reached the maximum limit for 2004, If Bob’s business use of the car was less tion, for the year your business use drops to
Jack will use the unadjusted basis to figure histhan 100% during any year, his depreciation50% or less, you must recapture (include in your
depreciation deduction for 2005. deduction would be less than the maximum gross income) any excess depreciation (dis-
amount allowable for that year. However, in de-cussed later). You also increase the adjusted
Deductions in years after the recovery pe-termining his unrecovered basis in the car, hebasis of your car by the same amount.riod. If the depreciation limits apply to yourwould still reduce his original basis by the maxi-
car, you may have unrecovered basis in your carmum amount allowable. Bob’s unrecovered ba-Example. In June 2001, you purchased a
at the end of the recovery period. If you continuesis at the beginning of 2004 would be $12,165car for exclusive use in your business. You metto use your car for business, you can deduct that($28,600 – $16,435) in this example. This isthe more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 yearsunrecovered basis after the recovery periodtrue even if his actual depreciation deduction forof the recovery period (2001 through 2003) butends. any year was less than the maximum amountfailed to meet it in the fourth year (2004). You
shown.Unrecovered basis. This is your cost or determine your depreciation for 2004 using 20%
other basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel (from column (c) of Table 4-1). You also will
vehicle deduction, electric vehicle credit, and have to determine and include in your grossCar Used 50% or Lessdepreciation and section 179 deductions that income any excess depreciation, discussedfor Businesswould have been allowable if you had used the next.
car 100% for business and investment use.If you use your car 50% or less for qualifiedExcess depreciation. You must include
business use (defined earlier under Deprecia-The recovery period.For 5-year property, any excess depreciation in your gross income
tion Deduction) either in the year the car isyour recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part and add it to your car’s adjusted basis for the
placed in service or in a later year, special rulesyear’s depreciation is allowed in the first calen- first tax year in which you do not use the carapply. The rules that apply in these two situa-dar year, a full year’s depreciation is allowed in more than 50% in qualified business use. Usetions are explained in the following paragraphs.each of the next 4 calendar years, and a part Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-(For this purpose, “car” was defined earlieryear’s depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen- ure and report the excess depreciation in yourunder Actual Car Expenses and includes certaindar year. gross income.trucks and vans and electric cars.)Under MACRS, your recovery period is the Excess depreciation is: same whether you use declining balance or
Qualified business use 50% or less in yearstraight line depreciation. You determine your 1. The amount of the depreciation deductionsplaced in service.If you use your car 50% orunrecovered basis in the 7th year after you allowable for the car (including any sectionless for qualified business use (defined earlierplaced the car in service. 179 deduction claimed and any special de-under Depreciation Deduction) in the year theHow to treat unrecovered basis.If you preciation allowance claimed) for tax yearscar is placed in service, the following three spe-continue to use your car for business after the in which you used the car more than 50%cial rules apply. recovery period, you can claim a depreciation in qualified business use, minus
deduction in each succeeding tax year until you1. You cannot take the section 179 deduc-2. The amount of the depreciation deductionsrecover your full basis in the car. The maximumtion. that would have been allowable for thoseamount you can deduct each year is determined years if you had not used the car more2. You cannot take the special depreciationby the date you placed the car in service and
than 50% in qualified business use for theallowance.your business-use percentage. For example, no
year you placed it in service. This meansdeduction is allowed for a year you use your car3. You must figure depreciation using the the amount of depreciation figured using100% for personal purposes. straight line method over a 5-year recoverythe straight line method.period. You must continue to use theExample. In May 1998, Bob bought and straight line method even if your percent-placed in service a car that he used exclusivelyage of business use increases to more Example. On September 25, 2001, youin his business. The car cost $28,600. Bob didthan 50% in a later year. bought a car for $15,500 and placed it in service.not claim a section 179 deduction for the car. He You did not claim the section 179 deduction butInstead of making the computation yourself,continued to use the car 100% in his business you did claim the 30% special depreciation al-you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find thethroughout the recovery period (1998 through lowance. You used the car exclusively in quali-percentage to use.2003). For those years, Bob used Table 4-1 and fied business use for 2001, 2002, and 2003. Forthe Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Cars those years, you figured the special depreciationExample. On May 22, 2004, Dan bought atable (as explained earlier) to compute his de- allowance and you used the appropriatecar for $15,000. He used it 40% for his consult-preciation deductions as shown in the following MACRS Depreciation Chart to figure deprecia-ing business. Because he did not use the cartable.
tion deductions totaling $12,375 ($6,820 formore than 50% for business, Dan cannot take
any section 179 deduction or the special depre-MACRS MACRS Maximum Deprec. 2001, $3,472 for 2002, and $2,083 for 2003)
Year % Amount Deduction Allowed ciation allowance and he must use the straightunder the 200% DB method.
line method over a 5-year recovery period toDuring 2004, you used the car 50% for busi-1998 20.00 $5,720 $ 3,160 $ 3,160
recover the cost of his car.1999 32.00 9,152 5,000 5,000 ness and 50% for personal purposes. Since you
2000 19.20 5,491 2,950 2,950 Dan deducts $600 in 2004. This is the lesserdid not meet the more-than-50%-use test, you2001 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775 of: must include in gross income for 2004 your2002 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775 excess depreciation determined as follows.2003 5.76 1,647 1,775 1,647 1. $600 (($15,000 cost × 40% business use)Total $16,435 $16,307 × 10% recovery percentage (from columnTotal depreciation claimed: $12,375
(c), Table 4-1)), or (MACRS 200% DB method)At the end of 2003, Bob had an unrecovered
Minus total depreciation allowable:basis in the car of $12,293. This was the 2. $1,184 ($2,960 maximum limit × 40% busi- (Straight line method)$28,600 original basis of his car less the ness use). 2001 — 10% of $15,500.... $1,550$16,307 depreciation deductions allowed during 2002 — 20% of $15,500.... 3,100the recovery period. 2003 — 20% of $15,500.... 3,100 7,750Qualified business use 50% or less in a laterBob continued to use the car 100% for busi- Excess depreciation $4,625
year. If you use your car more than 50% inness in 2004. He can claim a depreciation de-
In 2004, using Form 4797, you figure andqualified business use in the tax year it is placedduction of $1,775 (the maximum allowed for
report the $4,625 excess depreciation you mustin service but the business use drops to 50% oreach subsequent year) for the year. If he contin-
include in your gross income. Your adjustedless in a later year, you can no longer use anues to use the car 100% for business in 2005
accelerated depreciation method for that car.basis in the car is also increased by $4,625.and later years, Bob can deduct the lesser of
Your 2004 depreciation deduction is $1,550For the year the business use drops to 50%$1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis in
($15,500 (unadjusted basis) × 50% (businessor less and all later years in the recovery period,each of those years until his deductions total the
use percentage) × 20% (from column (c) of Ta-you must use the straight line depreciation$10,518 unrecovered basis ($12,293 − $1,775
method over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-claimed in 2004). ble 4-1 on the line for Jan. 1— Sept. 30, 2001)).
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Dollar Business Inclusionon the year you first placed the car in service) toLeasing a Car year amount Proration use amountdetermine the inclusion amount. If the fair mar-
If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use inket value is more than $100,000, see the Reve-2003 $45 138/365 100% $17
2004 98 309/366 100% 83your business, you can use the standard mile-nue Procedure(s) identified in the footnote of the
age rate or actual expenses to figure your de-appendices for the inclusion amount. Revenue
ductible expense. This section explains how toProcedures are available at most IRS officesLeased car changed from personal to busi-
figure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, orand many local libraries. ness use. If you lease a car for personal use
van. and, in a later year, change it to business use,For each tax year during which you lease the
you must determine the car’s fair market valuecar for business, determine your inclusionDeductible payments. You can deduct the on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-amount by following these three steps.part of each lease payment that is for the use of sion amount using the rules explained earlierthe car in your business. You cannot deduct any under Figuring the inclusion amount. Use the1. Locate the appendix that applies to you.part of a lease payment that is for personal use fair market value on the date of conversion.To find the inclusion amount, do the follow-of the car, such as commuting. ing.You must spread any advance payments Example. In March 2002, Janice leased aover the entire lease period. You cannot deducta. Find the line that includes the fair mar-car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,any payments you make to buy a car, even if the 2004, she started working as a self-employedket value of the car on the first day ofpayments are called lease payments. advertising consultant and started using thethe lease term.If you lease a car for 30 days or more, you leased car for business purposes. Her recordsb. Go across the line to the column for themay have to reduce your lease payment deduc- show that her business use for June 1 throughtion by an “inclusion amount.” tax year in which the car is used underDecember 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusionthe lease to find the dollar amount. Foramount for 2004, Janice obtained an appraisalthe last tax year of the lease, use thefrom an independent car leasing company thatInclusion Amounts dollar amount for the preceding year.showed the fair market value of her 2002 car on
June 1, 2004, was $21,650. Using AppendixIf you lease a car that you use in your business2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) forA-7, Janice computed her inclusion amount forfor a lease term of 30 days or more, you maythe number of days of the lease term in-2004 as shown in the following table.have to include an inclusion amount in your cluded in the tax year.income for each tax year you lease the car. To Tax Dollar Business Inclusiondo this, you do not add an amount to income.3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) byyear amount Proration use amountInstead, you reduce your deduction for your the percentage of business and investment
2004 $25 214/366 60% $9lease payment. (This reduction has an effectuse for the tax year. This is your inclusion
similar to the limit on the depreciation deductionamount.
you would have on the car if you owned it.) Reporting inclusion amounts.   For informa-
The inclusion amount is a percentage of part tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employeesExample. On January 17, 2003, you leasedof the fair market value of the leased car multi- should see Car rentals under Completing Formsa car for 3 years and placed it in service for useplied by the percentage of business and invest- 2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprietorsin your business. The car had a fair market valuement use of the car for the tax year. It is prorated should see the instructions for Schedule Cof $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. Youfor the number of days of the lease term in the (Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc-use the car 75% for business and 25% for per-tax year. tions for Schedule F (Form 1040).
sonal purposes during each year of the lease.The inclusion amount applies to each tax
Assuming you continue to use the car 75% foryear that you lease the car if the fair market
business, you use Appendix A-6 to arrive at thevalue (defined next) of the car when the lease
following inclusion amounts for each year of thebegan was more than the amounts shown in the Disposition of a Car
lease:following table.
If you dispose of your car, you may have aTax Dollar Business Inclusion taxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion ofYear Lease Began Fair Market Value* year amount Proration use amount any gain that is due to depreciation (including2004 $17,500 2003 $ 59 349/365 75% $ 42 any section 179 or clean-fuel vehicle deduction)2003  18,000 2004 130 366/366 75% 98 that you claimed on the car will be treated as1999 – 2002  15,500 2005 194 365/365 75% 146 ordinary income. However, you may not have to1997 – 1998 15,800 2006 194 16/365 75% 61995 – 1996 15,500 recognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the car
1994 14,600 because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in.For each year of the lease that you deduct lease1993 14,300 This section gives some general informationpayments, you must reduce your deduction by1992 13,700 about dispositions of cars. For information onthe inclusion amount computed for that year.1991 13,400 how to report the disposition of your car, see1987 – 1990 12,800 Publication 544.Leased car changed from business to per-
*For 2004, the fair market value for trucks and vans issonal use. If you lease a car for business use
$18,000 and for electric cars it is $53,000. Casualty or theft.For a casualty or theft, aand, in a later year, change it to personal use,gain results when you receive insurance or otherfollow the rules explained earlier under Figuring reimbursement that is more than your adjustedFair market value.Fair market value is thethe inclusion amount. For the tax year in whichbasis in your car. If you then spend all of theprice at which the property would change handsyou stop using the car for business, use theproceeds to acquire replacement property (abetween a buyer and a seller, neither having todollar amount for the previous tax year. Proratenew car or repairs to the old car) within a speci-buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl-the dollar amount for the number of days in thefied period of time, you do not recognize anyedge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similarlease term that fall within the tax year.gain. Your basis in the replacement property isproperty around the same date may be helpful in
its cost minus any gain that is not recognized.figuring the fair market value of the property.Example. On August 16, 2003, Will leasedSee Publication 547 for more information.Figure the fair market value on the first day ofan electric car with a fair market value ofthe lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car is$58,600 for 3 years. He used the car exclusivelyTrade-in. When you trade in an old car for aspecified in the lease agreement, use thatin his own data processing business. On No-new one, the transaction is considered aamount as the fair market value. vember 5, 2004, Will closed his business andlike-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is
went to work for a company where he is notFiguring the inclusion amount. Inclusion recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of
required to use a car for business. Using Appen-amounts are listed in Appendix A for cars, in Publication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your
dix C-7, Will computed his inclusion amount forAppendix B for trucks and vans, and in Appendix basis in the new property is generally your ad-
2003 and 2004 as shown in the following tableC  for electric cars leased after August 5, 1997. If justed basis in the old property plus any addi-
and reduced his deductions for lease paymentsthe fair market value of the car is $100,000 or tional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis,
by those amounts.less, use the appropriate appendix (depending earlier.)
Page 24 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 25 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Depreciation adjustment when you used theresult by the percentage from the following table canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-
standard mileage rate.If you used the stan-for the month that you disposed of the car. penses.
dard mileage rate for the business use of your Exception. Documentary evidence is notMonth Percentagecar, depreciation was included in that rate. The needed if any of the following conditions apply.rate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan-Jan., Feb., March............ 12.5%
dard mileage rate is shown in the chart thatApril, May, June............. 37.5% 1. You have meals or lodging expenses while
July, Aug., Sept.............. 62.5%follows. You must reduce your basis in your car traveling away from home for which youOct., Nov., Dec.............. 87.5%(but not below zero) by the amount of this depre- account to your employer under an ac-
ciation. countable plan, and you use a per diemDo not use this table if you are a fiscalallowance method that includes mealsThese rates do not apply for any year in year filer. See Sale or Other Disposi- and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and perwhich the actual expenses method tion Before the Recovery Period EndsCAUTION
!
diem allowances are discussed in chapterwas used.
TIP
in chapter 4 of Publication 946. 6.)
Depreciation 2. Your expense, other than lodging, is lessYear(s) Rate per Mile than $75.
2003 –  2004 $ .16 3. You have a transportation expense for2001 –  2002 .15
which a receipt is not readily available.2000 .14
1994 –  1999 .12 5.1992 –  1993 .11 1/2 Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-
1989 –  1991 .11 dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it
1988 .10 1/2 shows the amount, date, place, and essential1987 .10 character of the expense.Recordkeeping1986 .09 For example, a hotel receipt is enough to1983 –  1985 .08 support expenses for business travel if it has all1982 .07 1/2 If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-of the following information.1980 –  1981 .07 portation expenses, you must be able to prove
(substantiate) certain elements of expense. This1. The name and location of the hotel.For tax years after 1989, the depreciationchapter discusses the records you need to keeprates apply to all business miles. For tax years 2. The dates you stayed there.to prove these expenses.before 1990, the depreciation rates apply to the 3. Separate amounts for charges such asIf you keep timely and accurate rec-first 15,000 miles. lodging, meals, and telephone calls.ords, you will have support to show the
Example. In 1999, you bought a car for ex- IRS if your tax return is ever examined.A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an
RECORDS
clusive use in your business. The car costYou will also have proof of expenses that yourexpense for a business meal if it has all of the
$18,000. From 1999 through 2004, you used theemployer may require if you are reimbursedfollowing information.
standard mileage rate to figure your car expenseunder an accountable plan. These plans are
1. The name and location of the restaurant.deduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles indiscussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements.
1999, 16,300 miles in 2000, 15,600 miles in 2. The number of people served.2001, 16,700 miles in 2002, 15,100 miles in
3. The date and amount of the expense.2003, and 14,900 miles in 2004. Your deprecia-
tion is figured as follows. If a charge is made for items other than food andHow To Prove
beverages, the receipt must show that this is theYear Miles x Rate Depreciation Expenses case.
1999 14,100 × .12 $ 1,692
Canceled check. A canceled check, to-2000 16,300 × .14 2,282 Table 5-1 is a summary of records you need together with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-2001 15,600 × .15 2,340 prove each expense discussed in this publica-2002 16,700 × .15 2,505 tablishes the cost. However, a canceled checktion. You must be able to prove the elements2003 15,100 × .16 2,416 by itself does not prove a business expenselisted across the top portion of the chart. You2004 14,900 × .16 2,384 without other evidence to show that it was for aprove them by having the information and re-Total depreciation $13,619 business purpose.ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed in
At the end of 2004, your adjusted basis in the carthe first column. Duplicate information.You do not have tois $4,381 ($18,000 − $13,619). record information in your account book or otherYou cannot deduct amounts that you
record that duplicates information shown on aapproximate or estimate.Depreciation deduction for the year of receipt as long as your records and receiptsdisposition.If you deduct actual car ex- CAUTION
!
complement each other in an orderly manner.penses and you dispose of your car before the
You do not have to record amounts yourend of its recovery period, you are allowed aYou should keep adequate records to proveemployer pays directly for any ticket or otherreduced depreciation deduction for the year ofyour expenses or have sufficient evidence thattravel item. However, if you charge these itemsdisposition. will support your own statement. You must gen-to your employer, through a credit card or other-To figure the reduced depreciation deductionerally prepare a written record for it to be consid-wise, you must keep a record of the amountsfor a car disposed of in 2004, first determine theered adequate. This is because written evidenceyou spend.depreciation deduction for the full year usingis more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-
Table 4-1. Timely-kept records.You should record theever, if you prepare a record in a computer
If you used a Date Placed in Service line for elements of an expense or of a business use atmemory device with the aid of a logging pro-
Jan. 1—Sept. 30, you can deduct one-half of or near the time of the expense or use andgram, it is considered an adequate record.
the depreciation amount figured for the full year. support it with sufficient documentary evidence.
Figure your depreciation deduction for the full A timely-kept record has more value than aWhat Are Adequateyear using the rules explained in this chapter statement prepared later when generally there isRecords?and deduct 50% of that amount with your other a lack of accurate recall.
actual car expenses. You do not need to write down the elementsYou should keep the proof you need in an ac-If you used a Date Placed in Service line for of every expense on the day of the expense. Ifcount book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-Oct. 1—Dec. 31, you can deduct a percentage you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac-ilar record. You should also keep documentaryof the depreciation amount figured for the full counts for use during the week, the log is consid-evidence that, together with your record, willyear. The percentage you use is determined by ered a timely-kept record.support each element of an expense.the month you disposed of the car. Figure your If you give your employer, client, or customer
depreciation deduction for the full year using theDocumentary evidence. You generally must an expense account statement, it can also be
rules explained in this chapter and multiply thehave documentary evidence, such as receipts, considered a timely-kept record. This is true if
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 25

Page 26 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you copy it from your account book, diary, state- expense and have it available to fully prove that the use of your car for business purposes. In-
ment of expense, or similar record. element of the expense. voices of deliveries establish when you used the
car for business.
Proving business purpose.You must gener- What If I Have Incomplete Sampling. You can keep an adequate recordally provide a written statement of the businessRecords? for parts of a tax year and use that record topurpose of an expense. However, the degree of prove the amount of business or investment useproof varies according to the circumstances inIf you do not have complete records to prove anfor the entire year. You must demonstrate byeach case. If the business purpose of an ex-element of an expense, then you must prove theother evidence that the periods for which anpense is clear from the surrounding circum-element with: adequate record is kept are representative ofstances, then you do not need to give a written the use throughout the tax year.explanation. 1. Your own written or oral statement contain-
ing specific information about the element,Example. You use your car to visit the of-Example. If you are a sales representativeand fices of clients, meet with suppliers and otherwho calls on customers on an established sales subcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to2. Other supporting evidence that is sufficientroute, you do not have to give a written explana- clients. There is no other business use of theto establish the element.tion of the business purpose for traveling that car, but you and your family use the car forroute. You can satisfy the requirements by re-If the element is the description of a gift, orpersonal purposes. You keep adequate recordscording the length of the delivery route once, thethe cost, time, place, or date of an expense, theduring the first week of each month that showdate of each trip at or near the time of the trips,supporting evidence must be either direct evi-that 75% of the use of the car is for business.and the total miles you drove the car during thedence or documentary evidence. Direct evi-Invoices and bills show that your business usetax year. You could also establish the date ofdence can be written statements, or the oralcontinues at the same rate during the latereach trip with a receipt, record of delivery, ortestimony of your guests or other witnesses set-weeks of each month. Your weekly records areother documentary evidence. ting forth detailed information about the element.representative of the use of the car each monthDocumentary evidence can be receipts, paidand are sufficient evidence to support the per-Confidential information.You do not need to bills, or similar evidence. centage of business use for the year.put confidential information relating to an ele- If the element is either the business relation-
ment of a deductible expense (such as the ship of your guests or the business purpose ofExceptional circumstances.You can satisfy
place, business purpose, or business relation- the amount spent, the supporting evidence can the substantiation requirements with other evi-
ship) in your account book, diary, or other re- be circumstantial, rather than direct. For exam- dence if, because of the nature of the situation in
cord. However, you do have to record the ple, the nature of your work, such as making which an expense is made, you cannot get a
information elsewhere at or near the time of the deliveries, provides circumstantial evidence of receipt. This applies if all the following are true.
Table 5-1. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have
expenses
for...
Travel
Entertainment
Gifts
Transportation
Amount Time
Place or
Description
Business Purpose and
Business Relationship
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Cost of each separate expense
for travel, lodging, and meals.
Incidental expenses may be
totaled in reasonable categories
such as taxis, daily meals for
traveler, etc.
Dates you
left and
returned for
each trip
and number
of days
spent on
business.
Destination or area
of your travel
(name of city, town,
or other
designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
Incidental expenses such as
taxis, telephones, etc., may be
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of
entertainment.
(Also see
Business
Purpose.)
Name and address
or location of place
of entertainment.
Type of
entertainment if not
otherwise apparent.
(Also see Business
Purpose.)
Cost of the gift. Date of the
gift.
Description of the
gift.
Date of the
expense.
For car
expenses,
the date of
the use of
the car.
Your business
destination.
Cost of each separate expense.
For car expenses, the cost of
the car and any improvements,
the date you started using it for
business, the mileage for each
business use, and the total miles
for the year.
Purpose:
 Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 N/A
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or other
designations) about the recipients that
shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that
you or your employee was present if the
entertainment was a business meal.
For entertainment, the nature of the
business discussion or activity. If the
entertainment was directly before or after a
business discussion: the date, place, nature,
and duration of the business discussion,
and the identities of the persons who took
part in both the business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
Relationship: N/A
Page 26 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 27 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gift expenses.You do not always have to are included in this publication as Table 6-2 and
1. You were unable to obtain evidence for anrecord the name of each recipient of a gift. A Table 6-3. They are part of the illustrated exam-
element of the expense or use that com-general listing will be enough if it is evident that ples shown at the end of chapter 6.
pletely satisfies the requirements ex-you are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limit
plained earlier under What Are Adequate on the amount you can deduct for gifts to any
Records. one person. For example, if you buy a large
number of tickets to local high school basketball2. You are unable to obtain evidence for an
games and give one or two tickets to each ofelement that completely satisfies the two
many customers, it is usually enough to record arules listed earlier under What if I Have 6.general description of the recipients.Incomplete Records.
Allocating total cost.If you can prove the3. You have presented other evidence for the
total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-element that is the best proof possible
not prove how much it cost for each person whoHow To Reportunder the circumstances.
participated in the event, you may have to allo-
cate the total cost among you and your guestsDestroyed records. If you cannot produce a This chapter explains where and how to reporton a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishreceipt because of reasons beyond your control, the expenses discussed in this publication. Itthe number of persons who participated in theyou can prove a deduction by reconstructing discusses reimbursements and how to treatevent.your records or expenses. Reasons beyond them under accountable and nonaccountableAn allocation would be needed, for example,your control include fire, flood, and other casu- plans. It also explains rules for independent con-if you did not have a business relationship withalty. tractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certainall of your guests. See Allocating between busi-performing artists, Armed Forces reservists, andness and nonbusiness in chapter 2. certain disabled employees. The chapter endsSeparating and Combining
with illustrations of how to report travel, enter-If your return is examined.If your return isExpenses tainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 2106examined, you may have to provide additional
and 2106-EZ.information to the IRS. This information could beThis section explains when expenses must be
needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy orkept separate and when expenses can be com-
reliability of information contained in your rec-bined.
ords, statements, testimony, or documentary
Separating expenses. Each separate pay- evidence before a deduction is allowed. Where To Report
ment is generally considered a separate ex-
pense. For example, if you entertain a customer This section provides general information onHow Long To Keepor client at dinner and then go to the theater, the where to report the expenses discussed in thisRecords and Receiptsdinner expense and the cost of the theater tick- publication.
ets are two separate expenses. You must recordYou must keep records as long as they may bethem separately in your records. Self-employed.   You must report your in-needed for the administration of any provision ofcome and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZthe Internal Revenue Code. Generally, thisSeason or series tickets.If you buy sea- (Form 1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or onmeans you must keep records that support yourson or series tickets for business use, you must Schedule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. Youdeduction (or an item of income) for 3 years fromtreat each ticket in the series as a separate item. do not use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.the date you file the income tax return on whichTo determine the cost of individual tickets, divide If you claim car or truck expenses, you mustthe deduction is claimed. A return filed early isthe total cost (but not more than face value) by provide certain information on the use of yourconsidered filed on the due date. For a morethe number of games or performances in the vehicle. You provide this information on Sched-complete explanation of how long to keep rec-series. You must keep records to show whether ule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Form 4562.ords, get Publication 583, Starting a Businessyou use each ticket as a gift or entertainment. If you file Schedule C:and Keeping Records.Also, you must be able to prove the cost of
You must keep records of the business usenonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox or 1. Report your travel expenses, exceptof your car for each year of the recovery period.other private luxury box for more than one event. meals, on line 24a,See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 underSee Entertainment tickets in chapter 2.
2. Report your meals (actual cost or standardDepreciation Deduction.
Combining items. You can make one daily meal allowance) and entertainment on lineReimbursed for expenses. Employees whoentry in your record for reasonable categories of 24b (The 50% limit is figured on line 24c.),give their records and documentation to theirexpenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneemployers and are reimbursed for their ex-3. Report your gift expenses and transporta-calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealspenses generally do not have to keep copies oftion expenses, other than car expenses,should be in a separate category. You can in-this information. However, you may have to on line 27, andclude tips for meal-related services with theprove your expenses if any of the following con-costs of the meals. 4. Report your car expenses on line 9. Com-ditions apply.Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur- plete Part IV of the form unless you have
ing the course of a single event are considered a to file Form 4562 for depreciation or amor-1. You claim deductions for expenses thatsingle expense. For example, if during entertain- tization.are more than reimbursements.ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately for If you file Schedule C-EZ, report the total of2. Your expenses are reimbursed under aeach serving of refreshments, the total expense all business expenses on line 2. You can onlynonaccountable plan.for the refreshments is treated as a single ex- include 50% of your meals and entertainment inpense. 3. Your employer does not use adequate ac-that total. If you include car expenses, you must
counting procedures to verify expense ac-Car expenses. You can account for several also complete Part III of the form.
counts.uses of your car that can be considered part of a If you file Schedule F:
single use, such as a round trip or uninterrupted4. You are related to your employer as de-1. Report your car expenses on line 12. At-business use, with a single record. Minimal per-fined under Per Diem and Car Allowances, tach Form 4562 and provide informationsonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the waylater. on the use of your car in Part V of Formbetween two business stops, is not an interrup-
Reimbursements, adequate accounting, and 4562.tion of business use.
nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapter2. Report all other business expenses dis-6.Example. You make deliveries at several cussed in this publication on line 34. Youdifferent locations on a route that begins and can only include 50% of your meals andends at your employer’s business premises andExamples of Records entertainment on that line.that includes a stop at the business premises
See your forms instructions for more informationbetween two deliveries. You can account for Examples of records that show the information
on how to complete your tax return.these using a single record of miles driven. you need to keep for different types of expenses
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 27

Page 28 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Both self-employed and an employee. If read this section on reimbursements. Instead,Vehicle Provided by
see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later,you are both self-employed and an employee,Your Employer for information on completing your tax return.you must keep separate records for each busi-
ness activity. Report your business expenses forIf your employer provides you with a car, youReimbursement, allowance, or advance.Aself-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or Fmay be able to deduct the actual expenses ofreimbursement or other expense allowance ar-(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report youroperating that car for business purposes. Therangement is a system or plan that an employerbusiness expenses for your work as an em-amount you can deduct depends on the amountuses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-ployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussedthat your employer included in your income andpenses, advances, reimbursements, andnext. the business and personal miles you drove dur-amounts charged to the employer for employeeing the year. You cannot use the standard mile-business expenses. Arrangements include perEmployees. If you are an employee, you gen-age rate. diem and car allowances.erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofValue reported on Form W-2.Your employertravel, transportation, and entertainment ex- daily reimbursement your employer gives youcan figure and report either the actual value ofpenses. However, you can use the shorter Form for your lodging, meals, and incidental expensesyour personal use of the car or the value of the2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all 3 when you are away from home on business.car as if you used it only for personal purposesof the following conditions. (The term “incidental expenses” is defined in(100% income inclusion). Your employer must
chapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) Aseparately state the amount if 100% of the an-1. You are an employee deducting expenses car allowance is an amount your employer givesnual lease value was included in your income. Ifattributable to your job. you for the business use of your car.you are unsure of the amount included in your
2. You were not reimbursed by your em- Your employer should tell you what methodForm W-2, ask your employer.
of reimbursement is used and what records youployer for your expenses (amounts in-Full value included in your income.You can must provide.cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notdeduct the value of the business use of anconsidered reimbursements). employer-provided car if your employer reportedEmployers. If you are an employer and you
3. If you claim car expenses, you use the100% of the value of the car in your income. Onreimburse employee business expenses, how
standard mileage rate. your 2004 Form W-2, the amount of the valueyou treat this reimbursement on your
will be included in box 1, Wages, tips, otheremployee’s Form W-2 depends in part onFor more information on how to report yourcompensation, and box 12. whether you have an accountable plan. Reim-expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see To claim your expenses, complete Part II,bursements treated as paid under an accounta-Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. Sections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter yourble plan, as explained next, are not reported as
Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse-actual expenses on line 23 of Section C andpay. Reimbursements treated as paid under
ments (or the reimbursements were all includedinclude the entire value of the employer-pro-nonaccountable plans, as explained later, are
in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only businessvided car on line 25. Complete the rest of thereported as pay. See Publication 15 (Circular E),
expense you are claiming is for gifts, and theform. Employer’s Tax Guide, for information on em-
Special Rules discussed later do not apply to ployee pay.Less than full value included in your income.you, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.If less than the full annual lease value of the carInstead, claim the amount of your deductible Accountable Planswas included on your Form W-2, this means thatgifts directly on line 20 of Schedule A (Formyour Form W-2 only includes the value of your1040). To be an accountable plan, your employer’spersonal use of the car. Do not enter this value
reimbursement or allowance arrangement muston your Form 2106; it is not deductible.Statutory employees. If you received a
include all three of the following rules.If you paid any actual costs (that your em-Form W-2 and the “Statutory employee” box in
ployer did not provide or reimburse you for) tobox 13 was checked, report your income and 1. Your expenses must have a business con-operate the car, you can deduct the businessexpenses related to that income on Schedule C nection — that is, you must have paid orportion of those costs. Examples of costs thator C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form incurred deductible expenses while per-you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-2106 or 2106-EZ. forming services as an employee of yourplete Part II, Sections A and C, of Form 2106.Statutory employees include full-time life in- employer.Enter your actual costs on line 23 of Section Csurance salespersons, certain agent or commis- 2. You must adequately account to your em-and leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of thesion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain ployer for these expenses within a reason-form.homeworkers. able period of time.
 If you are entitled to a reimbursement 3. You must return any excess reimburse-from your employer but you do not ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-claim it, you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
! Reimbursements riod of time.for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-
bursement applies. “Adequate accounting” and “returning ex-This section explains what to do when you re-
cess reimbursements” are discussed later.ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any of
An excess reimbursement or allowance isthe employee business expenses discussed inReimbursement for personal expenses. If
any amount you are paid that is more than thethis publication.your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-
business-related expenses that you adequatelyIf you received an advance, allowance, orible personal expenses, such as for vacation
accounted for to your employer.reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-trips, your employer must report the reimburse-
The definition of reasonable period of timeport this amount and your expenses depends onment as wage income in box 1 of your Form
depends on the facts and circumstances of yourwhether the reimbursement was paid to youW-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.
situation. However, regardless of the facts andunder an accountable plan or a nonaccountable
circumstances of your situation, actions thatplan.Income-producing property. If you have take place within the times specified in the fol-This section explains the two types of plans,travel or transportation expenses related to lowing list will be treated as taking place within ahow per diem and car allowances simplify prov-income-producing property, report your deducti- reasonable period of time.ing the amount of your expenses, and the taxble expenses on the form appropriate for that
treatment of your reimbursements and ex-activity. 1. You receive an advance within 30 days ofpenses. It also covers rules for independentFor example, if you have rental real estate the time you have an expense.contractors.income and expenses, report your expenses on 2. You adequately account for your expensesSchedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss.No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed within 60 days after they were paid or in-See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-or given an allowance for your expenses if youcurred.erty, for more information on the rental of realare paid a salary or commission with the under-
estate. If you have deductible investment-re-standing that you will pay your own expenses. In 3. You return any excess reimbursement
lated transportation expenses, report them onthis situation, you have no reimbursement or within 120 days after the expense was
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22. allowance arrangement, and you do not have to paid or incurred.
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. You are given a periodic statement (at by credit card or other method. You must give a. The standard mileage rate.
least quarterly) that asks you to either re- your employer the same type of records andb. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).turn or adequately account for outstanding supporting information that you would have to
advances and you comply within 120 days give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deduction
For per diem amounts, use the rate inof the statement. on your return. You must pay back the amount of
effect for the area where you stop forany reimbursement or other expense allowance
sleep or rest.for which you do not adequately account or that
TIP
Employee meets accountable plan rules.If
is more than the amount for which you ac-you meet the three rules for accountable plans,
counted. Regular federal per diem rate.The regularyour employer should not include any reim-
federal per diem rate is the highest amount thatbursements in your income in box 1 of your
the federal government will pay to its employeesForm W-2. If your expenses equal your reim-
Per Diem and Car Allowances for lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (orbursement, you do not complete Form 2106.
meals and incidental expenses only) while theyYou have no deduction since your expensesIf your employer reimburses you for your ex-are traveling away from home in a particularand reimbursement are equal. penses using a per diem or a car allowance, youarea. The rates are different for different loca-can generally use the allowance as proof for theIf your employer included reimburse- tions. Your employer should have these ratesamount of your expenses. A per diem or carments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and available. (Employers can get Publication 1542,allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-you meet all three rules for accounta-
TIP
which gives the rates in the continental Unitedquirements for the amount of your expensesble plans, ask your employer for a corrected States for the current year. Publication 1542 isonly if all four of the following conditions apply. Form W-2. available on the Internet at www.irs.gov.)
1. Your employer reasonably limits paymentsThe standard meal allowance.The stan-Accountable plan rules not met. Even
of your expenses to those that are ordinarydard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) isthough you are reimbursed under an accounta-
and necessary in the conduct of the tradethe federal rate for meals and incidental ex-ble plan, some of your expenses may not meet
or business. penses (M&IE). The rate for most small localitiesall three rules. Those expenses that fail to meet
all three rules for accountable plans are treated in the United States is $31 a day for all of 2004.2. The allowance is similar in form to and not
as having been reimbursed under a nonac- Most major cities and many other localities qual-more than the federal rate (defined later).
countable plan (discussed later). ify for higher rates. The rates for all localities3. You prove the time (dates), place, andwithin the continental United States are listed inReimbursement of nondeductible business purpose of your expenses to yourPublication 1542. You can also find this informa-expenses. You may be reimbursed under employer (as explained in Table 5-1) withintion on the Internet at www.gsa.gov.your employer’s accountable plan for expensesa reasonable period of time. You receive an allowance only for meals andrelated to that employer’s business, some of
incidental expenses when your employer does4. You are not related to your employer (aswhich are deductible as employee business ex-
one of the following. defined next). If you are related to yourpenses and some of which are not deductible.
employer, you must be able to prove yourThe reimbursements you receive for the nonde- 1. Provides you with lodging (furnishes it inexpenses to the IRS even if you have al-ductible expenses do not meet rule (1) for ac- kind).ready adequately accounted to your em-countable plans, and they are treated as paid
ployer and returned any excessunder a nonaccountable plan. 2. Reimburses you, based on your receipts,reimbursement. for the actual cost of your lodging.
Example. Your employer’s plan reimbursesIf the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow-3. Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for youryou for travel expenses while away from homeance practices are not based on reasonably lodging.on business and also for meals when you workaccurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-late at the office, even though you are not away 4. Does not have a reasonable belief that youognition of cost differences in different areas forfrom home. The part of the arrangement that had (or will have) lodging expenses, suchper diem amounts), you will not be considered toreimburses you for the nondeductible meals as when you stay with friends or relativeshave accounted to your employer. In this case,when you work late at the office is treated as or sleep in the cab of your truck.you must be able to prove your expenses to thepaid under a nonaccountable plan. IRS. 5. Figures the allowance on a basis similar to
The employer makes the decision that used in computing your compensation,Related to employer.You are related to yourwhether to reimburse employees such as number of hours worked or milesemployer if: under an accountable plan or a nonac- traveled.
TIP
countable plan. If you are an employee who1. Your employer is your brother or sister,
receives payments under a nonaccountable High-low rate.This is a simplified methodhalf brother or half sister, spouse, ances-
plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay- of computing the federal per diem rate for traveltor, or lineal descendant,
ments under an accountable plan by voluntarily within the continental United States. It elimi-2. Your employer is a corporation in whichaccounting to your employer for the expenses nates the need to keep a current list of the peryou own, directly or indirectly, more thanand voluntarily returning excess reimburse- diem rate for each city.10% in value of the outstanding stock, orments to the employer. Under the high-low method, the per diem
3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-amount for travel during January through Sep-
duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,tember of 2004 is $207 (including $46 for M&IE)
Adequate Accounting a trust, and your employer. for certain high-cost locations. All other areas
have a per diem amount of $126 (including $36You may be considered to indirectly own stock,One of the three rules for an accountable plan is for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in athat you must adequately account to your em- (Revised October 2004) on the Internet, whichcorporation, partnership, estate, or trust thatployer for your expenses. You adequately ac- gives the areas eligible for the $207 per diemowns the stock or if a member of your family orcount by giving your employer a statement of amount under the high-low method for all or partyour partner owns the stock.expense, an account book, a diary, or a similar of this period.)record in which you entered each expense at orThe federal rate.The federal rate can be fig- Effective October 1, 2004, the per diemnear the time you had it, along with documentaryured using any one of the following methods. rate for certain high-cost locations de-evidence (such as receipts) of your travel, mile-
creased to $199 (including $46 forage, and other employee business expenses. CAUTION
!
1. For per diem amounts: M&IE). The rate for all other locations increased(See Table 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need
to $127 (including $36 for M&IE). However, anto enter in your record and documents you needa. The regular federal per diem rate.
employer can continue to use the rates de-to prove certain expenses.) b. The standard meal allowance. scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re-You must account for all amounts you re-
mainder of 2004 if those rates and locations areceived from your employer during the year asc. The high-low rate.
used consistently during October, November,advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This
and December for all employees. Employersincludes amounts you charged to your employer 2. For car expenses:
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
who did not use the high-low method during theneed to report the related expenses or the allow- Form W-2) and all your expenses. You should
first 9 months of 2004 cannot begin to use itance on your return if your expenses are equal be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.
before 2005. See Revenue Procedure 2004-60to or less than the allowance.
Example 1.  Laura lives and works in Aus-for more information. Also see Publication 1542However, if your actual expenses are more
(available on the Internet at www.irs.gov) for any tin. Her employer sent her to Albuquerque for 2than your allowance, you can complete Form
changes to these rates. days on business. Laura’s employer paid the2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-
hotel directly for her lodging and reimbursedule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-Prorating the standard meal allowance on Laura $50 a day ($100 total) for meals andpenses, you must be able to prove to the IRS thepartial days of travel.The standard meal al- incidental expenses. Laura’s actual meal ex-total amount of your expenses and reimburse-lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you penses were not more than the federal rate forments for the entire year. If you are using thetravel for part of a day, such as on the days you Albuquerque, which is $43 per day.standard meal allowance or the standard mile-depart and return, you must prorate the full-day
age rate, you do not have to prove that amount.Her employer included the $14 that wasM&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-
more than the federal rate (($50 − $43) × 2) inployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or
Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-daythe high-low rate. box 1 of Laura’s Form W-2. Her employer shows
business trip to Denver. The federal rate for$86 ($43 a day × 2) in box 12 of her Form W-2.You can use either of the following methodsDenver is $159 per day. As required by hisThis amount is not included in Laura’s income.to figure the federal M&IE for that day. employer’s accountable plan, he accounts forLaura does not have to complete Form 2106;
the time (dates), place, and business purpose ofhowever, she must include the $14 in her gross1. Method 1: the trip. His employer reimburses him $159 aincome as wages (by reporting the total amount
day ($318 total) for living expenses. Jeremy’sa. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the shown in box 1 of her Form W-2).
living expenses in Denver are not more thanstandard meal allowance amount for
that day. $159 a day. Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and
works for the same employer as Laura. In MayJeremy’s employer does not include any ofb. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 daysthe reimbursement on his Form W-2 and Jeremystandard meal allowance amount for and paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotel bill. Thedoes not deduct the expenses on his return.the preceding day.
employer reimbursed Joe $60 a day for his
Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-daymeals and incidental expenses. The federal rate2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-
business trip to Boston. Matt’s employer usesfor San Diego is $51 a day.lowance using any method that you con-
the high-low method to reimburse employees.sistently apply and that is in accordance Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses
Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is givenwith reasonable business practice. For ex- totaled $325. His employer’s accountable plan
an advance of $207 a day ($414 total) for hisample, an employer can treat 2 full days of will not pay more than $60 a day for travel to San
lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt’sper diem (that includes M&IE) paid for Diego, so Joe does not give his employer the
actual expenses totaled $550.travel away from home from 9 a.m. of one records that prove that he actually spent $325.
day to 5 p.m. of the next day as being noSince Matt’s $550 of expenses are moreHowever, he does account for the time, place,
more than the federal rate. This is truethan his $414 advance, he includes the excessand business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’s
even though a federal employee would beexpenses when he itemizes his deductions. Mattonly business trip this year.limited to a reimbursement of M&IE forcompletes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex-Joe was reimbursed $240 ($60 × 4 days),only 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate.penses and reimbursements). He must also al-which is $36 more than the federal rate of $204
locate his reimbursement between his meals($51 × 4 days). The employer includes the $36The standard mileage rate.This is a setand other expenses as discussed later underas income on Joe’s Form W-2 in box 1. Therate per mile that you can use to compute yourCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. employer also enters $204 in box 12 of Joe’sdeductible car expenses. For 2004, the standard Form W-2.mileage rate is 371/2 cents a mile for all businessExample 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-miles. This rate is adjusted periodically.year for business. Under her employer’s ac-ductible expenses. He enters the total of hiscountable plan, she accounts for the timeFixed and variable rate (FAVR).This is an actual expenses for the year ($325) on Form(dates), place, and business purpose of eachallowance your employer may use to reimburse 2106. He also enters the reimbursements thattrip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowanceyour car expenses. Under this method, your were not included in his income ($204). His totalof 20 cents a mile.employer pays an allowance that includes a deductible expense, before the 50% limit, iscombination of payments covering fixed and va-Since Nicole’s $3,750 expenses computed$121. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate tounder the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles × reimbursed meals and entertainment, he willcover your variable operating costs (such as371/2 cents) are more than her $2,000 reim-include the balance, $61, as an itemized deduc-gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover yourbursement (10,000 miles × 20 cents), she item-tion.fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-izes her deductions to claim the excess
ments), insurance, etc.). If your employerexpenses. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show-Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles forchooses to use this method, your employer willing all of her expenses and reimbursements)business. Under her employer’s accountablerequest the necessary records from you. and enters $1,750 ($3,750 − $2,000) as an item-plan, she gets reimbursed 391/2 cents a mile,ized deduction. which is 2 cents a mile more than the standardReporting your expenses with a per diem or mileage rate.Allowance more than the federal rate.Ifcar allowance.If your reimbursement is in the
your allowance is more than the federal rate,Debbie’s employer must include the reim-form of an allowance received under an ac-
your employer must include the allowance bursement amount up to the standard mileagecountable plan, the following two facts affect
amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of yourrate, $3,750 (10,000 miles × 371/2 cents), in boxyour reporting.
Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However,12 of her Form W-2. That amount is not taxable.
the excess allowance will be included in box 1 ofHer employer must also include $200 (10,0001. The federal rate.
your Form W-2. You must report this part of yourmiles × 2 cents) in box 1 of her Form W-2. This is2. Whether the allowance or your actual ex-allowance as if it were wage income. the reimbursement that is more than the stan-penses were more than the federal rate. dard mileage rate.If your actual expenses are less than or
The following discussions explain where to re-equal to the federal rate, you do not complete If Debbie’s expenses are equal to or less
port your expenses depending upon how theForm 2106 or claim any of your expenses onthan the standard mileage rate, she would not
amount of your allowance compares to the fed-your return. complete Form 2106. If her expenses are more
eral rate. than the standard mileage rate, she would com-However, if your actual expenses are more
plete Form 2106 and report her total expensesthan the federal rate, you can complete FormAllowance less than or equal to the federal
and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of her2106 and deduct those excess expenses. Yourate. If your allowance is less than or equal to
Form W-2). She would then claim the excessmust report on Form 2106 your reimbursementsthe federal rate, the allowance will not be in-
expenses as an itemized deduction.up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of yourcluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example.  Your employer sends you on a
5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you a
$300 ($60 × 5 days) advance to cover your
meals and incidental expenses. The federal per
diem for meals and incidental expenses for
Phoenix is $47. Your trip lasts only 3 days.
Under your employer’s accountable plan, you
must return the $120 ($60 × 2 days) advance for
the 2 days you did not travel. You do not have to
return the $39 difference between the allowance
you received and the federal rate for Phoenix
(($60 − $47) × 3 days). However, the $39 will be
reported on your Form W-2 as wages.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or
expense allowance arrangement that does not
meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier
under Accountable Plans.
In addition, even if your employer has an
accountable plan, the following payments will be
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable
plan:
1. Excess reimbursements you fail to return
to your employer, and
2. Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses related to your employer’s busi-
ness. See Reimbursement of
nondeductible expenses, earlier, under Ac-
countable Plans.
An arrangement that repays you for business
expenses by reducing the amount reported as
your wages, salary, or other pay will be treated
as a nonaccountable plan. This is because you
are entitled to receive the full amount of your pay
whether or not you have any business ex-
penses.
If you are not sure if the reimbursement or
expense allowance arrangement is an account-
able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-
ployer.
Reporting your expenses under a nonac-
countable plan.Your employer will combine
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-
countable plan with your wages, salary, or other
Table 6-1.
IF the type of reimbursement (or
other expense allowance)
arrangement is under:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: 
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
THEN the employer
reports on Form W-2:
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
No reimbursement plan:
Either adequate accounting or
return of excess, or both, not
required by plan
No amount.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
All expenses and
reimbursements only if
excess expenses are
claimed. Otherwise,
form is not filed.
All expenses.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106: *
Per diem or mileage allowance
exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the
federal rate only and
 excess not
returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
All expenses (and
reimbursements
reported on Form W-2,
box 12) only if expenses
in excess of the federal
rate are claimed.
Otherwise, form is not
filed.
No amount.
pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1If you do not adequately account for or do notReturning Excess of your Form W-2.return any excess advance within a reasonableReimbursements You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZperiod of time, the amount you do not accountand itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-Under an accountable plan, you are required tofor or return will be treated as having been paidpenses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-return any excess reimbursement or other ex-under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).tertainment. Your meal and entertainmentpense allowances for your business expensesUnproved amounts. If you do not prove expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis-to the person paying the reimbursement or al-that you actually traveled on each day for whichcussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenseslowance. Excess reimbursement means any you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-will be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-amount for which you did not adequately ac-ing the elements described in Table 5-1), youcome limit that applies to most miscellaneouscount within a reasonable period of time. Formust return this unproved amount of the travelitemized deductions.example, if you received a travel advance andadvance within a reasonable period of time. Ifyou did not spend all the money on business-re- Example 1. Kim’s employer gives her $500you do not do this, the unproved amount will belated expenses, or you do not have proof of all a month ($6,000 total for the year) for her busi-considered paid under a nonaccountable planyour expenses, you have an excess reimburse- ness expenses. Kim does not have to provide(discussed later).ment. any proof of her expenses to her employer, and“Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-Per diem allowance more than federal rate.Kim can keep any funds that she does notriod of time” were discussed earlier in this chap-If your employer’s accountable plan pays you anspend.ter. allowance that is higher than the federal rate,Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-you do not have to return the difference betweenTravel advance. You receive a travel ad- countable plan. Her employer will include thethe two rates for the period you can provevance if your employer provides you with an $6,000 on Kim’s Form W-2 as if it were wages. Ifbusiness-related travel expenses. However, theexpense allowance before you actually have the Kim wants to deduct her business expenses,difference will be reported as wages on yourexpense, and the allowance is reasonably ex- she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ andForm W-2. This excess amount is consideredpected to be no more than your expense. Under itemize her deductions.paid under a nonaccountable plan (discussedan accountable plan, you are required to ade-later).quately account to your employer for this ad- Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month by
vance and to return any excess within a his employer. On days that he travels away from
reasonable period of time. home on business, his employer designates $50
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travelContractor does not adequately account. If Standard mileage rate.If you claim a de-
expenses. Because his employer would pay Ke- the contractor does not adequately account to duction based on the standard mileage rate in-
vin his monthly salary whether or not he was you for allowances or reimbursements of enter-stead of your actual expenses, you must
traveling away from home, the arrangement is a tainment expenses, you do not have to keep complete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. The
nonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a day records of these items. You are not subject to amount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to Form
designated by his employer is treated as paid the 50% limit on entertainment in this case. You 2106, Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part 1, line 2,
under an accountable plan. can deduct the reimbursements or allowances you can deduct parking fees and tolls that apply
as payment for services if they are ordinary and to the business use of the car. If you file Form
necessary business expenses. However, you 2106-EZ, complete Part I, line 1, for the standard
Rules for Independent
must file Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous In- mileage rate and line 2 for parking fees and tolls.Contractors and Clients come, to report amounts paid to the indepen- See Standard Mileage Rate in chapter 4 for
dent contractor if the total of the reimbursements information on using this rate.This section provides rules for independent con-and any other fees is $600 or more during thetractors who incur expenses on behalf of a client Actual expenses. If you claim a deductioncalendar year.or customer. The rules cover the reporting and based on actual expenses, you cannot use
substantiation of certain expenses discussed in Form 2106-EZ. You must complete Form 2106,
this publication, and they affect both indepen- Part II, Section C. In addition, unless you lease
dent contractors and their clients or customers. your car, you must complete Section D to showCompleting FormsYou are considered an independent contrac- your depreciation deduction and any section
tor if you are self-employed and you perform 179 deduction you can claim.2106 and 2106-EZservices for a customer or client. If you are still using a car that is fully depreci-
ated, continue to complete Section C. Since youThis section briefly describes how employeeshave no depreciation deduction, enter zero oncomplete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 6-1Accounting to Your Client line 28. In this case, do not complete Section D.explains what the employer reports on Form
Car rentals. If you claim car rental ex-W-2 and what the employee reports on FormIf you received a reimbursement or an allow-
penses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have to2106. The instructions for the forms have moreance for travel, entertainment, or gift expenses
reduce that expense by an inclusion amount asinformation on completing them.that you incurred on behalf of a client, you
described in chapter 4. If so, you can show yourshould provide an adequate accounting of these If you are self-employed, do not filecar expenses and any inclusion amount as fol-expenses to your client. If you do not account toForm 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report your lows.your client for these expenses, you must includeexpenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or FCAUTION
!
any reimbursements or allowances in income.(Form 1040). See the instructions for the form1. Compute the inclusion amount without tak-You must keep adequate records of these ex-that you must file. ing into account your business use per-penses whether or not you account to your client centage for the tax year.for these expenses. Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the
If you do not separately account for and seek 2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) onshorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee
reimbursement for meals and entertainment in Form 2106, Part II, line 24b.business expenses. You can use this form if you
connection with providing services for a client,meet all 3 of the following conditions. 3. Report on line 24c the net amount of caryou are subject to the 50% limit on those ex- rental expenses (total car rental expensespenses. See 50% Limit in chapter 2. 1. You are an employee deducting expenses minus the inclusion amount computed inattributable to your job. (1)).Adequate accounting. As a self-employed
2. You were not reimbursed by your em-person, you adequately account by reporting The net amount of car rental expenses will beployer for your expenses (amounts in-your actual expenses. You should follow the adjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflectcluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notrecordkeeping rules in chapter 5. the percentage of business use for the tax year.considered reimbursements).
How to report. For information on how to Transportation expenses.Show your trans-3. If you are claiming car expenses, you arereport expenses on your tax return, see Self-em- portation expenses that did not involve overnightusing the standard mileage rate.ployed at the beginning of this chapter. travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on
Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on thisCar expenses. If you used a car to performline business expenses you have for parkingyour job as an employee, you may be able toRequired Records for fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-Clients or Customers ating your car or expenses of commuting be-ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and thentween your home and work.If you are a client or customer, you generally doclaimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A.
not have to keep records to prove the reimburse-Car expenses using the standard mileage rateEmployee business expenses other than
ments or allowances you give, in the course ofcan also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-meals and entertainment.Show your other
your business, to an independent contractor forpleting Part II and Part I, line 1. employee business expenses on Form 2106,
travel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf. Column A, lines 3 and 4, or Form 2106-EZ, linesInformation on use of cars.If you claimHowever, you must keep records if: 3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals andany deduction for the business use of a car, youentertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex-must answer certain questions and provide in-1. You reimburse the contractor for entertain- penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui-formation about the use of the car. The informa-ment expenses incurred on your behalf, tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses,tion relates to the following items.and and trade and professional publications.
• Mileage (total, business, commuting, and2. The contractor adequately accounts to you If line 4 expenses are the only ones youother personal mileage).for these expenses. are claiming, you received no reim-
• Percentage of business use. bursements (or the reimbursements
TIP
Contractor adequately accounts.If the con- were all included in box 1 of your Form W-2),• Date placed in service.tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain- and the Special Rules discussed later do not
ment expenses, you (the client or customer)• Use of other vehicles. apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or
must keep records documenting each element 2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on• After-work use.of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Use Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. List the type
your records as proof for a deduction on your tax• Whether you have evidence to support theand amount of each expense on the dotted lines
return. If entertainment expenses are accounteddeduction. and include the total on line 20.
for separately, you are subject to the 50% limit• Whether or not the evidence is written.on entertainment. If the contractor adequately Meal and entertainment expenses. Show
accounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you do Employees must complete Form 2106, Part II,the full amount of your expenses for
not have to report the amounts on an information Section A, or Form 2106-EZ, Part II, to provide business-related meals and entertainment on
return. this information. Form 2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
while away from your tax home overnight andAfter you complete the form.After you have
1. During the tax year, you perform servicesother business meals and entertainment. Entercompleted your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, follow
in the performing arts as an employee for50% of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertain-the directions on that form to deduct your ex-at least two employers.ment expenses on line 9, Column B. penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.
If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the fullFor most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule A2. You receive at least $200 each from any
amount of your meals and entertainment on the(Form 1040). However, if you are a governmenttwo of these employers.
line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total byofficial paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,3. Your related performing-arts business ex-50%. Enter the result on line 5. an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-penses are more than 10% of your grossployee with impairment-related work expenses,Hours of service limits.If you are subject income from the performance of thosesee Special Rules, later.to the Department of Transportation’s “hours of services.
service” limits (as explained earlier under Indi-
4. Your adjusted gross income is not moreLimits on employee business expenses.viduals subject to “hours of service” limits in
than $16,000 before deducting these busi-Your employee business expenses may be sub-chapter 2), use 70% instead of 50% for meals
ness expenses.ject to any of the three limits described next.while away from your tax home.
They are figured in the following order on the
Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7specified form. Special rules for married persons.If you are(you cannot use Form 2106-EZ) the amounts married, you must file a joint return unless you1. Limit on meals and entertainment.Cer-your employer (or third party) reimbursed you lived apart from your spouse at all times duringtain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-that were not reported to you in box 1 of your the tax year. If you file a joint return, you mustject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, youForm W-2. This includes any amount reported figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separatelyfigure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 ofunder code L in box 12 of Form W-2. for both you and your spouse. However, require-Form 2106-EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.) ment (4) applies to your and your spouse’s com-Allocating your reimbursement. If you
2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-bined adjusted gross income.were reimbursed under an accountable plan and
tions. If you are an employee, deduct yourwant to deduct excess expenses that were not Where to report.If you meet all of the aboveemployee business expenses (as figured onreimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim- requirements, you should first complete FormForm 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 20 of Schedule Abursement. This is necessary when your em- 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your(Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de-ployer pays your reimbursement in the following performing-arts-related expenses from Formductions, including employee business ex-manner: 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in thepenses, are subject to a 2%-of-adjusted-
total on Form 1040, line 24.1. Pays you a single amount that covers gross-income limit. This limit is figured on line 25
If you do not meet all of the above require-meals and/or entertainment, as well asof Schedule A (Form 1040). ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-other business expenses, and
3. Limit on total itemized deductions.If penses as an adjustment to gross income.2. Does not clearly identify how much is foryour adjusted gross income (line 35 of FormInstead, you must complete Form 2106 ordeductible meals and/or entertainment.1040) is more than $142,700 ($71,350 if you are2106-EZ and deduct your employee business
married filing separately), the total of certainexpenses as an itemized deduction on ScheduleYou must allocate that single payment so that
itemized deductions, including employee busi-A (Form 1040), line 20.you know how much to enter in Form 2106,
ness expenses, may be limited. See your formColumn A and Column B of line 7.
instructions for information on how to figure this
limit. Armed Forces Reservists TravelingExample. Rob’s employer paid him an ex-
More Than 100 Miles From Homepense allowance of $5,000 this year under an
accountable plan. The $5,000 payment con-Special Rules If you are a member of a reserve component ofsisted of $2,000 for airfare and $3,000 for enter-
the Armed Forces of the United States and youtainment and car expenses. The employer did This section discusses special rules that apply
travel more than 100 miles away from home innot clearly show how much of the $3,000 was foronly to government officials who are paid on a
connection with your performance of services asthe cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-fee basis, performing artists, Armed Forces re-a member of the reserves, you can deduct yourally spent $6,500 during the year ($2,000 forservists, and disabled employees with travel expenses as an adjustment to gross in-airfare, $2,000 for entertainment, and $2,500 forimpairment-related work expenses. come rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedcar expenses).
deduction. The amount of expenses you canSince the airfare allowance was clearly iden-
deduct as an adjustment to gross income istified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the paymentOfficials Paid on a Fee Basis
limited to the regular federal per diem rate (forgoes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. To
lodging, meals, and incidental expenses) andCertain fee-basis officials can claim their em-allocate the remaining $3,000, Rob uses the
the standard mileage rate (for car expenses)ployee business expenses whether or not theyworksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.
plus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. Seeitemize their other deductions on Schedule AHis completed worksheet follows.
Per Diem and Car Allowances earlier for more(Form 1040).
information. Any expenses in excess of these1. Enter the total amount of Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-reimbursements your employer amounts can be claimed only as a miscellane-ployed by a state or local government and whogave you that were not reported ous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit.are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. Theyto you in box 1 of Form W-2 . . . 3,000can deduct their business expenses in perform-2. Enter the total amount of your Member of a reserve component.You are aing services in that job as an adjustment to grossexpenses for the periods member of a reserve component of the Armedcovered by this reimbursement 4,500 income rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedForces of the United States if you are in the3. Of the amount on line 2, enter deduction. Army, Naval, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coastyour total expense for meals If you are a fee-basis official, include yourGuard Reserve, the Army National Guard of theand entertainment......... 2,000 employee business expenses from Form 2106,United States, the Air National Guard of the4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total onUnited States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub-result as a decimal (rounded to
Form 1040, line 24.at least three places).......  .444 lic Health Service.
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter
the result here and in Column How to report. If you have reserve-related
B, line 7............... 1,332 travel that takes you more than 100 miles fromExpenses of Certain
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter home, you should first complete Form 2106 orPerforming Artiststhe result here and in Column Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses forA, line 7............... 1,668 If you are a performing artist, you may qualify toreserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to
deduct your employee business expenses as anOn line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668 the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or
adjustment to gross income rather than as a($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) in Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040,
miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,Column A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in Column line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on
you must meet all of the following requirements.B. Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct the balance as an itemized deduction on deduction of $1,945 ($9,723 (remaining basis) ×• Necessary for you to do your work satis-Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. 20%). factorily, David’s total depreciation deduction wouldYou cannot deduct expenses of travel that
• For goods and services not required ornormally be $10,520 ($8,575 + $1,945). How-does not take you more than 100 miles from
used, other than incidentally, in your per-ever, it is limited in the first year to $7,427home as an adjustment to gross income. In-
sonal activities, and ($10,610 (from the Maximum Depreciation De-stead, you must complete Form 2106 or
duction for Cars table shown in chapter 4) ×2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an • Not specifically covered under other in-70%). He enters these amounts in Part II, Sec-itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040),come tax laws. tion D.line 20.
His other car expenses included $3,080 for
Example. You are blind. You must use agas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters this
reader to do your work. You use the reader bothImpairment-Related Work amount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it by
during your regular working hours at your placeExpenses of Disabled Employees the 70% business use. He adds this amount
of work and outside your regular working hours($2,156) to the depreciation deduction ($7,427)
If you are an employee with a physical or mental away from your place of work. The reader’sand reports the total ($9,583) on Part I, line 1.
disability, your impairment-related work ex-services are only for your work. You can deductHis other transportation expenses for park-penses are not subject to the your expenses for the reader as business ex-ing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,190. He enters2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies penses. this amount on Part I, line 2. David’s employerto most other employee business expenses. Af- reimbursed him a total of $2,940 for his car andter you complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, enterIllustrated Examples transportation expenses. This amount was paidyour impairment-related work expenses from from an accountable plan and was not shown onForm 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, onThe following examples illustrate the reporting ofDavid’s Form W-2. However, since he is claim-Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27, and identifytravel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex-ing expenses that are more than his reimburse-the type and amount of this expense on thepenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Businessments, he must show the entire reimbursementdotted line next to line 27. Enter your employeeuse of a car is shown using actual car expensesamount on Part I, Column A, line 7. Since Davidbusiness expenses that are unrelated to yourin Example 1 and the standard mileage rate inhad no meal or entertainment expenses, he en-disability from Form 2106, line 10, or FormExample 2. Sample records that prove some ofters his excess deductible expenses ($7,833) on2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),the claimed expenses are also shown. Part I, line 10. He can deduct these expensesline 20. (subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeExample 1. David Pine purchased a newImpairment-related work expenses are your limit) on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20 if hecar for $24,500 (including sales tax) on Januaryallowable expenses for attendant care at your itemizes his deductions.6, 2004. In 2004, he used the car 70% for busi-workplace and other expenses in connection
ness purposes. A sample page from David’swith your workplace that are necessary for you Example 2. Bill Wilson is an employee oflogbook is illustrated in Table 6-2. He records histo be able to work. Fashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In abusiness mileage (but not his personal miles)You are disabled if you have: typical week, Bill leaves his home on Long Is-and expenses daily. land on Monday morning and drives to Albany to• A physical or mental disability (for exam-David uses Form 2106 to claim actual carexhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospectiveple, blindness or deafness) that function-expenses. He completes Part II, Section A, ascustomers. Then he drives to Troy to showally limits your being employed, or shown later on his illustrated form. He does notFashion’s new line of merchandise to Town De-
claim the section 179 deduction. He does claimpartment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-
the 50% special depreciation allowance andhe talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent forample, a sight or hearing impairment) that
uses the MACRS double declining balance Town Department Store, to discuss the new line.substantially limits one or more of your
method (200% DB) to determine his deprecia-He later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out tomajor life activities, such as performing
tion deduction. dinner to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’smanual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-
new line of clothing.David figures his special depreciation allow-ing, learning, or working.
ance of $7,427 ($24,500 (basis) × 70% (busi- Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2001.
You can deduct impairment-related expenses ness use) × 50% = $8,575 limited to $7,427 He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-
as business expenses if they are: ($10,610 × 70%)). Next, he figures his MACRS pense purposes. He records his total mileage,
Date
6/6/04
Table 6-2. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name:  David Pine
Destination
(City, Town, or Area)
Business
Purpose Start Stop
Miles
this trip
Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
Odometer Readings
6/7/04
6/8/04
6/9/04
6/10/04
6/11/04
6/12/04
Local
(St. Louis)
Indianapolis
Louisville
Return to
St. Louis
Local
(St. Louis)
Weekly
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Sales calls
Sales calls
See Bob Smith
(Pot. Client)
Sales calls
8,097
8,211
8,486
8,599
8,914
8,097
8,188
8,486
8,599
8,875
9,005
9,005
91
275
113
276
91
846
6,236
Gas
Parking
Gas/Repair
flat tire
Gas
$ 18.25
2.00
16.50
17.25
$ 62.00
$993.00
8.00
Expenses
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the His total employee business expenses are not have to account to his employer for the
year. Bill records his expenses and other perti- shown in the following table. reimbursement and the $3,600 was included as
nent information in his Weekly Traveling Ex- income in box 1 of his Form W-2.
Type of Expense Amountpense and Entertainment Record, shown in Because Bill’s reimbursement was included
Table 6-3. He obtains receipts for his expenses in his income and he is using the standard mile-Parking fees and tolls........... $  3 2 5
for lodging and for any other expenses of $75 orCar expenses................ 7,500 age rate for his car expenses, he files Form
Meals ..................... 2,632more. 2106-EZ with his tax return.
Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning..... 8,975During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000
Entertainment................ 1,870miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.Gifts, education, etc............ 4 3 0Following the instructions for Form 2106, Part II,Total $21,732he answers all the questions and figures his car
Bill received an allowance of $3,600 ($300expense to be $7,500 (20,000 business miles ×
per month) to help offset his expenses. Bill did371/2 cents standard mileage rate.)
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
David Pine 559 00 9559Sales
9,583
1,190
10,773
2,940
7,833
7,833
7,833
OMB No. 1545-0139Employee Business Expenses2106Form
/H17075See separate instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements
Column BColumn A
Step 1 Enter Your Expenses Meals and
Entertainment
Other Than Meals
and Entertainment
1
Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See
instructions.)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging,
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not
include meals and entertainment
4
4
5Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions)5
Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5
6
6
Note: If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8.
Step 2 Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see
instructions)
7
7
Step 3 Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040)
8
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if
line 7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as
income on Form 1040, line 7
8
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form 2106
to your return.
9
9
10
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal
expenses incurred while away from home on business by 70% (.70)
instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local government
officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the instructions for
special rules on where to enter the total.)
/H1707510
Cat. No. 11700NFor Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Form 2106 (2004)
Part I
(99)
2004
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
/H12011
16 0 4
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
3,080
3,080
2,156
7,427
9,583
24,500
9,723
200DB 20%
1,945
9,372
10,610
7,427
7,427
7,427
/H12011
Page 2Form 2106 (2004)
Vehicle Expenses
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
//1111 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service
12 milesmiles12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2004
milesmiles1313 Business miles included on line 12
%%1414 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12
milesmiles1515 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance
milesmiles1616 Commuting miles included on line 12
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 milesmiles17
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?18 NoYes
NoYesWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?19
NoYes
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?21 NoYes
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?20
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or
Section C.)
22 Multiply line 13 by 37.5¢ (.375) 22
Section C—Actual Expenses (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle
insurance, etc.
23
23
24a24a Vehicle rentals
24bb Inclusion amount (see instructions)
24cc Subtract line 24b from line 24a
Value of employer-provided
vehicle (applies only if 100% of
annual lease value was included
on Form W-2—see instructions)
25
25
2626 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25
Multiply line 26 by the
percentage on line 14
27
27
28
Depreciation. Enter amount from
line 38 below
28
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total
here and on line 1 29
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C
for the vehicle.)
(a) Vehicle 1 (b) Vehicle 2
Enter cost or other basis (see
instructions)
30
30
Enter section 179 deduction
and special allowance (see
instructions)
31
31
Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see
instructions if you claimed the
section 179 deduction or
special allowance)
32
32
Enter depreciation method and
percentage (see instructions)
33
33
Multiply line 32 by the percentage
on line 33 (see instructions)
34
34
35Add lines 31 and 3435
Enter the applicable limit explained
in the line 36 instructions
36
36
Multiply line 36 by the
percentage on line 14
37
37
Enter the smaller of line 35 or
line 37. Also enter this amount
on line 28 above
38
38
Part II
//
Form 2106 (2004)
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel and transportation expenses
Table 6-3. Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
From: August 8, 2004 To: August 14, 2004 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
Travel Expenses:
Airlines
1.
Excess baggage
Bus - Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Hotel and Motel
(Detail in Schedule B)
Entertainment
(Detail in Schedule C)
Other Expenses:
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s)
Trade Shows
2.
3.
4.
Car Expenses: (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
5.
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A - Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B - Lodging
Schedule C - Entertainment
Date
6.
Hotel
or
Motel
Name
City
August 12, 2004 Bar
Dinner
Item Place
John’s Steak House
Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
Troy
Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.15 00
35 00
Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern
Hotel
Albany Albany Albany Troy
57,600
57,445
155
155
57,620
57,600
20
57,650
57,620
57,660
57,650
57,840
57,660
30 10 395
170103020
180
385
40 0
87 25 120 00 117 75 111 50 19 50 456 00
10 0030 0 30 0
20 00 20 00
15 0015 00 30 00
40 00
15 0 10 0 25 0
50 00
22 00
97 5
50 00
18 25
10 00
67 5
50 00
17 50
92 5
60 0 52 5
82 5
45 00
50 00
70 0
85 0
25 00
45 75
195 00
57 75
50 00
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Other reimbursements
TOTAL
N/A
Page 38 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 39 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
7,500
8,975
430
2,251
19,481
1 3 2001
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
4,502
325
OMB No. 1545-1441
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
1
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 37.5¢
(.375)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and entertainment4 4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ × 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred
while away from home on business by 70% (.70) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
(Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing
artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter
this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2004)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and
appropriate for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2004.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year)
/H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2004, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2004 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
2004
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 39

Page 40 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Search publications online by topic or in on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask
keyword. some callers to complete a short survey at the
end of the call.• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)7.
published in the last few years.
Walk-in. Many products and services
• Figure your withholding allowances using are available on a walk-in basis.
our Form W-4 calculator.How To Get Tax • Sign up to receive local and national tax
news by email. • Products. You can walk in to many postHelp offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up• Get information on starting and operating
certain forms, instructions, and publica-a small business.You can get help with unresolved tax issues, tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- stores, copy centers, city and county gov-
tions, and get more information from the IRS in ernment offices, credit unions, and officeFax. You can get over 100 of the mostseveral ways. By selecting the method that is supply stores have a collection of productsrequested forms and instructions 24best for you, you will have quick and easy ac- available to print from a CD-ROM or pho-hours a day, 7 days a week, by fax.cess to tax help. tocopy from reproducible proofs. Also,Just call 703-368-9694 from the telephone con-some IRS offices and libraries have thenected to your fax machine. When you call, youContacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter-will hear instructions on how to use the service.have attempted to deal with an IRS problem nal Revenue Bulletins, and CumulativeThe items you request will be faxed to you.unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- Bulletins available for research purposes.For help with transmission problems, callpayer Advocate.
703-487-4608. • Services. You can walk in to your localThe Taxpayer Advocate independently rep-
Long-distance charges may apply. Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-resents your interests and concerns within the
ness day to ask tax questions or get helpIRS by protecting your rights and resolving Phone. Many services are available by with a tax problem. An employee can ex-problems that have not been fixed through nor- phone. plain IRS letters, request adjustments tomal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-
your account, or help you set up a pay-not change the tax law or make a technical tax
ment plan. You can set up an appointmentdecision, they can clear up problems that re-
by calling your local Center and, at thesulted from previous contacts and ensure that• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
prompt, leaving a message requestingyour case is given a complete and impartial tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order
Everyday Tax Solutions help. A represen-review. current-year forms, instructions, and publi-
tative will call you back within 2 businesscations and prior-year forms and instruc-To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
days to schedule an in-person appoint-tions. You should receive your order within• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at ment at your convenience. To find the10 days.1-877-777-4778. number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with or look in the phone book under United• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocateyour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. States Government, Internal Revenueoffice in your area.
• Solving problems. You can get Service.• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a face-to-face help solving tax problemsTTY/TDD user. every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- Mail. You can send your order for
sistance Centers. An employee can ex-• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. forms, instructions, and publications to
plain IRS letters, request adjustments to the Distribution Center nearest to you
your account, or help you set up a pay-For more information, see Publication 1546, and receive a response within 10 business days
ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS— after your request is received. Use the address
tance Center for an appointment. To findHow To Get Help With Unresolved Tax that applies to your part of the country.
the number, go toProblems. • Western part of U.S.:www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the
Western Area Distribution Centerphone book under United States Govern-Free tax services.To find out what services
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743-0001ment, Internal Revenue Service.are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax • Central part of U.S.:• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesspublications and an index of tax topics. It also Central Area Distribution Centerto TTY/TDD equipment, calldescribes other free tax information services, P.O. Box 89031-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toincluding tax education and assistance pro- Bloomington, IL 61702-8903order forms and publications.grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 andInternet. You can access the IRS web- addresses:press 2 to listen to pre-recordedsite 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, at Eastern Area Distribution Centermessages covering various tax topics.www.irs.gov to: P.O. Box 85074• Refund information. If you would like to Richmond, VA 23261-5074
check the status of your 2004 refund, call• E-file your return. Find out about commer- 1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for auto-cial tax preparation and e-file services CD-ROM for tax products. You canmated refund information or callavailable free to eligible taxpayers. order Publication 1796, IRS Federal1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6 Tax Products CD-ROM, and obtain:weeks from the date you filed your return• Check the status of your 2004 refund.
(3 weeks if you filed electronically). HaveClick on Where’s My Refund. Be sure to
your 2004 tax return available becausewait at least 6 weeks from the date you • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-
you will need to know your filing statusfiled your return (3 weeks if you filed elec- lications.
and the exact whole dollar amount of yourtronically). Have your 2004 tax return • Prior-year forms and instructions.refund.available because you will need to know
• Frequently requested tax forms that mayyour filing status and the exact whole dol-
be filled in electronically, printed out forlar amount of your refund. Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-submission, or saved for recordkeeping.ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give• Download forms, instructions, and publica-
accurate, courteous, and professional answers,• Internal Revenue Bulletins.tions.
we use several methods to evaluate the quality• Order IRS products online. of our telephone services. One method is for a Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In-
• Research your tax questions online. second IRS representative to sometimes listenformation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/
Page 40 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 41 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cdorders for $22 (no handling fee) or call Appendices B-1 through B-2 show the lease
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the CD-ROM for inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifAppendices
$22 (plus a $5 handling fee). The first release is you leased a truck or van.
available in early January and the final release is Appendices C-1 through C-8 show the leaseThere are seventeen appendices.
available in late February. inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifAppendices A-1 through A-7 show the lease
you leased an electric car.inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifCD-ROM for small businesses. Pub- If any of these apply to you, use the appendixyou leased a car (other than a truck or van, or anlication 3207, The Small Business Re- for the year you first leased the car. (See chapterelectric car) for 30 days or more. The tables aresource Guide, CD-ROM 2004, is a
4.)numbered.must for every small business owner or any
taxpayer about to start a business. This handy,
interactive CD contains all the business tax
forms, instructions, and publications needed to
successfully manage a business. In addition, the
CD provides other helpful information, such as
how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-
ing for your business, and much more. The de-
sign of the CD makes finding information easy
and quick and incorporates file formats and
browsers that can be run on virtually any
desktop or laptop computer.
It is available in early April. You can get a
free copy by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visit-
ing www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 41

Page 42 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1994 through 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
14
25
36
47
62
80
99
117
136
154
173
191
209
228
255
292
329
366
403
439
477
513
550
587
624
661
697
735
771
808
845
882
919
955
992
1,028
1,066
1,102
1,140
1,176
1,213
1,250
1,286
1,324
1,360
39
49
58
68
81
97
113
129
145
161
176
193
208
225
248
280
312
344
376
408
440
471
503
535
567
599
631
662
694
726
757
790
822
854
886
918
950
981
1,013
1,045
1,077
1,109
1,141
1,172
1,204
28
43
56
71
89
113
136
159
184
207
230
254
277
301
336
383
429
477
524
570
617
665
711
758
804
851
899
946
992
1,039
1,086
1,133
1,180
1,227
1,274
1,320
1,367
1,415
1,462
1,508
1,556
1,603
1,649
1,696
1,743
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1994
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1995
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1996
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1997
$$ $$$ $
5th and Later
21
32
42
53
67
84
102
119
136
154
171
189
207
225
250
286
320
355
390
425
460
495
531
565
600
635
670
705
740
775
810
844
880
915
950
985
1,020
1,054
1,089
1,125
1,159
1,195
1,230
1,264
1,299
$
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1998
10
21
32
44
58
77
95
114
132
151
169
187
205
224
252
288
326
362
399
435
473
509
546
583
620
657
693
731
767
804
841
878
915
951
989
1,026
1,062
1,098
1,136
1,172
1,209
1,246
1,282
1,320
1,356
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
2
1,398
1,434
1,471
1,508
1,544
1,582
1,619
1,674
1,747
1,821
1,894
1,968
2,042
2,115
2,189
1,236
1,268
1,299
1,331
1,363
1,395
1,427
1,475
1,538
1,602
1,666
1,730
1,793
1,857
1,921
1,790
1,837
1,884
1,931
1,977
2,024
2,072
2,142
2,235
2,330
2,423
2,517
2,611
2,704
2,799
1,334
1,370
1,404
1,440
1,474
1,509
1,544
1,597
1,667
1,737
1,807
1,876
1,947
2,016
2,086
1,394
1,430
1,467
1,504
1,540
1,578
1,615
1,670
1,743
1,817
1,890
1,964
2,038
2,112
2,186
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,801, see the document listed for the first year of th e lease.
For 1994, Revenue Procedure 94-53 (1994-2 CB 712)
For 1995, Revenue Procedure 95-9 (1995-1 CB 498)
For 1996, Revenue Procedure 96-25 (1996-1 CB 681)
For 1997, Revenue Procedure 97-20 (1997-1 CB 647)
For 1998, Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-1 CB 930)
If you leased an electric car after August 5, 1987, use Appendix B.
Page 42

Page 43 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
16
19
22
26
29
32
39
47
53
61
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
32
35
39
42
47
53
60
66
73
79
85
92
98
105
111
118
124
131
137
144
150
157
163
170
176
183
189
196
202
208
215
221
228
234
241
247
254
260
267
273
280
286
296
309
322
335
348
361
374
387
399
412
435
467
500
532
68
75
82
89
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
199
214
227
242
256
270
284
299
313
327
341
355
369
384
398
412
426
441
455
469
483
497
512
526
540
554
569
582
597
611
625
646
675
703
732
760
788
817
845
874
902
952
1,023
1,094
1,165 1,729 2,394 2,073
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
$$ $$$$ $
48
59
69
80
90
101
111
122
132
148
169
190
212
233
253
275
296
316
338
359
380
402
423
443
464
486
507
528
549
570
591
612
633
654
675
696
718
739
759
780
802
823
843
865
886
907
928
960
1,002
1,044
1,086
1,128
1,171
1,212
1,255
1,297
1,339
1,413
1,518
1,623
58
71
83
96
108
121
134
146
160
178
204
229
254
279
305
330
355
381
406
431
456
481
506
532
557
582
607
633
658
683
708
734
759
784
810
835
860
885
911
936
961
986
1,012
1,037
1,062
1,087
1,113
1,151
1,201
1,252
1,302
1,353
1,403
1,454
1,504
1,555
1,606
1,694
1,821
1,947
68
82
96
111
126
140
155
169
183
206
235
264
293
322
351
380
410
439
468
497
527
556
585
614
643
672
702
731
760
789
819
848
877
906
935
964
993
1,023
1,052
1,081
1,110
1,140
1,169
1,198
1,227
1,256
1,285
1,329
1,387
1,446
1,504
1,563
1,621
1,679
1,738
1,796
1,854
1,956
2,102
2,248
2
4
6
8
10
13
3
7
11
15
20
25
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
4
10
17
23
29
38
4
13
20
28
35
45
6
14
23
32
41
53
Page 43

Page 44 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
23
28
9
17
25
33
42
10
20
30
40
49
12
23
34
45
57
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
49,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
25
29
33
37
41
45
50
54
60
68
77
85
93
102
110
119
127
135
144
152
160
169
177
185
194
202
210
219
227
235
244
252
260
269
277
285
294
302
311
319
327
336
344
352
361
369
381
398
415
432
448
465
482
498
515
532
561
603
644
686
36
45
54
63
72
81
91
100
109
118
132
150
168
187
205
223
241
259
278
296
314
333
351
369
388
406
424
443
461
479
497
516
534
552
571
589
607
626
644
662
680
699
717
735
754
772
790
808
836
873
909
945
982
1,019
1,055
1,092
1,129
1,165
1,229
1,320
1,412
1,504
52
66
79
93
107
121
133
147
160
174
194
222
249
276
303
330
358
385
412
439
467
493
521
548
574
602
629
656
683
710
738
765
792
819
846
873
901
927
954
982
1,009
1,036
1,063
1,090
1,117
1,145
1,172
1,199
1,240
1,294
1,348
1,403
1,457
1,511
1,566
1,620
1,673
1,728
1,823
1,959
2,095
2,230
62
78
95
111
127
143
160
176
193
209
234
266
298
331
364
396
429
461
493
527
558
591
623
656
689
721
754
786
819
852
884
916
949
982
1,014
1,047
1,079
1,112
1,145
1,177
1,210
1,242
1,275
1,308
1,340
1,372
1,405
1,438
1,486
1,551
1,617
1,681
1,747
1,811
1,876
1,942
2,007
2,072
2,186
2,349
72
91
109
128
147
166
185
204
222
241
269
306
345
381
419
457
494
532
570
607
645
683
720
757
795
833
870
908
946
983
1,021
1,058
1,095
1,133
1,171
1,208
1,246
1,284
1,321
1,359
1,396
1,433
1,471
1,508
1,546
1,584
1,621
1,659
1,715
1,790
1,865
1,941
2,016
2,092
2,166
2,241
2,317
2,392
2,523
2,711
2,899
3,087
2,511
2,674
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 I.R.B. 274).
$$ $$$$ $
Page 44

Page 45 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
22
27
9
16
24
33
41
10
20
30
39
48
11
22
33
44
56
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
53
59
67
75
83
91
100
108
116
124
132
140
149
157
165
173
181
189
198
206
214
222
230
238
247
255
263
271
279
287
296
304
312
320
328
336
345
353
361
373
390
406
422
439
455
471
488
504
520
549
590
631
671
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
97
106
115
129
147
165
183
201
218
236
254
272
290
308
326
343
361
379
397
415
433
451
469
487
505
523
540
558
576
594
612
630
648
666
684
702
720
738
755
773
791
818
854
890
926
961
997
1,033
1,068
1,104
1,140
1,203
1,292
1,382
1,472
51
64
78
91
104
117
131
144
158
171
190
217
243
270
296
324
350
377
403
430
456
482
510
536
563
590
616
642
669
695
722
748
775
802
828
855
881
908
935
961
987
1,014
1,040
1,067
1,093
1,120
1,147
1,173
1,213
1,266
1,319
1,372
1,426
1,479
1,532
1,585
1,638
1,692
1,784
1,917
2,049
2,182
61
77
92
109
125
141
156
173
188
204
229
260
292
324
356
387
419
451
483
515
547
579
610
643
674
705
738
770
801
833
865
897
929
961
993
1,024
1,057
1,088
1,119
1,151
1,184
1,215
1,248
1,279
1,311
1,343
1,375
1,407
1,455
1,518
1,582
1,645
1,709
1,772
1,836
1,901
1,964
2,027
2,139
2,298
70
89
107
125
143
162
181
199
217
236
263
300
337
373
410
447
484
520
557
594
631
667
705
741
778
815
851
888
925
962
998
1,036
1,072
1,108
1,145
1,183
1,219
1,256
1,293
1,330
1,366
1,403
1,439
1,476
1,514
1,550
1,586
1,624
1,678
1,752
1,825
1,900
1,972
2,047
2,120
2,193
2,267
2,341
2,469
2,653
2,837
3,020
2,458
2,617
$$ $$$$ $
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732).
Page 45

Page 46 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
2
3
4
6
7
5
9
14
18
23
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
9
11
14
16
18
21
23
25
28
30
33
38
43
47
52
57
61
66
71
75
80
85
89
94
99
103
108
112
117
122
126
131
136
140
145
150
154
159
164
168
173
177
182
187
191
196
201
205
212
222
231
240
250
259
268
277
287
296
312
335
359
382
29
37
44
52
60
67
75
82
90
97
108
123
139
154
169
185
199
214
230
245
260
276
290
305
321
336
351
366
381
396
411
426
441
457
472
487
502
517
532
548
904
934
964
1,017
1,092
1,169
1,245
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
3
7
10
13
16
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
56
60
66
74
84
94
104
114
124
135
145
155
165
175
185
196
206
216
226
236
247
257
267
278
288
298
308
318
328
339
349
359
369
379
390
400
410
420
430
440
451
466
486
507
527
547
568
589
609
629
650
686
737
787
838
6
11
17
22
29
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
98
108
117
130
149
166
185
203
220
239
258
275
294
312
329
348
367
384
403
421
439
457
475
493
512
530
548
566
584
602
620
639
657
675
693
711
729
747
766
784
802
829
866
902
938
974
1.011
1,047
1,083
1,120
1,156
1,219
1,311
1,401
1,491
6
13
19
26
31
40
50
61
72
82
93
103
114
123
134
150
171
192
213
234
255
276
296
318
338
360
381
402
422
443
464
485
506
527
549
570
590
611
632
653
674
695
717
737
758
779
800
821
842
863
883
905
925
957
999
1,041
1,083
1,125
1,166
1,208
1,250
1,292
1,334
1,408
1,512
1,617
1,722100,000
2
$$$$ $
563
578
593
608
624
639
654
669
692
722
752
783
813
843
873
Page 46

Page 47 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
10
12
14
15
17
33
39
44
50
56
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
19
21
22
25
28
32
35
39
42
46
49
52
56
59
63
66
70
73
77
80
83
87
90
94
97
101
104
108
111
115
118
121
125
128
132
135
139
142
146
149
152
158
165
171
178
185
192
199
206
213
220
232
249
266
284
61
66
72
81
92
103
115
125
137
148
159
171
182
194
204
215
227
238
249
260
272
283
294
306
317
328
339
351
362
374
385
396
407
418
430
441
452
463
474
486
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
22
26
30
34
37
41
45
49
54
62
70
77
85
92
100
108
115
123
130
138
146
153
161
168
176
184
191
199
206
214
221
229
236
244
251
259
267
274
282
289
297
304
312
320
327
335
346
361
377
392
407
422
437
452
467
483
509
547
585
623
40
46
53
59
66
73
80
87
97
110
123
137
151
165
178
191
205
218
231
245
259
272
285
299
313
326
340
353
366
380
394
407
420
434
447
460
474
488
502
515
528
542
556
569
582
596
616
642
670
697
724
751
778
804
832
859
906
973
1.041
1,108
45
53
61
69
77
85
92
100
111
127
143
158
174
189
204
221
236
251
267
283
298
314
330
346
361
376
391
407
423
438
454
470
486
501
516
532
548
563
578
594
610
626
641
656
672
688
711
743
773
805
835
867
898
930
960
991
1,046
1,124
1,202
1,280
$$$$ $
497
514
537
559
581
604
626
649
672
694
716
756
812
868
924
100,000
2
Page 47

Page 48 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-7. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
$$$$ $11 23 33 42 48
13 26 40 49 56
14 31 46 55 65
16 35 51 63 73
18 39 57 70 81
20 43 63 77 89
22 47 69 84 97
23 51 75 91 106
25 55 81 98 114
28 61 90 109 126
32 69 102 123 142
35 77 114 137 159
39 85 126 151 176
43 93 137 166 192
46 101 149 180 209
50 109 161 194 225
54 116 174 208 242
57 125 185 223 257
61 133 197 237 274
64 141 209 251 291
68 149 221 265 307
72 157 232 280 323
75 165 244 294 340
79 173 256 308 357
83 181 268 322 373
86 189 280 337 389
90 197 292 351 405
94 204 304 365 423
97 213 316 379 438
101 221 327 394 455
105 228 340 408 471
108 237 351 422 488
112 245 363 436 504
115 253 375 451 520
119 261 387 464 538
123 269 398 479 554
126 277 411 493 570
130 285 422 508 586
134 292 435 522 603
137 301 446 536 619
141 309 458 550 636
145 316 471 564 652
148 325 482 578 669
152 333 493 593 685
155 341 506 607 701
159 349 517 622 718
163 357 529 636 734
168 369 547 657 759
176 384 571 686 792
183 401 594 714 825
190 417 618 743 857
197 433 642 771 890
205 448 666 800 923
212 465 689 828 956
219 481 713 856 990
227 496 738 884 1,022
234 513 760 914 1,055
247 540 803 963 1,112
265 580 862 1,035 1,194
283 621 921 1,105 1,277
301 661 980 1,177 1,359
17,500 18,000
18,000 18,500
18,500 19,000
19,000 19,500
19,500 20,000
20,000 20,500
20,500 21,000
21,000 21,500
21,500 22,000
22,000 23,000
23,000 24,000
24,000 25,000
25,000 26,000
26,000 27,000
27,000 28,000
28,000 29,000
29,000 30,000
30,000 31,000
31,000 32,000
32,000 33,000
33,000 34,000
34,000 35,000
35,000 36,000
36,000 37,000
37,000 38,000
38,000 39,000
39,000 40,000
40,000 41,000
41,000 42,000
42,000 43,000
43,000 44,000
44,000 45,000
45,000 46,000
46,000 47,000
47,000 48,000
48,000 49,000
49,000 50,000
50,000 51,000
51,000 52,000
52,000 53,000
53,000 54,000
54,000 55,000
55,000 56,000
56,000 57,000
57,000 58,000
58,000 59,000
59,000 60,000
60,000 62,000
62,000 64,000
64,000 66,000
66,000 68,000
68,000 70,000
70,000 72,000
72,000 74,000
74,000 76,000
76,000 78,000
78,000 80,000
80,000 85,000
85,000 90,000
90,000 95,000
95,000 100,000
2
1
2
Page 48

Page 49 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
7
8
10
12
14
22
27
33
38
44
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
15
17
20
23
27
30
33
37
40
44
47
51
54
58
61
65
68
71
75
78
82
85
89
92
96
99
102
106
109
113
116
120
123
127
130
134
137
140
144
147
152
159
166
173
180
187
194
201
208
215
227
244
261
278
49
55
63
74
86
97
109
119
130
142
153
165
176
187
198
210
221
232
243
254
266
277
289
300
311
322
333
345
356
368
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
14
18
22
26
29
34
37
43
51
58
66
73
81
89
96
104
111
119
126
134
141
149
157
164
172
179
187
194
202
209
217
225
232
240
247
255
263
270
278
285
293
301
308
316
323
335
350
365
380
395
410
426
441
456
471
497
535
573
611
24
32
38
45
52
59
66
76
89
102
116
129
143
157
170
183
196
210
224
238
251
264
278
292
305
318
332
345
358
373
386
400
413
426
439
29
36
44
52
60
67
75
86
102
118
133
149
165
180
196
212
227
242
258
273
289
305
320
336
352
367
383
398
414
429
445
460
476
492
507
$$$$ $
100,000
2
379
389
401
412
434
445
457
468
480
496
519
542
564
587
609
631
654
676
699
739
795
851
907
453
467
480
493
507
521
534
548
561
575
595
622
648
676
702
730
757
783
811
837
885
952
1,020
1,088
424
523
538
554
570
585
601
617
632
647
663
687
717
749
780
811
842
873
905
935
967
1,021
1,099
1,177
1,254
Page 49

Page 50 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
$$$$ $
1
2
18,000 18,500 7 15 21 26 30
18,500 19,000 9 18 28 33 38
19,000 19,500 11 22 34 40 47
19,500 20,000 13 26 39 48 55
20,000 20,500 14 31 45 54 63
20,500 21,000 16 35 51 61 72
21,000 21,500 18 38 58 68 80
21,500 22,000 20 42 63 76 88
22,000 23,000 23 48 72 87 100
23,000 24,000 26 57 83 101 117
24,000 25,000 30 64 96 115 133
25,000 26,000 34 72 108 129 149
26,000 27,000 37 81 119 143 166
27,000 28,000 41 88 132 157 183
28,000 29,000 44 97 143 172 198
29,000 30,000 48 104 155 187 215
30,000 31,000 52 112 167 201 231
31,000 32,000 55 121 178 215 248
32,000 33,000 59 128 191 229 264
33,000 34,000 63 136 203 243 281
34,000 35,000 66 145 214 257 298
35,000 36,000 70 152 227 271 314
36,000 37,000 74 160 238 286 330
37,000 38,000 77 169 249 301 346
38,000 39,000 81 176 262 314 364
39,000 40,000 84 185 273 329 379
40,000 41,000 88 192 286 343 396
41,000 42,000 92 200 298 357 412
42,000 43,000 95 209 309 371 429
43,000 44,000 99 216 322 385 445
44,000 45,000 103 224 333 400 462
45,000 46,000 106 233 345 413 479
46,000 47,000 110 240 357 428 495
47,000 48,000 114 248 369 442 511
48,000 49,000 117 257 380 457 527
49,000 50,000 121 264 393 471 544
50,000 51,000 125 272 404 486 560
51,000 52,000 128 280 417 499 577
52,000 53,000 132 288 428 514 593
53,000 54,000 135 297 440 527 610
54,000 55,000 139 304 452 542 626
55,000 56,000 143 312 464 556 643
56,000 57,000 146 321 475 571 659
57,000 58,000 150 328 488 585 675
58,000 59,000 154 336 499 600 691
59,000 60,000 157 345 511 613 708
60,000 62,000 163 356 529 635 733
62,000 64,000 170 372 553 663 766
64,000 66,000 177 389 576 692 798
66,000 68,000 185 404 600 720 832
68,000 70,000 192 420 624 749 864
70,000 72,000 199 436 648 777 897
72,000 74,000 206 453 671 805 931
74,000 76,000 214 468 695 834 963
76,000 78,000 221 484 719 863 996
78,000 80,000 228 501 742 891 1,029
80,000 85,000 241 528 785 940 1,087
85,000 90,000 259 568 844 1,012 1,168
90,000 95,000 277 609 902 1,084 1,250
95,000 100,000
2 296 648 962 1,155 1,333
Page 50

Page 51 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1997
1
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
1
This table only applies to lease terms beginning after August 5, 1997.
2
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-24 (1998-10 IRB 31).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
1
9
17
25
34
42
50
58
66
74
83
91
99
111
128
144
160
177
193
209
226
242
259
287
328
369
410
4
22
40
58
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
201
219
246
282
318
354
389
425
461
497
533
568
632
721
811
900
7
33
60
87
114
140
167
194
220
247
273
300
326
366
419
472
525
579
632
686
738
792
845
938
1,071
1,204
1,337
9
41
73
104
136
169
200
232
264
296
328
359
392
440
503
567
631
695
759
822
887
950
1,014
1,125
1,285
1,444
1,604
11
48
84
122
159
195
232
269
306
342
379
417
453
508
582
656
730
803
876
950
1,023
1,097
1,171
1,300
1,484
1,669
1,853
Appendix C-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
4
5
13
21
29
38
46
54
62
70
79
87
95
103
115
132
148
164
181
197
214
230
246
263
291
332
373
414
11
29
47
65
83
101
119
137
155
172
190
208
226
253
289
325
361
396
432
468
504
540
576
639
728
818
908
18
45
71
98
124
151
177
204
231
258
284
311
338
378
430
484
537
591
644
697
750
803
856
949
1,083
1,215
1,348
21
52
85
116
148
180
212
244
275
307
340
372
403
451
515
578
643
706
770
834
898
962
1,025
1,137
1,296
1,456
1,615
23
60
96
134
171
207
244
281
318
355
391
428
465
520
594
668
741
815
888
962
1,035
1,109
1,183
1,312
1,496
1,681
1,865
4
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
Page 51

Page 52 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
14
28
43
57
71
86
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
206
235
263
291
320
348
377
405
433
462
511
582
654
724
21
42
62
83
105
126
147
168
189
211
232
252
273
305
347
389
432
473
516
558
600
643
684
758
864
968
1,075
26
51
77
102
127
151
177
202
228
253
278
304
329
367
417
468
518
569
619
669
720
771
822
910
1,036
1,163
1,289
30
59
88
118
147
177
205
235
264
292
322
351
380
424
483
541
600
658
716
775
833
891
949
1,052
1,198
1,343
1,489
Appendix C-4. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
17
31
45
59
74
88
102
116
130
145
159
173
187
208
237
266
294
322
351
379
407
436
464
514
585
656
727
26
47
69
90
110
132
153
174
195
216
237
258
279
311
353
394
437
480
521
564
606
648
690
763
869
975
1,080
32
57
82
107
133
157
183
209
234
259
284
310
335
373
423
474
524
574
625
675
727
777
828
916
1,042
1,168
1,295
36
66
95
124
153
183
211
240
270
299
328
357
387
430
489
547
606
664
723
781
838
897
955
1,058
1,204
1,350
1,495
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 726).
Page 52

Page 53 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-5. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
9
17
25
33
42
50
58
66
74
82
91
99
107
119
136
152
168
185
201
217
234
250
266
295
336
377
417
21
39
57
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
200
218
236
263
298
334
370
406
442
478
513
549
585
648
737
826
916
33
60
86
113
139
165
192
218
245
272
299
325
352
391
445
498
551
604
657
710
764
817
870
962
1,095
1,229
1,361
40
71
104
135
167
199
231
263
295
326
358
390
422
470
533
597
661
724
788
852
915
979
1,043
1,155
1,314
1,472
1,632
46
83
119
157
193
230
266
304
340
377
414
451
487
543
616
690
763
837
910
984
1,057
1,131
1,204
1,332
1,517
1,701
1,885
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732).
Appendix C-6. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
3
7
12
17
21
26
31
35
40
45
49
54
59
63
70
79
89
98
107
117
126
135
145
154
170
193
217
240
6
16
26
36
47
57
67
77
87
98
108
118
128
139
154
276
297
317
337
373
424
475
526
10
26
41
56
71
86
101
117
132
146
161
177
192
206
229
260
290
320
350
381
411
441
472
502
555
631
706
782
102
120
138
156
174
193
211
229
248
275
311
347
384
420
456
493
529
564
602
665
756
847
937
117
138
159
180
201
222
242
264
284
316
358
400
442
484
525
567
609
652
693
767
871
976
1,081
174
195
215
236
256
11
29
47
66
83
12
33
54
74
96
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
Page 53

Page 54 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-7. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$ $$$$ $
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-19 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
28
31
35
38
42
45
49
54
61
68
75
81
88
95
102
109
116
128
145
162
180
60
68
76
83
91
98
106
117
132
147
163
178
193
208
223
239
254
280
318
356
394
90
101
112
124
134
146
157
174
197
219
241
264
287
309
332
353
376
416
472
528
584
108
121
134
148
162
175
188
209
235
263
290
317
343
371
397
425
452
499
566
634
701
124
140
156
171
187
203
218
241
273
304
334
366
397
428
460
491
521
576
655
732
810
Appendix C-8. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$ $$$$ $
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
33 72 106 127 147
37 79 118 142 164
40 88 130 155 180
44 96 141 170 197
48 103 154 184 213
51 112 165 199 229
55 120 177 213 245
60 132 195 234 270
68 147 219 263 303
75 164 242 291 336
82 180 266 320 369
90 195 290 348 402
97 211 314 377 435
104 228 337 405 468
111 244 361 434 500
119 259 385 462 534
126 275 409 491 566
139 303 451 540 624
157 343 510 612 706
175 384 569 682 788
193 424 628 754 870
2
1
3
Page 54

Page 55 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Casualty and theft losses: Extravagant expenses .....5 ,  1 0Leasing a car................ 2 4
Cars....................... 1 6 Luxury private boxes at50% limit on meals........... 5
Depreciation............. 2 4 entertainment events...... 1 0FCharitable organizations: Luxury water travel........... 8Fair market value of car..... 2 4A Benefit events for.......... 1 0
Farmers:Accountable plans.......28-31 Sports events to benefit..... 1 3 MForm 1040, Schedule F..... 2 7Accounting to employer..... 2 8Clean-fuel cars.............. 2 2 MACRS (Modified AcceleratedFederal crime investigations orAdequate accounting........ 2 9Club dues .................... 9 Cost Recoveryprosecutions:Independent contractors.... 3 2 Comments on publication.... 2 System) ................... 2 0Federal employees engagedAdequate records........... 2 5Commuting expenses ....... 1 4 2004 chart (Table 4-1)...... 2 1i n ........................ 4Advertising: Conventions ..............9 ,  1 1 Main place of business orFederal rate for per diem.....5 ,Car display................ 1 4Country clubs................ 9 work ....................... 329Expenses .................. 1 3Cruise ships................. 9 Married taxpayers:Fee-basis officials........... 3 3Signs, display racks, or Performing artists.......... 3 3Fees you pay................ 1 4promotional material to be Meal expenses ............... 5Fixed and variable rate (FAVR)used on recipient’s businessD 50% limit................... 1 2allowance ................. 3 0premises ................ 1 3Daily business mileage and Determination of applicabilityForm 1040, Schedule C...... 2 7Airline clubs................. 9 expense log (Table (Figure A).........11, 12Form 1040, Schedule F...... 2 7Allocating costs....... 4 ,  10, 27 6-2)....................... 3 5 Exceptions............... 1 2Form 2106 .....17, 28, 31, 32-35Allowance (See Depreciation of car: (See also Actual cost method.......... 5Reimbursements) Form 2106-EZ ...........32, 35Section 179 deductions).... 1 6 Form 2106 ................. 3 2
Armed forces: Adjustment for using standardForm 4562 ................... 2 7Major cities with higher
Assigned overseas.......... 3 mileage rate............. 2 5Form 4797 ................... 2 3 allowances............... 6
Basis...................... 1 8Assistance (See Tax help) Form W-2: Standard meal allowance....5 ,
Sales taxes.............. 1 6Associated Employer-provided 6, 29
Unrecovered basis....... 2 3entertainment............. 1 1 vehicles................. 2 8Meals,Casualty or theft, effect..... 2 4 Reimbursement of personalAthletic clubs................ 9 entertainment-related..... 1 0Deduction...........16, 18, 25 expenses ................ 2 8Mileage rate (See StandardExcess depreciation........ 2 3 Statutory employees........ 2 8 mileage rate)Modified Accelerated CostB Free tax services............ 4 0Military (See Armed forces)Recovery SystemBasis of car: (See also Missing children, photographs(MACRS) ................ 2 0Depreciation of car)........ 1 8 of .......................... 2Section 179 deduction...... 2 2GBona fide business Modified Accelerated CostSpecial depreciation Gifts....................10, 13purpose .................... 4 Recovery Systemallowance................ 1 7 $25 limit................... 1 3Box seats at entertainment (MACRS) .................. 2 0Trade-in, effect.........19, 24 Combining for recordkeepingevents .................... 1 0 2004 chart (Table 4-1)...... 2 1Trucks and vans........... 2 2 purposes ................ 2 7Business travel.............. 6 More information (See Tax help)Directly-related Reporting requirements..... 2 8Outside U.S................. 7 entertainment............. 1 1Golf clubs.................... 9Business use of car......... 1 6Disabled employees: NMore-than-50%-use Impairment-related work Nonaccountable plans ...... 3 1test...................... 1 8 Hexpenses ................ 3 4Qualified business use...... 1 8 Hauling tools................ 1 5Documentary evidence ...... 2 5
OHelp (See Tax help)
Office in the home........... 1 5High-low rate method....... 2 9C E Officials paid on feeHome office................. 1 5Canceled checks:
basis...................... 3 3Electric cars................. 1 6Hotel clubs................... 9As evidence of business
Overseas travel:Employer-providedexpenses ................ 2 5
Conventions................ 9vehicles................... 1 6Car expenses ............15-24 I Meal allowance............. 6Reporting requirements..... 2 8Actual expenses........... 1 6
Part of trip outside U.S....... 6Impairment-related workEntertainmentAllowances for..........29-30
expenses ................. 3 4expenses ............9-13, 13Business and personal
Incidental expenses:50% limit................... 1 2u s e...................... 1 6 PDefined..................... 5Determination of applicabilityCombining expenses....... 2 7 Parking fees.............14, 16Gifts....................... 1 3(Figure A).........11, 12Depreciation (See Depreciation Per diem allowances.....29-30No meals, incidentalsAssociated test............. 1 1of car) Defined.................... 2 8only...................... 5Deductible..............10-12Disposition of car........... 2 4 Federal rate for............. 2 9Summary (Table 2-1)..... 1 0Income-producingFixed and variable rate (FAVR) Performing artists........... 3 3Directly-related test......... 1 1 property................... 2 8allowance................ 3 0
Personal property taxes..... 1 6Entertainment, defined...... 1 0Form 2106 ................. 3 2 Incomplete records.......... 2 6
Personal trips................ 6Form 2106 ................. 3 2Leasing a car.............. 2 4 Indefinite job assignment.... 4 Outside U.S................. 8Tickets (See Tickets)Mileage rate (See Standard Independent contractors.... 3 2 Placed in service, cars...... 1 8Entertainment facilities:mileage rate) Interest on car loans........ 1 6Expenses for use of........ 1 0Taxes paid on car.......... 1 6 Probationary work period.... 4Itinerants..................... 3Traffic tickets............... 1 6Estimates of expenses...... 2 5 Proving business
Car pools ................... 1 5 purpose ................... 2 6Exceptions to the 50%
Limit...................... 1 2Car rentals.................. 2 4 L Public transportation:
Form 2106 ................. 3 2 Outside of U.S. travel........ 6Excess reimbursements (See Lavish or extravagant
Reimbursements)Car, defined................. 1 6 expenses ...............5 ,  1 0Publications (See Tax help)
Page 55

Page 56 of 56 of Publication 463 11:11 - 16-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rural mail carriers.......... 1 5 Transportation expenses, Deductible ................ 4 - 9R
determination of deductibility Summary of (TableRecordkeeping
(Figure B)............13, 14 1-1) .................... 5requirements...........25-27 S Travel expenses, determination Defined..................... 3Adequate records.......... 2 5Section 179 deduction: of deductibility (Table Going home on days off ..... 4Daily business mileage and Amended return............ 1 7 1-1)...................... 5 I n  U.S....................... 6expense log (Table Deduction.................. 1 6Weekly travel expense and Lodging ..................... 66-2)..................... 3 5Limits...................... 1 7 entertainment record (Table Luxury water travel.......... 8Destroyed records.......... 2 7Self-employed persons...... 1 3 6-3)..................... 3 5Outside U.S................. 7How to prove expenses (Table Reporting requirements..... 2 7 Travel to family home........ 3Tax help..................... 4 05-1)..................... 2 5Skyboxes ................... 1 0 Trucks and vans:Incomplete records......... 2 6 Tax home, determinationSpecial depreciation Depreciation...........16, 22Reimbursed expenses...... 2 7 of .......................... 3allowance ................. 1 7 Transportation workers..... 1 3Sampling to prove Taxpayer Advocate.......... 4 0Spouse, expenses for.....4 ,  1 2 Transportation workers’expenses ................ 2 6 Temporary jobStandard meal allowance.....5 , expenses ................. 6Separating and combining assignments ............... 46, 29expenses ................ 2 7 TTY/TDD information........ 4 0Temporary work location.... 1 4Standard mileage rate.... 2 ,  1 5 ,Three-year period of Two places of work.......... 1 4Tickets..................10, 1330retention................. 2 7 Season or series tickets.... 2 7Depreciation adjustment forWeekly travel expense and Traffic violations............ 1 6Uusing.................... 2 5entertainment record (Table Tools: UnclaimedForm 2106 ................. 3 26-3)..................... 3 5 Hauling tools............... 1 5 reimbursements ........... 2 8Statutory employees........ 2 8Reimbursements .........28-32 Trade association Unions:Accountable plans.......... 2 8Suggestions for meetings .................. 1 0Trips from union hall to place ofExcess .................... 3 1publication................. 2Trade-in of car..........19, 24 work..................... 1 5Form 2106 ................. 3 3
Traffic tickets............... 1 6Unrecovered basis of car.... 2 3Nonaccountable plans...... 3 1T Transients.................... 3Nondeductible expenses.... 2 9 Tables and figures: TransportationPersonal expenses......... 2 8 V50% limit determination (Figureexpenses ..............13-25Recordkeeping............. 2 7 Volunteers................... 2A ) ...................11, 12 Car expenses...........15-24Reporting (Table 6-1)....... 3 0 Daily business mileage and Deductible (Figure B)...... 1 3 ,Unclaimed ................. 2 8 expense log (Table W14Reporting 6-2)..................... 3 5 Weekly travel expense andfive or more cars........... 1 5requirements...........27-35 Entertainment expenses, entertainment record (TableForm 2106 ................. 3 2Per diem or car determination of deductibility 6-3)....................... 3 5Transportation workers......6 ,allowance................ 3 0 (Table 2-1)............... 1 0 13Reimbursements ........28-32 ■Modified Accelerated Cost Travel advance: (See alsoReservists: Recovery System (MACRS) Reimbursements)......28, 31Transportation 2004 chart (Table 4-1).... 2 1expenses ................ 1 4 Travel expenses............ 3 - 9Proving expenses (TableTraveling more than 100 miles Another individual5-1)..................... 2 5from home............... 3 3 accompanyingReporting reimbursements taxpayer.................. 4Returning excess (Table 6-1)............... 3 0 Away from home .......... 3 - 4reimbursements ........... 3 1
Page 56