Contents
Introduction ........................................1
Important Changes for 2000.............1
1. Deducting Business Expenses.. 2
2. Employees' Pay...........................5
3. Retirement Plans.........................8
4. Rent Expense ..............................13
5. Interest .........................................15
6. Taxes ............................................20
7. Insurance .....................................22
8. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize ......................................24
9. Amortization ................................29
10. Depletion ......................................36
11. Business Bad Debts...................40
12. Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles 43
13. Other Expenses...........................46
14. How To Get Tax Help..................53
Index ....................................................54
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not
deductible. The general rules for deducting
business expenses are discussed in the
opening chapter. The chapters that follow
cover specific expenses and list other publi-
cations and forms you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and
your suggestions for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web
site at www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
You can write to us at the following ad-
dress:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would
include your daytime phone number, includ-
ing the area code, in your correspondence.
Important Changes
for 2000
The following items highlight some changes
in the tax law for 2000.
New Publication 15–B. Information on the
following topics, previously contained in this
publication, has been moved to new Publica-
tion 15–B, Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits.
Department
of the
Treasury
Internal
Revenue
Service
Publication 535
Cat. No. 15065Z
Business
Expenses
For use in preparing
2000 Returns


 Meals and lodging furnished to employ-
ees.
 Fringe benefits.
 Employee benefit programs.
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile-
age rate for the cost of operating your car,
van, pickup, or panel truck in 2000 is 32
1/2
cents a mile for all business miles. See
chapter 13.
Health insurance deduction for the self-
employed. For 2000, this deduction is 60%
of the amount you paid for health insurance
for yourself and your family. See chapter 7.
Meal expense deduction subject to “hours
of service” limits.For 2000, this deduction
increases to 60% of the reimbursed meals
your employees consume while they are
subject to the Department of Transportation's
“hours of service” limits. See chapter 13.
Marginal production of oil and gas.The
suspension of the taxable income limit on
percentage depletion from the marginal pro-
duction of oil and natural gas that was
scheduled to expire for tax years beginning
after 1999 has been extended to tax years
beginning before 2002. For more information
on marginal production, see section 613A(c)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
Paid preparer authorization.Beginning with
your return for 2000, you can check a box and
authorize the IRS to discuss your Form 1040
with your paid preparer who signed it. If you
check the “Yes” box in the signature area of
your return, the IRS can call your paid
preparer to answer any questions that may
arise during the processing of your return.
Also, you are authorizing your paid preparer
to perform certain actions. See your income
tax package for details.
Photographs of missing children. The
Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner
with the National Center for Missing and Ex-
ploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear
in this publication on pages that would other-
wise be blank. You can help bring these
children home by looking at the photographs
and calling 1–800–THE–LOST (1–800–843–
5678) if you recognize a child.
1.
Deducting
Business
Expenses
Introduction
This chapter covers the general rules for de-
ducting business expenses. Business ex-
penses are the costs of carrying on a trade
or business. These expenses are usually
deductible if the business is operated to make
a profit.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 What you can deduct
 How much you can deduct
 When to deduct
 Not-for-profit activities
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554334 Tax Guide for Small Business
/H18554463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and
Car Expenses
/H18554525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
/H18554 52 9 Miscellaneous Deductions
/H18554536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
/H18554538 Accounting Periods and Methods
/H18554 54 2 Corporations
/H18554547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
(Business and Nonbusiness)
/H18554587 Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care Pro-
viders)
/H18554925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
/H18554936 Home Mortgage Interest
Deduction
/H18554946 How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized De-
ductions
/H185545213 Election To Postpone
Determination as To Whether the
Presumption Applies That an
Activity Is Engaged in for Profit
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
What Can I Deduct?
To be deductible, a business expense must
be both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary
expense is one that is common and accepted
in your trade or business. A necessary ex-
pense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your trade or business. An expense does
not have to be indispensable to be considered
necessary.
It is important to separate business ex-
penses from the following expenses.
 The expenses used to figure the cost of
goods sold.
 Capital expenses.
 Personal expenses.
TIP
If you have an expense that is partly
for business and partly personal,
separate the personal part from the
business part.
Cost of Goods Sold
If your business manufactures products or
purchases them for resale, some of your ex-
penses are for the products you sell. You use
these expenses to figure the cost of the goods
you sold during the year. You deduct these
costs from your gross receipts to figure your
gross profit for the year. You must maintain
inventories to be able to determine your cost
of goods sold. If you use an expense to figure
the cost of goods sold, you cannot deduct it
again as a business expense.
The following are types of expenses that
go into figuring cost of goods sold.
 The cost of products or raw materials in
your inventory, including the cost of hav-
ing them shipped to you.
 The cost of storing the products you sell.
 Direct labor costs (including contributions
to pension or annuity plans) for workers
who produce the products.
 Factory overhead expenses.
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you
may have to include certain indirect costs of
production and resale in your cost of goods
sold. Indirect costs include rent, interest,
taxes, storage, purchasing, processing, re-
packaging, handling, and administrative
costs. This rule on indirect costs does not
apply to personal property you acquire for
resale if your average annual gross receipts
(or those of your predecessor) for the pre-
ceding 3 tax years are not more than $10
million.
For more information, see the following
sources.
 Cost of goods sold—chapter 6 of Publi-
cation 334.
 Inventories—Publication 538.
 Uniform capitalization rules—section
263A of the Internal Revenue Code and
the related regulations.
Capital Expenses
You must capitalize, rather than deduct, some
costs. These costs are a part of your invest-
ment in your business and are called “capital
expenses.” There are, in general, three types
of costs you capitalize.
1) Going into business.
 2) Business assets.
 3) Improvements.
Recovery. Although you generally cannot
take a current deduction for a capital ex-
pense, you may be able to take deductions
for the amount you spend through depreci-
ation, amortization, or depletion. These allow
you to deduct part of your cost each year over
a number of years. In this way you are able
to “recover” your capital expense. See
Amortization (chapter 9) and Depletion
(chapter 10) in this publication. For informa-
tion on depreciation, see Publication 946.
Going Into Business
The costs of getting started in business, be-
fore you actually begin business operations,
are capital expenses. These costs may in-
clude expenses for advertising, travel, or
wages for training employees.
Page 2 Chapter 1  Deducting Business Expenses

If you go into business.When you go into
business, treat all costs you had to get your
business started as capital expenses.
Usually you recover costs for a particular
asset through depreciation. Generally, you
cannot recover other costs until you sell the
business or otherwise go out of business.
However, you can choose to amortize certain
costs for setting up your business. See Going
Into Business in chapter 9 for more informa-
tion on business start-up costs.
If you do not go into business.If you are
an individual and your attempt to go into
business is not successful, the expenses you
had in trying to establish yourself in business
fall into two categories.
1) The costs you had before making a de-
cision to acquire or begin a specific
business. These costs are personal and
nondeductible. They include any costs
incurred during a general search for, or
preliminary investigation of, a business
or investment possibility.
2) The costs you had in your attempt to
acquire or begin a specific business.
These costs are capital expenses and
you can deduct them as a capital loss.
If you are a corporation and your attempt
to go into a new trade or business is not
successful, you may be able to deduct all
investigatory costs as a loss.
The costs of any assets acquired during
your unsuccessful attempt to go into business
are a part of your basis in the assets. You
cannot take a deduction for these costs. You
will recover the costs of these assets when
you dispose of them.
Business Assets
The cost of any asset you use in your busi-
ness is a capital expense. There are many
different kinds of business assets, such as
land, buildings, machinery, furniture, trucks,
patents, and franchise rights. You must capi-
talize the full cost of the asset, including
freight and installation charges.
If you produce certain property for use in
your trade or business, capitalize the pro-
duction costs under the uniform capitalization
rules. See section 1.263A–2 of the regu-
lations for information on those rules.
Improvements
The costs of making improvements to a
business asset are capital expenses if the
improvements add to the value of the asset,
appreciably lengthen the time you can use it,
or adapt it to a different use. You can deduct
repairs that keep your property in a normal
efficient operating condition as a business
expense.
Improvements include new electric wiring,
a new roof, a new floor, new plumbing,
bricking up windows to strengthen a wall, and
lighting improvements.
Restoration plan.Capitalize the cost of re-
conditioning, improving, or altering your
property as part of a general restoration plan
to make it suitable for your business. This
applies even if some of the work would by
itself be classified as repairs.
Replacements. You cannot deduct the cost
of a replacement that stops deterioration and
adds to the life of your property. Capitalize
that cost and depreciate it.
Treat amounts paid to replace parts of a
machine that only keep it in a normal operat-
ing condition like repairs. However, if your
equipment has a major overhaul, capitalize
and depreciate the expense.
Capital or Deductible Expenses
To help you distinguish between capital and
deductible expenses, several different items
are discussed below.
Business motor vehicles. You usually
capitalize the cost of a motor vehicle you buy
to use in your business. You can recover its
cost through annual deductions for depreci-
ation.
There are dollar limits on the depreciation
you can claim each year on passenger auto-
mobiles used in your business. See Publica-
tion 463.
Repairs you make to your business vehi-
cle are deductible expenses. However,
amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul
a business vehicle are capital expenses.
Roads and driveways.The costs of building
a private road on your business property and
the cost of replacing a gravel driveway with
a concrete one are capital expenses you may
be able to depreciate. The cost of maintain-
ing a private road on your business property
is a deductible expense.
Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rules
apply, amounts spent for tools used in your
business are deductible expenses if the tools
have a life expectancy of less than 1 year.
Machinery parts. Unless the uniform cap-
italization rules apply, the cost of replacing
short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in
good working condition and not add to its life
is a deductible expense.
Heating equipment. The cost of changing
from one heating system to another is a cap-
ital expense and not a deductible expense.
Personal Expenses
Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living,
or family expenses. However, if you have an
expense for something that is used partly for
business and partly for personal purposes,
divide the total cost between the business
and personal parts. You can deduct as a
business expense only the business part.
For example, if you borrow money and
use 70% of it for business and the other 30%
for a family vacation, generally you can de-
duct as a business expense only 70% of the
interest you pay on the loan. The remaining
30% is personal interest that is not deductible.
See chapter 5 for information on deducting
interest and the allocation rules.
Business use of your home.If you use part
of your home in your business, you may be
able to claim part of the expenses of main-
taining your home as a business expense.
These expenses include mortgage interest,
insurance, utilities, repairs, and depreciation.
The business use of your home must meet
specific requirements before you can take any
of these expenses as business deductions. 
To qualify to claim expenses for the busi-
ness use of your home, you must meet the
following tests.
1) The business part of your home must be
used exclusively and regularly for your
trade or business.
2) The business part of your home must be
one of the following.
a) Your principal place of business.
b) A place where you meet or deal
with patients, clients, or customers
in the normal course of your trade
or business.
c) A separate structure (not attached
to your home) you use in con-
nection with your trade or business.
You do not have to meet the exclusive use
test for the part of your home that you regu-
larly use in either of the following ways.
 For the storage of inventory or product
samples.
 As a day-care facility.
Your home office qualifies as your princi-
pal place of business if you meet the following
requirements.
 You use the office exclusively and regu-
larly for administrative or management
activities of your trade or business.
 You have no other fixed location where
you conduct substantial administrative or
management activities of your trade or
business.
For more information, see Publication 587.
Business use of your car.If you use your
car in your business, you can deduct car ex-
penses. If you use your car for both business
and personal purposes, you must divide your
expenses based on mileage. Only your ex-
penses for the miles you drove the car for
business are deductible as business ex-
penses.
You can deduct actual car expenses,
which include depreciation (or lease pay-
ments), gas and oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups,
insurance, and registration fees. Instead of
figuring the business part of these actual ex-
penses, you may be able to use the standard
mileage rate to figure your deduction. For
2000, the standard mileage rate is 32
1/2 cents
a mile for all business miles driven.
If you are self-employed, you can also
deduct the business part of interest on your
car loan, state and local personal property tax
on the car, parking fees, and tolls, whether
or not you claim the standard mileage rate.
You can use the nonbusiness part of the
personal property tax to determine your de-
duction for taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040)
if you itemize your deductions.
For more information on car expenses and
the rules for using the standard mileage rate,
see Publication 463.
How Much
Can I Deduct?
You cannot deduct more for a business ex-
pense than the amount you actually spend.
There is usually no other limit on how much
you can deduct if the amount is reasonable.
However, if your deductions are large enough
to produce a net business loss for the year,
the tax loss may be limited.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Recovery of amount deducted. If you re-
cover part of an expense in the same tax year
for which you would have claimed a de-
duction, reduce your expense deduction by
the amount of the recovery. If you have a re-
covery in a later year, include the recovered
amount in income. However, if part of the
deduction for the expense did not reduce your
tax, you do not have to include all the recov-
ery in income. Exclude the part that did not
reduce your tax.
For more information on recoveries and
the tax benefit rule, see Publication 525.
Payments in kind. If you provide services
to pay a business expense, the amount you
can deduct is the amount you spend to pro-
vide the services. It is not what you would
have paid in cash.
Similarly, if you pay a business expense
in goods or other property, you can deduct
only the amount the property costs you. If
these costs are included in the cost of goods
sold, do not deduct them as a business ex-
pense.
Limits on losses.If your deductions for an
investment or business activity are more than
the income it brings in, you have a net loss.
There may be limits on how much, if any, of
the loss you can use to offset income from
other sources.
Not-for-profit limits.If you do not carry
on your business activity with the intention of
making a profit, you cannot use a loss from
it to offset other income. See Not-for-Profit
Activities, later.
At-risk limits.Generally, a deductible
loss from a trade or business or other
income-producing activity is limited to the in-
vestment you have “at risk” in the activity. You
are “at risk” in any activity for the following
items.
1) The money and adjusted basis of prop-
erty you contribute to the activity.
2) Amounts you borrow for use in the ac-
tivity if:
a) You are personally liable for repay-
ment, or
b) You pledge property (other than
property used in the activity) as se-
curity for the loan.
For more information, see Publication 925.
Passive activities.Generally, you are in
a passive activity if you have a trade or busi-
ness activity in which you do not materially
participate during the year, or a rental activity.
Deductions from passive activities can gen-
erally offset your income from only passive
activities. You cannot use any excess de-
ductions to offset your other income. In addi-
tion, you can take passive activity credits only
from tax on net passive income. Any excess
loss or credits are carried over to later years.
For more information, see Publication 925.
Net operating loss.If your deductions
are more than your income for the year, you
may have a “net operating loss.” You can use
a net operating loss to lower your taxes in
other years. See Publication 536 for more in-
formation. See Publication 542 for information
about net operating losses of corporations.
When Can I
Deduct an Expense?
When you deduct an expense depends on
your accounting method. An accounting
method is a set of rules used to determine
when and how income and expenses are re-
ported. The two basic methods are the cash
method and an accrual method.
For more information on accounting
methods, see Publication 538.
Cash method. Under the cash method of
accounting, you deduct business expenses in
the tax year you actually paid them, even if
you incur them in an earlier year.
Accrual method. Under an accrual method
of accounting, you generally deduct business
expenses when you become liable for them,
whether or not you pay them in the same
year. All events that set the amount of the
liability must have happened, and you must
be able to figure the amount of the expense
with reasonable accuracy.
Economic performance rule.Under an
accrual method, you generally cannot deduct
or capitalize business expenses until eco-
nomic performance occurs. If your expense
is for property or services provided to you, or
your use of property, economic performance
occurs as the property or services are pro-
vided, or the property is used. If your expense
is for property or services you provide to oth-
ers, economic performance occurs as you
provide the property or services.
Example. Your tax year is the calendar
year. In December 2000, the Field Plumbing
Company did some repair work at your place
of business and sent you a bill for $150. You
paid it by check in January 2001. If you use
an accrual method of accounting, deduct the
$150 on your tax return for 2000 because all
events occurred to fix the fact of liability and
economic performance occurred in that year.
If you use the cash method of accounting, you
can deduct the expense on your 2001 return.
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses
in advance, even if you pay them in advance.
This rule applies to both the cash and accrual
methods. It applies to prepaid interest, pre-
paid insurance premiums, and any other ex-
pense paid far enough in advance to, in ef-
fect, create an asset with a useful life
extending substantially beyond the end of the
current tax year.
Example. In 2000, you sign a 10-year
lease and immediately pay your rent for the
first 3 years. Even though you paid the rent
for 2000, 2001, and 2002, you can deduct
only the rent for 2000 on your current tax re-
turn. You can deduct on your 2001 and 2002
tax returns the rent for those years.
Contested liability.Under the cash method,
you can deduct a contested liability only in the
year you pay the liability. Under an accrual
method, you can deduct contested liabilities,
such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. pos-
session income, war profits, and excess pro-
fits taxes), in the tax year you pay the liability
(or transfer money or other property to satisfy
the obligation) or in the tax year you settle the
contest. However, to take the deduction in the
year of payment or transfer, you must meet
certain conditions. See Contested Liability in
Publication 538 for more information.
Related person. Under an accrual method
of accounting, you generally deduct expenses
when you incur them, even if you have not
paid them. However, if you and the person
you owe are related and the person uses the
cash method of accounting, you must pay the
expense before you can deduct it. The de-
duction by an accrual method payer is al-
lowed when the corresponding amount is
includible in income by the related cash
method payee. See Related Persons in Pub-
lication 538.
Not-for-Profit
Activities
If you do not carry on your business or in-
vestment activity to make a profit, there is a
limit on the deductions you can take. You
cannot use a loss from the activity to offset
other income. Activities you do as a hobby,
or mainly for sport or recreation, come under
this limit. So does an investment activity in-
tended only to produce tax losses for the in-
vestors.
The limit on not-for-profit losses applies to
individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and
S corporations. It does not apply to corpo-
rations other than S corporations.
In determining whether you are carrying
on an activity for profit, all the facts are taken
into account. No one factor alone is decisive.
Among the factors to consider are whether:
1) You carry on the activity in a business-
like manner,
2) The time and effort you put into the ac-
tivity indicate you intend to make it prof-
itable,
3) You depend on income from the activity
for your livelihood,
4) Your losses are due to circumstances
beyond your control (or are normal in the
start-up phase of your type of business),
5) You change your methods of operation
in an attempt to improve profitability,
6) You, or your advisors, have the knowl-
edge needed to carry on the activity as
a successful business,
7) You were successful in making a profit
in similar activities in the past,
8) The activity makes a profit in some
years, and how much profit it makes, and
9) You can expect to make a future profit
from the appreciation of the assets used
in the activity.
Limit on
Deductions and Losses
If your activity is not carried on for profit, take
deductions only in the following order, only to
the extent stated in the three categories, and,
if you are an individual, only if you itemize
them on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Category 1. Deductions you can take for
personal as well as for business activities are
allowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusi-
ness deductions, such as those for home
mortgage interest, taxes, and casualty losses,
Page 4 Chapter 1  Deducting Business Expenses

belong in this category. Deduct them on the
appropriate lines of Schedule A (Form 1040).
You can deduct a casualty loss on property
you own for personal use only to the extent
it is more than $100 and all these losses are
more than 10% of your adjusted gross in-
come. See Publication 547 for more informa-
tion on casualty losses. For the limits that
apply to mortgage interest, see Publication
936.
Category 2.Deductions that do not result in
an adjustment to the basis of property are
allowed next, but only to the extent your gross
income from the activity is more than the de-
ductions you take (or could take) for it under
the first category. Most business deductions,
such as those for advertising, insurance pre-
miums, interest, utilities, wages, etc., belong
in this category.
Category 3. Business deductions that de-
crease the basis of property are allowed last,
but only to the extent the gross income from
the activity is more than deductions you take
(or could take) for it under the first two cate-
gories. The deductions for depreciation,
amortization, and the part of a casualty loss
an individual could not deduct in category (1)
belong in this category. Where more than one
asset is involved, divide depreciation and
these other deductions proportionally among
those assets.
TIP
Individuals must claim the amounts in
categories (2) and (3) as miscella-
neous deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040). They are subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Pub-
lication 529 for information on this limit.
Example. Ida is engaged in a not-for-
profit activity. The income and expenses of
the activity are as follows.
Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200,
the gross income she earned from the activ-
ity. The limit is reached in category (3), as
follows.
The $300 for depreciation is divided be-
tween the automobile and machine as fol-
lows.
$600 /H11003 $300 = $225 depreciation for the automobile$800
$200 /H11003 $300 = $75 depreciation for the machine$800
The basis of each asset is reduced ac-
cordingly.
The $1,600 for category (1) is deductible
in full on the appropriate lines for taxes and
interest on Schedule A (Form 1040). Ida adds
the remaining $1,600 (the total of categories
(2) and (3)) to her other miscellaneous de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) that are
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
limit.
Partnerships and S corporations. If a
partnership or S corporation carries on a
not-for-profit activity, these limits apply at the
partnership or S corporation level. They are
reflected in the individual shareholder's or
partner's distributive shares.
More than one activity.If you have several
undertakings, each may be a separate activity
or several undertakings may be one activity.
The following are the most significant facts
and circumstances in making this determi-
nation.
 The degree of organizational and eco-
nomic interrelationship of various under-
takings.
 The business purpose that is (or might
be) served by carrying on the various
undertakings separately or together in a
business or investment setting.
 The similarity of various undertakings.
The IRS will generally accept your char-
acterization of several undertakings as one
activity, or more than one activity, if supported
by facts and circumstances.
TIP
If you are carrying on two or more
different activities, keep the de-
ductions and income from each one
separate. Figure separately whether each is
a not-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit
on deductions and losses separately for each
activity that is not for profit.
Presumption of Profit
An activity is presumed carried on for profit if
it produced a profit in at least 3 of the last 5
tax years, including the current year. Activities
that consist primarily of breeding, training,
showing, or racing horses are presumed car-
ried on for profit if they produced a profit in
at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, including the
current year. You have a profit when the
gross income from an activity is more than the
deductions for it.
If a taxpayer dies before the end of the
5-year (or 7-year) period, the period ends on
the date of the taxpayer's death.
If your business or investment activity
passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, pre-
sume it is carried on for profit. This means it
will not come under these limits. You can take
all your business deductions from the activity,
even for the years that you have a loss. You
can rely on this presumption in every case,
unless the IRS shows it is not valid.
Using the presumption later.If you are
starting an activity and do not have 3 (or 2)
years showing a profit, you may want to take
advantage of this presumption later, after you
have the 5 (or 7) years of experience allowed
by the test.
You can choose to do this by filing Form
5213. Filing this form postpones any deter-
mination that your activity is not carried on for
profit until 5 (or 7) years have passed since
you started the activity. 
The benefit gained by making this choice
is that the IRS will not immediately question
whether your activity is engaged in for profit.
Accordingly, it will not restrict your de-
ductions. Rather, you will gain time to earn
a profit in 3 (or 2) out of the first 5 (or 7) years
you carry on the activity. If you show 3 (or
2) years of profit at the end of this period, your
deductions are not limited under these rules.
If you do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the
limit can be applied retroactively to any year
in the 5-year (or 7-year) period with a loss.
Filing Form 5213 automatically extends
the period of limitations on any year in the
5-year (or 7-year) period to 2 years after the
due date of the return for the last year of the
period. The period is extended only for de-
ductions of the activity and any related de-
ductions that might be affected.
TIP
You must file Form 5213 within 3
years after the due date of your return
for the year in which you first carried
on the activity, or, if earlier, within 60 days
after receiving written notice from the Internal
Revenue Service proposing to disallow de-
ductions attributable to the activity.
2.
Employees' Pay
Introduction
You can generally deduct the pay you give
your employees for the services they perform
for your business. The pay may be in cash,
property, or services. It may include wages,
salaries, vacation allowances, bonuses,
commissions, and fringe benefits. This chap-
ter provides information about deductions al-
lowed for various kinds of pay.
For information about determining who is
an employee and about employment taxes
on your employees' wages, see Publication
15, Circular E, Employer's Tax Guide, Publi-
cation 15–A, Employer's Supplemental Tax
Guide, and Publication 15–B, Employer's Tax
Guide to Fringe Benefits. For information
about deducting employment taxes paid on
your employees' wages, see chapter 6.
TIP
You can claim the following employ-
ment credits if you hire individuals
who meet certain requirements.
 Empowerment zone employment credit.
 Indian employment credit.
 Welfare-to-work credit.
 Work opportunity credit.
However, you must reduce your deduction for
employee wages by the amount of any em-
ployment credits you claim. For more infor-
mation about these credits, see Publication
954, Tax Incentives for Empowerment Zones
and Other Distressed Communities.
Gross income ............................................... $3,200
Minus expenses:
Real estate taxes ........................... $700
Home mortgage interest ................ 900
Insurance ........................................ 400
Utilities ............................................ 700
Maintenance ................................... 200
Depreciation on an automobile ...... 600
Depreciation on a machine ............ 200
3,700
Loss .............................................................$ 500
Limit on deduction ....................................... $3,200
Category 1: Taxes and interest ...... $1,600
Category 2: Insurance, utilities, and
maintenance .................................... 1,300
2,900
Available for Category 3 ...........................$ 300
Chapter 2 Employees' Pay Page 5

Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Tests for deducting pay
 Kinds of pay
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H1855415 Circular E, Employer's Tax Guide
/H1855415–A Employer's Supplemental Tax
Guide
/H1855415–B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
Tests for Deducting
Pay
To be deductible, your employees' pay must
be an ordinary and necessary expense and
you must pay or incur it in the tax year. These
and other requirements that apply to all busi-
ness expenses are explained in chapter 1.
In addition, the pay must meet both the
following tests.
 Test 1. The pay must be reasonable.
 Test 2. The pay must be for services
performed.
If these tests are met, the form or method of
figuring the pay does not affect its deductibil-
ity. For example, bonuses and commissions
based on sales or earnings and paid under
an agreement made before the services were
performed are generally deductible.
Employee-shareholder salaries.If a cor-
poration pays an employee who is also a
shareholder a salary that is unreasonably
high considering the services actually per-
formed, the excessive part of the salary may
be treated as a constructive distribution of
earnings to the employee-shareholder. For
more information on corporate distributions to
shareholders, see Publication 542, Corpo-
rations.
Test 1—Reasonable
Determine the reasonableness of pay by the
facts. Generally, reasonable pay is the
amount that like enterprises ordinarily would
pay for the services under similar circum-
stances.
You must be able to prove the pay is
reasonable. Base this test on the circum-
stances that exist when you contract for the
services, not those existing when the rea-
sonableness is questioned. If the pay is ex-
cessive, you can deduct only the part that is
reasonable.
Factors to consider.To determine if pay is
reasonable, consider the following items and
any other pertinent facts.
 The duties performed by the employee.
 The volume of business handled.
 The character and amount of responsi-
bility.
 The complexities of your business.
 The amount of time required.
 The general cost of living in the locality.
 The ability and achievements of the indi-
vidual employee performing the service.
 The pay compared with the gross and net
income of the business, as well as with
distributions to shareholders if the busi-
ness is a corporation.
 Your policy regarding pay for all your
employees.
 The history of pay for each employee.
Individual salaries.You must base the test
of whether a salary is reasonable on each
individual's salary and the service performed,
not on the total salaries paid to all officers or
all employees. For example, even if the total
amount you pay to your officers is reason-
able, you cannot deduct an individual officer's
entire salary if it is not reasonable based on
the items listed above.
Test 2—For Services
Performed
You must be able to prove the payment was
made for services actually performed.
Kinds of Pay
Some of the ways you may provide pay to
your employees are discussed next.
Awards
You can generally deduct, as wages,
amounts you pay to your employees as
awards, whether paid in cash or property.
(For awards paid in property, see Property,
later.) However, if you give property to an
employee as an employee achievement
award, your deduction may be limited.
Achievement awards. An achievement
award is an item of tangible personal property
that meets all the following requirements.
 It is given to an employee for length of
service or safety achievement.
 It is awarded as part of a meaningful
presentation.
 It is awarded under conditions and cir-
cumstances that do not create a signif-
icant likelihood of disguised pay.
Length-of-service award.An award will
not qualify as a length-of-service award if ei-
ther of the following applies.
 The employee receives the award during
his or her first 5 years of employment.
 The employee received another length-
of-service award (other than one of very
small value) during the same year or in
any of the prior 4 years.
Safety achievement award. An award
will not qualify as a safety achievement award
if it is given to either of the following.
1) A manager, administrator, clerical em-
ployee, or other professional employee.
2) More than 10% of your employees dur-
ing the year, excluding those listed in (1).
Deduction limit.Your deduction for the
cost of employee achievement awards given
to any one employee during the tax year is
limited to the following amounts.
 $400 for awards that are not qualified
plan awards.
 $1,600 for all awards, whether or not
qualified plan awards.
Claim the deduction as a nonwage business
expense on your return or business schedule.
A qualified plan award is an achievement
award given as part of an established written
plan or program that does not favor highly
compensated employees as to eligibility or
benefits.
A highly compensated employee for 2000
is an employee who meets either of the fol-
lowing tests.
1) The employee was a 5% owner at any
time during the year or the preceding
year.
2) The employee received more than
$85,000 in pay for the preceding year.
You can choose to ignore test (2) if the em-
ployee was not also in the top 20% of em-
ployees when ranked by pay for the preced-
ing year.
An award is not a qualified plan award if
the average cost of all the employee
achievement awards given during the tax year
(that would be qualified plan awards except
for this limit) is more than $400. To figure this
average cost, do not take into account awards
of very small value.
TIP
You may be able to exclude the value
of achievement awards you provide
to an employee from the employee's
wages. See Publication 15–B.
Bonuses
You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an
employee as wages if you intended the bonus
as additional pay for services, not as a gift,
and the services were actually performed.
However, the total bonuses, salaries, and
other pay must be reasonable for the services
performed. If the bonus is paid in property,
see Property, later.
Gifts of nominal value.If, to promote em-
ployee goodwill, you distribute turkeys, hams,
or other merchandise of nominal value to your
employees at holidays, you can deduct the
cost of these items as a nonwage business
expense. Your deduction for gifts of food or
drink are not subject to the 50% deduction
limit that generally applies to meals. For more
information on this deduction limit, see Meals
and lodging, later.
Education Expenses
If you pay or reimburse education expenses
for an employee, you can deduct the pay-
ments. Deduct payments for education that is
not related to the employee's job or that is
nonqualifying education as wages. Deduct
payments for education that is job related and
is not nonqualifying education as a nonwage
business expense. Regardless of the nature
of the education, deduct the payments on the
“employee benefit programs” line of your tax
return or business schedule if they are part
Page 6 Chapter 2  Employees' Pay

of a qualified educational assistance program.
For information on educational assistance
programs, see Educational Assistance in
chapter 2 of Publication 15–B.
Nonqualifying education is education that:
1) Is needed to meet the minimum educa-
tion requirements for the employee's job,
or
2) Is part of a program of study that can
qualify the employee for a different type
of job.
For a discussion on nonqualifying education,
see Publication 508, Tax Benefits for Work-
Related Education.
Fringe Benefits
A fringe benefit is a form of pay provided to
any person for the performance of services
by that person. The following are examples
of fringe benefits.
 Benefits under qualified employee benefit
programs.
 Meals and lodging.
 The use of a car.
 Flights on airplanes.
 Discounts on property or services.
 Memberships in country clubs or other
social clubs.
 Tickets to entertainment or sporting
events.
You can generally deduct the cost of
fringe benefits you provide on your tax return
or business schedule in whatever category
the cost falls. For example, if you allow an
employee to use a car or other property you
lease, deduct the cost of the lease as a rent
or lease expense. If you own the property,
include your deduction for its cost or other
basis as a section 179 deduction or a depre-
ciation deduction.
TIP
You may be able to exclude all or part
of the fringe benefits you provide from
your employees' wages. For more in-
formation about fringe benefits and the ex-
clusion of benefits, see Publication 15–B.
Employee benefit programs. Employee
benefit programs include the following.
 Accident and health plans.
 Adoption assistance.
 Cafeteria plans.
 Dependent care assistance.
 Educational assistance.
 Group-term life insurance coverage.
 Welfare benefit funds.
You can generally deduct amounts you
spend on employee benefit programs on the
“employee benefit programs” line of your tax
return or business schedule. However, if you
provide dependent care by operating a de-
pendent care facility for your employees, de-
duct your costs in whatever categories they
fall (depreciation, utilities, salaries, etc.).
Group-term life insurance coverage.
You cannot deduct the cost of group-term life
insurance coverage if you are directly or in-
directly the beneficiary of the policy. See
Nondeductible Premiums in chapter 7.
Welfare benefit funds.A welfare benefit
fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrange-
ment having the effect of a plan) that provides
welfare benefits to your employees, inde-
pendent contractors, or their beneficiaries.
Welfare benefits are any benefits other than
deferred compensation or transfers of re-
stricted property.
Your deduction for contributions to a wel-
fare benefit fund is limited to the fund's qual-
ified cost for the tax year. If your contributions
to the fund are more than its qualified cost,
you can carry the excess over to the next tax
year.
Generally, the fund's qualified cost is the
total of the following amounts, reduced by the
after-tax income of the fund.
 The cost you would have been able to
deduct using the cash method of ac-
counting if you had paid for the benefits
directly.
 The contributions added to a reserve ac-
count that are needed to fund claims in-
curred but not paid as of the end of the
year for supplemental unemployment
benefits, severance pay, or disability,
medical, or life insurance benefits.
For more information, see sections 419(c)
and 419A of the Internal Revenue Code and
the related regulations.
Meals and lodging.You can usually deduct
the cost of furnishing meals and lodging to
your employees. However, you can generally
deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishing
meals.
Deduct the cost on your tax return or
business schedule in whatever category the
expense falls. For example, if you operate a
restaurant, deduct the cost of the meals you
furnish to your employees as part of the cost
of goods sold. If you operate a nursing home,
motel, or rental property, deduct the cost of
furnishing lodging to an employee as ex-
penses for utilities, linen service, salaries,
depreciation, etc.
Deduction limit on meals. You can
generally deduct only 50% of the cost of fur-
nishing meals to your employees. However,
you can deduct the full cost of the following
meals.
 Meals whose value you must include in
an employee's wages.
 Meals that qualify as a de minimis fringe
benefit, as discussed in chapter 2 of
Publication 15–B.
 Meals you furnish to your employees at
the work site when you operate a res-
taurant or catering service.
 Meals you furnish to your employees as
part of the expense of providing recre-
ational or social activities, such as a
company picnic.
 Meals you must furnish to crew members
of a commercial vessel under a federal
law. This includes meals furnished to
crew members of commercial vessels
operating on the Great Lakes, the Saint
Lawrence Seaway, or any U.S. inland
waterway if the meals would be required
under federal law had the vessel been
operated at sea. This does not include
meals you furnish on vessels primarily
providing luxury water transportation.
 Meals you furnish on an oil or gas plat-
form or drilling rig located offshore or in
Alaska. This includes meals you furnish
at a support camp that is near and inte-
gral to an oil or gas drilling rig located in
Alaska.
Loans or Advances
You generally can deduct as wages a loan
or advance you make to an employee that
you do not expect the employee to repay if it
is for personal services actually performed.
The total must be reasonable when you add
the loan or advance to the employee's other
pay. However, if the employee performs no
services, treat the amount you advanced to
the employee as a loan, which you cannot
deduct unless it becomes a bad debt. For in-
formation on the deduction for bad debts, see
chapter 11.
Below-market interest rate loans.On cer-
tain loans you make to an employee or
shareholder, you are treated as having re-
ceived interest income and as having paid
compensation or dividends equal to that in-
terest. See Below-Market Loan in chapter 5
for more information.
Property
If you transfer property (including your com-
pany's stock) to an employee as payment for
services, you can generally deduct it as
wages. The amount you can deduct is its fair
market value on the date of the transfer minus
any amount the employee paid for the prop-
erty.
You can claim the deduction only for the
tax year in which your employee includes the
property's value in income. Your employee is
deemed to have included the value in income
if you report it on Form W–2 in a timely
manner.
 You treat the deductible amount as re-
ceived in exchange for the property, and you
must recognize any gain or loss realized on
the transfer. Your gain or loss is the difference
between the fair market value of the property
and its adjusted basis on the date of transfer.
CAUTION
!
A corporation recognizes no gain or
loss when it pays for services with its
own stock.
These rules also apply to property trans-
ferred to an independent contractor, generally
reported on Form 1099–MISC.
Restricted property.If the property you
transfer for services is subject to restrictions
that affect its value, you generally cannot de-
duct it and do not report gain or loss until it
is substantially vested in the recipient. How-
ever, if the recipient pays for the property, you
must report any gain at the time of the trans-
fer up to the amount paid.
“Substantially vested” means the property
is not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture.
The recipient is not likely to have to give up
his or her rights in the property in the future.
Reimbursements
for Business Expenses
You can generally deduct the amount you pay
or reimburse employees for business ex-
penses they incur for you for items such as
travel and entertainment. However, your de-
duction for meal and entertainment expenses
is usually limited to 50% of the payment.
Chapter 2 Employees' Pay Page 7

If you make the payment under an ac-
countable plan, deduct it in the category of
the expense paid. For example, if you pay an
employee for travel expenses incurred on
your behalf, deduct this payment as a travel
expense on your tax return or business
schedule. See the instructions for the form
you file for information on which lines to use.
If you make the payment under a nonac-
countable plan, deduct it as wages on your
tax return or business schedule.
See Travel, Meals, and Entertainment in
chapter 13 for more information about de-
ducting reimbursements and an explanation
of accountable and nonaccountable plans.
Sick Pay
You can deduct amounts you pay to your
employees for sickness and injury, including
lump-sum amounts, as wages. However, your
deduction is limited to amounts not compen-
sated by insurance or other means.
Vacation Pay
Vacation pay is an amount you pay to an
employee while the employee is on vacation.
It includes an amount you pay an employee
for unused vacation leave. Vacation pay does
not include any sick pay or holiday pay.
You can ordinarily deduct vacation pay
only in your tax year in which the employee
actually receives it. This rule applies regard-
less of whether you use the cash method or
an accrual method of accounting.
However, you can deduct vacation pay in
your tax year in which the employee earns it
if it is vested by the end of that year and the
employee actually receives it within 2
1/2
months after the end of that year. Generally,
vacation pay is vested if it is payable under
an oral or written vacation pay plan that you
told your employees about before the tax year
and its amount and your liability for it are
certain.
3.
Retirement
Plans
Introduction
This chapter discusses retirement plans you
can set up and maintain for yourself and your
employees. Retirement plans are savings
plans that offer you tax advantages to set
aside money for your own and your employ-
ees' retirement.
In general, a sole proprietor or a partner
is treated as an employee for participating in
a retirement plan.
SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer
you and your employees a tax favored way
to save for retirement. You can deduct con-
tributions you make to the plan for your em-
ployees. If you are a sole proprietor, you can
deduct contributions you make to the plan for
yourself. You can also deduct trustees' fees
if contributions to the plan do not cover them.
Earnings on the contributions are generally
tax free until you or your employees receive
distributions from the plan in later years.
Under certain plans, employees can have
you contribute limited amounts of their
before-tax pay to a plan. These amounts (and
the earnings on them) are generally tax free
until your employees receive distributions
from the plan in later years.
In general, individuals who are employed
or self-employed can also set up and con-
tribute to individual retirement arrangements
(IRAs).
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Simplified employee pension (SEP)
 SIMPLE retirement plan
 Qualified plan
 Individual retirement arrangement (IRA)
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554560 Retirement Plans for Small Busi-
ness (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qual-
ified Plans) 
/H18554590 Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs) (Including Roth
IRAs and Education IRAs)
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554W–2 Wage and Tax Statement
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
Simplified Employee
Pension (SEP)
A simplified employee pension (SEP) is a
written plan that allows you to make deduct-
ible contributions toward your own and your
employees' retirement without getting in-
volved in more complex retirement plans. A
corporation also can have a SEP and make
deductible contributions toward its employ-
ees' retirement. But certain advantages
available to qualified plans, such as the spe-
cial tax treatment that may apply to lump-sum
distributions, do not apply to SEPs.
Under a SEP, you make the contributions
to a traditional individual retirement arrange-
ment (called a SEP-IRA) set up for each eli-
gible employee.
SEP-IRAs are set up for, at a minimum,
each eligible employee. A SEP-IRA may
have to be set up for a leased employee, but
need not be set up for an excludable em-
ployee. For more information, see Publication
560.
Form 5305–SEP.  You may be able to use
Form 5305–SEP, Simplified Employee
Pension-Individual Retirement Accounts
Contribution Agreement, in setting up your
SEP.
Contribution Limits
Contributions you make for a year to a com-
mon-law employee's SEP-IRA are limited to
the lesser of $30,000 or 15% of the employ-
ee's compensation. Compensation generally
does not include your contributions to the
SEP, but does include certain elective defer-
rals unless you choose not to include them.
Annual compensation limit.You generally
cannot consider the part of an employee's
compensation over $170,000 when you figure
your contribution limit for that employee.
More than one plan.If you also contribute
to a defined contribution retirement plan (de-
fined later), annual additions to all a partic-
ipant's accounts are limited to the lesser of
$30,000 or 25% of the participant's compen-
sation. When you figure this limit, you must
add your contributions to all defined contri-
bution plans. A SEP is considered a defined
contribution plan for this limit.
Contributions for yourself.The annual
limits on your contributions to a common-law
employee's SEP-IRA also apply to contribu-
tions you make to your own SEP-IRA. 
Deduction Limit
The most you can deduct for employer con-
tributions for a common-law employee is 15%
of the compensation paid to him or her during
the year from the business that has the plan.
Deduction of contributions for yourself.
When figuring the deduction for employer
contributions made to your own SEP-IRA,
compensation is your net earnings from self-
employment minus the following amounts.
1) The deduction for one-half your self-
employment tax.
2) The deduction for contributions to your
own SEP-IRA.
The deduction for contributions to your
own SEP-IRA and your net earnings depend
on each other. For this reason, you determine
the deduction for contributions to your own
SEP-IRA indirectly by reducing the contribu-
tion rate called for in your plan. Use the Rate
Worksheet for Self-Employed shown under
Qualified Plan, later, to figure the rate.
SEP and profit-sharing plan.If you also
contributed to a qualified profit-sharing plan,
you must reduce the 15% deduction limit for
that plan by the allowable deduction for con-
tributions to the SEP-IRAs of those partic-
ipating in both the SEP plan and the profit-
sharing plan.
SEP and another qualified plan.If you also
contributed to any other type of qualified plan,
treat the SEP as a separate profit-sharing
plan when applying the overall 25% deduction
limit described in section 404(h)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
TIP
If your SEP contribution is more than
the deduction limit (nondeductible
contribution), you can carry over and
deduct the difference in later years. However,
the contribution carryover, when combined
with the contribution for the later year, is
subject to the deduction limit for that year.
Page 8 Chapter 3  Retirement Plans

Employee contributions. Employees can
also make contributions of up to $2,000 to
their SEP-IRAs independent of the employer's
SEP contributions. However, the employee's
deduction for IRA contributions may be re-
duced or eliminated because the employee is
covered by an employer retirement plan (the
SEP plan). See Publication 590 for details.
Salary Reduction
Simplified Employee
Pension (SARSEP)
CAUTION
!
An employer is no longer allowed to
set up a SARSEP. However, partic-
ipants in a SARSEP set up before
1997 (including employees hired after 1996)
can continue to have their employer contrib-
ute part of their pay to the plan.
A SARSEP is a SEP set up before 1997
that included a salary reduction arrangement.
Under the arrangement, employees can
choose to have you contribute part of their
pay to their SEP-IRAs rather than receive it
in cash. This contribution is called an “elective
deferral” because employees choose (elect)
to set aside the money and the tax on the
money is deferred until it is distributed.
This choice is available only if all the fol-
lowing requirements are met.
 The SARSEP was set up before 1997.
 At least 50% of the eligible employees
choose the salary reduction arrangement.
 You had 25 or fewer eligible employees
(or employees who would have been eli-
gible if you had maintained a SEP) at any
time during the preceding year.
 Each eligible highly compensated em-
ployee's deferral percentage each year is
no more than 125% of the average
deferral percentage (ADP) of all non-
highly compensated employees eligible
to participate (the ADP test). See Publi-
cation 560 for the definition of a highly
compensated employee and information
on how to figure the deferral percentage.
Limit on elective deferrals.In general, the
total income an employee can defer under a
SARSEP and certain other elective deferral
arrangements for 2000 is limited to the lesser
of $10,500 or 15% of the employee's com-
pensation (as defined in Publication 560).
This limit applies only to amounts that reduce
the employee's pay, not to any contributions
from employer funds.
Employment taxes. Elective deferrals that
meet the ADP test are not subject to income
tax in the year of deferral, but they are in-
cluded in wages for social security, Medicare,
and federal unemployment (FUTA) tax.
Reporting SEP
Contributions on Form W–2
Your contributions to an employee's SEP-IRA
are excluded from the employee's income.
Unless there are contributions under a salary
reduction arrangement, do not include these
contributions in your employee's wages on
Form W–2 for income, social security, or
Medicare tax purposes. Your SEP contribu-
tions under a salary reduction arrangement
are included in your employee's wages for
social security and Medicare tax purposes
only.
Example. Jim's salary reduction ar-
rangement calls for 10% of his salary to be
contributed by his employer as an elective
deferral to Jim's SEP-IRA. Jim's salary for the
year is $30,000 (before reduction for the
deferral). The employer did not choose to
treat deferrals as compensation under the
arrangement. To figure the deferral, the em-
ployer multiplies Jim's salary of $30,000 by
9.0909%, the reduced rate equivalent of 10%,
to get the deferral of $2,727.27. (This method
is the same one you, as a self-employed
person, use to figure the contributions you
make on your own behalf. See Rate Work-
sheet for Self-Employed under Qualified
Plan.)
On Jim's Form W–2, his employer shows
total wages of $27,272.73 ($30,000 −
$2,727.27), social security wages of $30,000,
and Medicare wages of $30,000. Jim reports
$27,272.73 as wages on his individual income
tax return.
If his employer chooses to treat deferrals
as compensation under the salary reduction
arrangement, Jim's deferral would be $3,000
($30,000 x 10%). In this case, the employer
uses the rate called for under the arrange-
ment (not the reduced rate) to figure the
deferral and the ADP test. On Jim's Form
W–2, the employer shows total wages of
$27,000 ($30,000 − $3,000), social security
wages of $30,000, and Medicare wages of
$30,000. Jim reports $27,000 as wages on
his return.
In either case, the maximum deductible
contribution would be $3,913.05 ($30,000 x
13.0435%).
More information.For more information on
employer withholding requirements, see
Publication 15.
For more information on SEPs, see Pub-
lication 560.
SIMPLE
Retirement Plans
A Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-
ees (SIMPLE plan) is a written arrangement
that provides you and your employees with a
simplified way to make contributions to pro-
vide retirement income. Under a SIMPLE
plan, employees can choose to make salary
reduction contributions to the plan rather than
receiving these amounts as part of their reg-
ular pay. In addition, you will contribute
matching or nonelective contributions.
SIMPLE plans can only be maintained on
a calendar-year basis.
A SIMPLE plan can be set up in either of
the following ways.
 Using SIMPLE IRAs (SIMPLE IRA plan).
 As part of a 401(k) plan (SIMPLE 401(k)
plan).
See Publication 560 for information on
SIMPLE 401(k) plans.
TIP
Many financial institutions will help
you set up a SIMPLE plan.
SIMPLE IRA Plan
A SIMPLE IRA plan is a retirement plan that
uses SIMPLE IRAs for each eligible em-
ployee. Under a SIMPLE IRA plan, a SIMPLE
IRA must be set up for each eligible em-
ployee. For the definition of an eligible em-
ployee, see Who Can Participate in a SIMPLE
IRA Plan?, next.
Who Can Set Up
a SIMPLE IRA Plan?
You can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan if you
meet both the following requirements.
 You meet the employee limit.
 You do not maintain another qualified
plan unless the other plan is for collective
bargaining employees.
Employee limit.You can set up a SIMPLE
IRA plan only if you had 100 or fewer em-
ployees who earned $5,000 or more in com-
pensation during the preceding year. Under
this rule, you must take into account all em-
ployees employed at any time during the cal-
endar year regardless of whether they are
eligible to participate. Employees include
self-employed individuals who received
earned income, and leased employees.
Once you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan, you
must continue to meet the 100-employee limit
each year you maintain the plan.
Grace period for employers who cease
to meet the 100-employee limit. If you
maintain the SIMPLE IRA plan for at least 1
year and you cease to meet the
100-employee limit in a later year, you will be
treated as meeting it for the 2 calendar years
immediately following the calendar year for
which you last met it.
A different rule applies if you do not meet
the 100-employee limit because of an acqui-
sition, disposition, or similar transaction. Un-
der this rule, the SIMPLE IRA plan will be
treated as meeting the 100-employee limit for
the year of the transaction and the 2 following
years if both the following conditions are sat-
isfied.
 Coverage under the plan has not signif-
icantly changed during the grace period.
 The SIMPLE IRA plan would have cont-
inued to qualify after the transaction if you
had remained a separate employer.
CAUTION
!
The grace period for acquisitions,
dispositions, and similar transactions
also applies if, because of these types
of transactions, you do not meet the rules
explained under Other qualified plan or Who
Can Participate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?, be-
low.
Other qualified plan.The SIMPLE IRA plan
generally must be the only retirement plan to
which you make contributions, or benefits
accrue, for service in any year beginning with
the year the SIMPLE IRA plan becomes ef-
fective.
Exception. If you maintain a qualified
plan for collective bargaining employees, you
are permitted to maintain a SIMPLE IRA plan
for other employees.
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 9

Who Can Participate
in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?
Eligible employee. Any employee who re-
ceived at least $5,000 in compensation during
any 2 years preceding the current calendar
year and is reasonably expected to earn at
least $5,000 during the current calendar year
is eligible to participate. The term
“employee” includes a self-employed individ-
ual who received earned income.
You can use less restrictive eligibility re-
quirements (but not more restrictive ones) by
eliminating or reducing the prior year com-
pensation requirements, the current year
compensation requirements, or both. For ex-
ample, you can allow participation for em-
ployees who received at least $3,000 in
compensation during any preceding calendar
year. However, you cannot impose any other
conditions on participating in a SIMPLE IRA
plan.
Excludable employees. The following em-
ployees do not need to be covered under a
SIMPLE IRA plan.
 Employees who are covered by a union
agreement and whose retirement benefits
were bargained for in good faith by the
employees' union and you.
 Nonresident alien employees who have
received no U.S. source wages, salaries,
or other personal services compensation
from you.
Compensation. Compensation for employ-
ees is the total wages required to be reported
on Form W–2. Compensation also includes
the salary reduction contributions made under
this plan, compensation deferred under a
section 457 plan, and the employees' elective
deferrals under a section 401(k) plan, a
SARSEP, or a section 403(b) annuity con-
tract. If you are self-employed, compensation
is your net earnings from self-employment
(line 4 of Short Schedule SE (Form 1040))
before subtracting any contributions made to
the SIMPLE IRA plan for yourself.
How To Set Up a SIMPLE IRA Plan
You can use Form 5304–SIMPLE  or Form
5305–SIMPLE  to set up a SIMPLE IRA plan.
Each form is a model savings incentive match
plan for employees (SIMPLE) plan document.
Which form you use depends on whether you
select a financial institution or your employees
select the institution that will receive the con-
tributions.
Use Form 5304–SIMPLE if you allow each
plan participant to select the financial institu-
tion for receiving his or her SIMPLE IRA plan
contributions. Use Form 5305–SIMPLE if you
require that all contributions under the
SIMPLE IRA plan be deposited initially at a
designated financial institution.
The SIMPLE IRA plan is adopted when
you (and the designated financial institution,
if any) have completed all appropriate boxes
and blanks on the form and you have signed
it. Keep the original form. Do not file it with the
IRS.
Other uses of the forms.If you set up a
SIMPLE IRA plan using Form 5304–SIMPLE
or Form 5305–SIMPLE, you can use the form
to satisfy other requirements, including the
following.
 Meeting employer notification require-
ments for the SIMPLE IRA plan. Page 3
of Form 5304–SIMPLE and Page 3 of
Form 5305–SIMPLE contain a Model
Notification to Eligible Employees that
provides the necessary information to the
employee.
 Maintaining the SIMPLE IRA plan records
and proving you set up a SIMPLE IRA
plan for employees.
Deadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA plan.
You can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan effective
on any date between January 1 and October
1 of a year, provided you did not previously
maintain a SIMPLE IRA plan. If you previ-
ously maintained a SIMPLE IRA plan, you
can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan effective only
on January 1 of a year. This requirement does
not apply if you are a new employer that
comes into existence after October 1 of the
year the SIMPLE IRA plan is set up and you
set up a SIMPLE IRA plan as soon as ad-
ministratively feasible after you come into
existence. A SIMPLE IRA plan cannot have
an effective date that is before the date you
actually adopt the plan.
Setting up a SIMPLE IRA. SIMPLE IRAs
are the individual retirement accounts or an-
nuities into which the contributions are de-
posited. A SIMPLE IRA must be set up for
each eligible employee. Forms 5305–S,
SIMPLE Individual Retirement Trust Account,
and 5305–SA, SIMPLE Individual Retirement
Custodial Account, are model trust and cus-
todial account documents the participant and
the trustee (or custodian) can use for this
purpose.
A SIMPLE IRA cannot be designated as
a Roth IRA. Contributions to a SIMPLE IRA
will not affect the amount an individual can
contribute to a Roth IRA.
Deadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA.
A SIMPLE IRA must be set up for an em-
ployee before the first date by which a con-
tribution is required to be deposited into the
employee's IRA. See Time limits for contrib-
uting funds later under Contribution Limits.
Notification Requirement
If you adopt a SIMPLE IRA plan, you must
notify each employee of the following infor-
mation before the beginning of the election
period.
1) The employee's opportunity to make or
change a salary reduction choice under
a SIMPLE IRA plan.
2) Your choice to make either reduced
matching contributions or nonelective
contributions (discussed later). 
3) A summary description and the location
of the plan. The financial institution
should provide you with this information.
4) Written notice that his or her balance can
be transferred without cost or penalty if
you use a designated financial institu-
tion.
Election period.The election period is gen-
erally the 60-day period immediately preced-
ing January 1 of a calendar year (November
2 to December 31 of the preceding calendar
year). However, the dates of this period are
modified if you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan in
mid-year (for example, on July 1) or if the
60-day period falls before the first day an
employee becomes eligible to participate in
the SIMPLE IRA plan.
A SIMPLE IRA plan can provide longer
periods for permitting employees to enter into
salary reduction agreements or to modify prior
agreements. For example, a SIMPLE IRA
plan can provide a 90-day election period in-
stead of the 60-day period. Similarly, in addi-
tion to the 60-day period, a SIMPLE IRA plan
can provide quarterly election periods during
the 30 days before each calendar quarter,
other than the first quarter of each year.
Contribution Limits
Contributions are made up of salary reduction
contributions and employer contributions.
You, as the employer, must make either
matching contributions or nonelective contri-
butions, defined later. No other contributions
can be made to the SIMPLE IRA plan. These
contributions, which you can deduct, must be
made timely. See Time limits for contributing
funds, later.
Salary reduction contributions. The
amount the employee chooses to have you
contribute to a SIMPLE IRA on his or her
behalf cannot be more than $6,000 for 2000.
These contributions must be expressed as a
percentage of the employee's compensation
unless you permit the employee to express
them as a specific dollar amount. You cannot
place restrictions on the contribution amount
(such as limiting the contribution percentage),
except to comply with the $6,000 limit.
If an employee is a participant in any other
employer plan during the year and has elec-
tive salary reductions or deferred compen-
sation under those plans, the salary reduction
contributions under a SIMPLE IRA plan also
are elective deferrals that count toward the
overall $10,500 annual limit on exclusion of
salary reductions and other elective deferrals.
If the other plan is a deferred compen-
sation plan of a state or local government or
a tax-exempt organization, the limit on elec-
tive deferrals is $8,000.
Employer matching contributions.You are
generally required to match each employee's
salary reduction contributions on a dollar-for-
dollar basis up to 3% of the employee's
compensation. This requirement does not
apply if you make nonelective contributions
as discussed later.
Example. In 2000, your employee, John
Rose, earned $25,000 and chose to defer 5%
of his salary. You make a 3% matching con-
tribution. The total contribution you can make
for John is $2,000, figured as follows.
Lower percentage. If you choose a
matching contribution less than 3%, the per-
centage must be at least 1%. You must notify
the employees of the lower match within a
reasonable period of time before the 60-day
election period (discussed earlier) for the
calendar year. You cannot choose a per-
centage less than 3% for more than 2 years
during the 5-year period that ends with (and
includes) the year for which the choice is ef-
fective.
Salary reduction contributions
($25,000 × .05) ............................................ $1,250
Employer matching contribution
($25,000 × .03) ............................................ 750
Total contributions ....................................$2,000
Page 10 Chapter 3  Retirement Plans

Nonelective contributions. Instead of
matching contributions, you can choose to
make nonelective contributions of 2% of
compensation on behalf of each eligible em-
ployee who has at least $5,000 of compen-
sation (or some lower amount of compen-
sation that you select) from you for the year.
If you make this choice, you must make non-
elective contributions whether or not the em-
ployee chooses to make salary reduction
contributions. Only $170,000 of the employ-
ee's compensation can be taken into account
to figure the contribution limit.
If you choose this 2% contribution formula,
you must notify the employees within a rea-
sonable period of time before the 60-day
election period (discussed earlier) for the
calendar year.
Example 1. In 2000, your employee,
Jane Wood, earned $36,000 and chose to
have you contribute 10% of her salary. You
make a 2% nonelective contribution. The total
contributions you can make for her are
$4,320, figured as follows.
Example 2. Using the same facts as in
Example 1, above, the maximum contribution
you can make for Jane if she earned $75,000
is $7,500, figured as follows.
Time limits for contributing funds.You
must make the salary reduction contributions
to the SIMPLE IRA within 30 days after the
end of the month in which the amounts would
otherwise have been payable to the employee
in cash. You must make matching contribu-
tions or nonelective contributions by the due
date (including extensions) for filing your fed-
eral income tax return for the year.
When To Deduct Contributions
You can deduct SIMPLE IRA contributions in
the tax year with or within which the calendar
year for which contributions were made ends.
You can deduct contributions for a particular
tax year if they are made for that tax year and
are made by the due date (including exten-
sions) of your federal income tax return for
that year.
Example 1. Your tax year is the fiscal
year ending June 30. Contributions under a
SIMPLE IRA plan for the calendar year 2000
(including contributions made in 2000 before
July 1, 2000) are deductible in the tax year
ending June 30, 2001.
Example 2. You are a sole proprietor
whose tax year is the calendar year. Contri-
butions under a SIMPLE IRA plan for the
calendar year 2000 (including contributions
made in 2001 by April 16, 2001) are deduct-
ible in the 2000 tax year.
Where To Deduct Contributions
Deduct contributions you make for your com-
mon-law employees on your tax return. For
example, sole proprietors deduct them on
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form
1040), partnerships deduct them on Form
1065, and corporations deduct them on Form
1120, Form 1120–A, or Form 1120S.
Sole proprietors and partners deduct con-
tributions for themselves on line 29 of Form
1040. (If you are a partner, contributions for
yourself are shown on the Schedule K–1
(Form 1065) you receive from the partner-
ship).
Tax Treatment of Contributions
You can deduct your contributions and your
employees can exclude these contributions
from their gross income. SIMPLE IRA contri-
butions are not subject to federal income tax
withholding. However, salary reduction con-
tributions are subject to social security, Med-
icare, and federal unemployment (FUTA)
taxes. Matching and nonelective contributions
are not subject to these taxes.
Reporting on Form W–2. Do not include
SIMPLE IRA contributions in the “Wages, tips,
other compensation” box of Form W–2.
However, salary reduction contributions must
be included in the boxes for social security
and Medicare wages. Also include the proper
code in Box 13. For more information, see the
instructions for Forms W–2 and W–3.
Distributions (Withdrawals)
Distributions from a SIMPLE IRA are subject
to IRA rules and generally are includible in
income for the year received. Tax-free
rollovers can be made from one SIMPLE IRA
into another SIMPLE IRA. A rollover from a
SIMPLE IRA to another IRA can be made tax
free only after a 2-year participation in the
SIMPLE IRA plan.
Early withdrawals generally are subject to
a 10% additional tax. However, the additional
tax is increased to 25% if funds are withdrawn
within 2 years of beginning participation.
More information.See Publication 590 for
information about IRA rules, including those
on the tax treatment of distributions, rollovers,
required distributions, and income tax with-
holding.
More Information
on SIMPLE IRA Plans
If you need more help to set up and maintain
a SIMPLE IRA plan, see the following IRS
notice and revenue procedure.
Notice 98–4.This notice contains questions
and answers about the implementation and
operation of SIMPLE IRA plans, including the
election and notice requirements for these
plans. Notice 98–4 is in Cumulative Bulletin
1998–1.
Revenue Procedure 97–29. This revenue
procedure provides guidance to drafters of
prototype SIMPLE IRAs on obtaining opinion
letters. Revenue Procedure 97–29 is in Cu-
mulative Bulletin 1997–1.
Qualified Plan
A qualified retirement plan is a written plan
you can set up for the exclusive benefit of
your employees and their beneficiaries. It is
sometimes called a Keogh or H.R.10 plan.
You, or you and your employees, can
make contributions to the plan. If your plan
meets the qualification requirements, you can
generally deduct your contributions to the
plan. For more information, see Publication
560.
Your employees generally are not taxed
on your contributions or increases in the
plan's assets until they are distributed. How-
ever, certain loans made from qualified plans
are treated as taxable distributions. For more
information, see Publication 575.
Qualification requirements.To be a qual-
ified plan, the plan must meet many require-
ments. They include requirements that de-
termine the following.
 Who must be covered by the plan.
 How contributions to the plan are to be
invested.
 How contributions to the plan and bene-
fits under the plan are to be determined.
 How much of an employee's interest in
the plan must be guaranteed (vested).
For more information, see Publication 560.
More than one job.If you are self-employed
and also work for someone else, you can
participate in retirement plans for both jobs.
Generally, your participation in a retirement
plan for one job does not affect your partici-
pation in a plan for the other job. However,
if you have an IRA, you may not be allowed
to deduct part or all of your IRA contributions.
See Publication 590.
Kinds of Qualified Plans
There are two basic kinds of qualified retire-
ment plans: defined contribution plans and
defined benefit plans.
Defined Contribution Plan
This plan provides for a separate account for
each person covered by the plan. Benefits are
based only on amounts contributed to or al-
located to each account.
There are two types of defined contribu-
tion plans: profit-sharing and money purchase
pension.
Profit-sharing plan.This plan lets your em-
ployees or their beneficiaries share in the
profits of your business. The plan must have
a definite formula for allocating the contribu-
tion among the participating employees and
for distributing the accumulated funds in the
plan.
Money purchase pension plan.Under this
plan, contributions fixed and are not based
on your business profits. For example, if the
plan requires contributions be 10% of each
participating employee's compensation re-
gardless of whether you have a profit, the
plan is a money purchase pension plan.
Defined Benefit Plan
This is any plan that is not a defined contri-
bution plan. In general, contributions to a
qualified defined benefit plan are based on
what is needed to provide definitely determi-
nable benefits to plan participants. Your con-
tributions to the plan are based on actuarial
assumptions. Generally, you will need con-
tinuing professional help to administer a de-
fined benefit plan.
Salary reduction contributions
($36,000 × .10) ............................................ $3,600
2% nonelective contributions
($36,000 × .02) ............................................ 720
Total contributions ....................................$4,320
Salary reduction contributions
(maximum amount) ...................................... $6,000
2% nonelective contributions
($75,000 × .02) ............................................ 1,500
Total contributions ....................................$7,500
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 11

Setting Up a Plan
You must adopt a written plan. The plan can
be an IRS-approved master or prototype plan
offered by a sponsoring organization. Or it
can be an individually designed plan.
Master or prototype plans.The following
sponsoring organizations generally can pro-
vide IRS-approved master or prototype plans.
 Trade or professional organizations.
 Banks (including savings and loan asso-
ciations and federally insured credit un-
ions).
 Insurance companies.
 Mutual funds.
Adoption of a master or prototype plan does
not mean your plan is automatically qualified.
It must still meet all the qualification require-
ments stated in the law.
Individually designed plan.If you prefer,
you can set up an individually designed plan
to meet specific needs. Although advance
IRS approval is not required, you can apply
for approval by paying a fee and requesting
a determination letter. You may need profes-
sional help with this. Revenue Procedure
2000–6 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2000–1
can help you decide whether to apply for ap-
proval.
Deduction Limit
The deduction limit for contributions to a
qualified plan depends on the kind of plan you
have.
CAUTION
!
In figuring the deduction for contribu-
tions to these plans, you cannot take
into account any contributions or
benefits that are more than the limits dis-
cussed under Limits on Contributions and
Benefits in Publication 560.
Defined contribution plans.The deduction
limit for a defined contribution plan depends
on whether it is a profit-sharing plan or a
money purchase pension plan.
Profit-sharing plan.Your deduction for
contributions to a profit-sharing plan cannot
be more than 15% of the compensation paid
(or accrued) during the year to the eligible
employees participating in the plan. You must
reduce this limit in figuring the deduction for
contributions you make for your own account.
See Deduction of contributions for yourself,
later.
Money purchase pension plan. Your
deduction for contributions to a money pur-
chase pension plan is generally limited to
25% of the compensation paid during the year
to a participating eligible employee. You must
reduce this limit in figuring the deduction for
contributions you make for yourself, as dis-
cussed later.
Defined benefit plans.An actuary must fig-
ure the deduction for contributions to a de-
fined benefit plan since it is based on actuarial
assumptions and computations.
Deduction of contributions for yourself.
To take a deduction for contributions you
make to a plan for yourself, you must have
net earnings from the trade or business for
which the plan was set up.
Limit on deduction.If the qualified plan
is a profit-sharing plan, your deduction for
yourself is limited to the lesser of $30,000 or
13.0435% (15% reduced as discussed below)
of your net earnings from the trade or busi-
ness that has the plan. If the plan is a money
purchase plan, the deduction is limited to the
lesser of $30,000 or 20% (25% reduced as
discussed later) of your net earnings.
Net earnings. Your net earnings must
be from self-employment in a trade or busi-
ness in which your personal services are a
material income-producing factor. Your net
earnings do not include items excluded from
income (or deductions related to that income),
other than foreign earned income and foreign
housing cost amounts.
Your net earnings are your business gross
income minus the allowable business de-
ductions from that business. Allowable busi-
ness deductions include contributions to SEP
and qualified plans for common-law employ-
ees and the deduction for one-half your self-
employment tax.
Net earnings include a partner's distribu-
tive share of partnership income or loss (other
than separately stated items such as capital
gains and losses) and any guaranteed pay-
ments. If you are a limited partner, net
earnings include only guaranteed payments
for services rendered to or for the partnership.
For more information, see Partners under
Who Must Pay Self-Employment Tax in Pub-
lication 533.
Net earnings do not include income
passed through to shareholders of S corpo-
rations.
Adjustments. You must reduce your net
earnings by the deduction for one-half your
self-employment tax. Also, net earnings must
be reduced by the deduction for contributions
you make for yourself. This reduction is made
indirectly, as explained next.
Net earnings reduced by adjusting
contribution rate.You must reduce net
earnings by your deduction for contributions
for yourself. The deduction and the net
earnings depend on each other. You make
the adjustment indirectly by reducing the
contribution rate called for in the plan and
using the reduced rate to figure your maxi-
mum deduction for contributions for yourself.
Annual compensation limit.You gen-
erally cannot take into account more than
$170,000 of your compensation in figuring
your contribution to a defined contribution
plan.
Figuring Your Deduction
Use the following worksheet to find the re-
duced contribution rate for yourself. Make no
reduction to the contribution rate for any
common-law employees.
Now that you have figured your self-
employed rate, you can figure your maximum
deduction for contributions for yourself by
completing the following steps.
Example. You are a self-employed
farmer and you have employees. The terms
of your plan provide that you contribute 8
1/2%
(.085) of your compensation (defined earlier)
and 8
1 / 2% of your participants' compensation.
Your net earnings from line 36, Schedule F
(Form 1040) are $200,000. In figuring this,
you deducted your participants' pay of
$100,000 and contributions for them of
$8,500 (8
1 / 2% x $100,000). You figure your
self-employed rate and maximum deduction
for contributions on behalf of yourself as fol-
lows.
When to make contributions. To take a
deduction for contributions for a particular
year, you must make the contributions not
later than the due date (generally, April 15 for
calendar year taxpayers), plus extensions, of
your tax return for that year.
More information.See Publication 560 for
more information on retirement plans for small
business owners, including the self-
employed. Publication 560 also discusses
Step 2
Enter your net earnings (net profit) from
line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line
3, Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040); line
36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or line
15a, Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) .........
Step 3
Enter your deduction for self-employ-
ment tax from line 27, Form 1040 .......
Step 4
Subtract step 3 from step 2 and enter
the result ..............................................
Step 5
Multiply step 4 by step 1 and enter the
result ....................................................
Step 6
Multiply $170,000 by your plan contri-
bution rate. Enter the result, but not
more than $30,000 ..............................
Step 7
Enter the lesser of step 5 or step 6.
This is your maximum deductible
contribution. Enter your deduction on
line 29, Form 1040 ..............................
Rate Worksheet for Self-Employed
1) Plan contribution rate as a decimal (for
example, 101 / 2% = .105) ...................... 0.085
2) Rate in line 1 plus 1
(for example, .105 + 1 = 1.105) .......... 1.085
3) Self-employed rate as a decimal
rounded to at least 3 decimal places
(line 1 ÷ line 2) .................................... 0.078
Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed
Step 1
Enter the rate shown on line 3 above . 0.078
Step 2
Enter your net earnings (net profit) from
line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line
3, Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040); line
36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or line
15a, Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) ......... $200,000
Step 3
Enter your deduction for self-employ-
ment tax from line 27, Form 1040 ....... 7,403
Step 4
Subtract step 3 from step 2 and enter
the result .............................................. 192,597
Step 5
Multiply step 4 by step 1 and enter the
result .................................................... 15,023
Step 6
Multiply $170,000 by your plan contri-
bution rate. Enter the result but not
more than $30,000 .............................. 14,450
Step 7Rate Worksheet for Self-Employed Enter the lesser of step 5 or step 6.
This is your maximum deductible
contribution. Enter your deduction on
line 29, Form 1040 .............................. $ 14,450
1) Plan contribution rate as a decimal (for
example, 101 / 2% = .105) ......................
2) Rate in line 1 plus 1
(for example, .105 + 1 = 1.105) ..........
3) Self-employed rate as a decimal
rounded to at least 3 decimal places
(line 1 ÷ line 2) ....................................
Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed
Step 1
Enter the rate shown on line 3 above .
Page 12 Chapter 3  Retirement Plans

the reporting forms that must be filed for these
plans.
Individual Retirement
Arrangement (IRA)
An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is
a personal savings plan that allows you to set
aside money for your retirement or for certain
education expenses. You do not have to set
up IRAs for your employees or make contri-
butions for them. You may be able to deduct
your contributions, depending on the type of
IRA and your circumstances. Generally,
amounts in an IRA, including earnings and
gains, are not taxed until they are distributed.
In certain cases, your earnings and gains may
not be taxed at all if they are distributed ac-
cording to the rules. For more information on
IRAs, see Publication 590.
4.
Rent Expense
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of
rent or lease payments you make for property
you use in your business but do not own. It
also discusses how to treat other kinds of
payments you make that are related to your
use of this property. These include payments
you make for taxes on the property, im-
provements to the property, and getting a
lease. There is a discussion about capitaliz-
ing (including in the cost of property) certain
rent expenses at the end of the chapter.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 The definition of rent
 Taxes on leased property
 The cost of getting a lease
 Improvements by the lessee
 Capitalizing rent expenses
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554946  How To Depreciate Property
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
Rent
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of
property you do not own. In general, you can
deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is
for property you use in your trade or business.
If you have or will receive equity in or title to
the property, the rent is not deductible.
Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental
deduction for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily,
the issue of reasonableness arises only if you
and the lessor are related. Rent paid to a re-
lated person is reasonable if it is the same
amount you would pay to a stranger for use
of the same property. Rent is not unreason-
able just because it is figured as a percentage
of gross receipts. For examples of related
persons, see Related Persons in chapter 12.
Rent on your home. If you rent your home
and use part of it as your place of business,
you may be able to deduct the rent you pay
for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more in-
formation, see Business use of your home in
chapter 1.
Rent paid in advance.  Generally, rent paid
in your trade or business is deductible in the
year paid or accrued. If you pay rent in ad-
vance, you can deduct only the amount that
applies to your use of the rented property
during the tax year. You can deduct the rest
of your payment only over the period to which
it applies.
Example 1. You leased a building for 5
years beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000
per year. You paid the first year's rent
($12,000) on June 30. You can deduct only
$6,000 (
6 / 12 × $12,000) for the rent that applies
to the first year.
Example 2. Last January you leased
property for 3 years for $6,000 a year. You
paid the full $18,000 (3 × $6,000) during the
first year of the lease. Each year you can
deduct only $6,000, the part of the rent that
applies to that year.
Canceling a lease.You generally can de-
duct as rent an amount you pay to cancel a
business lease.
Lease or purchase. There may be instances
in which you must determine whether your
payments are for rent or for the purchase of
the property. You must first determine
whether your agreement is a lease or a con-
ditional sales contract. Payments made under
a conditional sales contract are not deductible
as rent expense.
Conditional sales contract.Whether an
agreement is a conditional sales contract de-
pends on the intent of the parties. Determine
intent based on the provisions of the agree-
ment and the facts and circumstances that
exist when you make the agreement. No sin-
gle test, or special combination of tests, al-
ways applies. However, in general, an
agreement may be considered a conditional
sales contract rather than a lease if any of the
following is true.
 The agreement applies part of each pay-
ment toward an equity interest you will
receive.
 You get title to the property after you
make a stated amount of required pay-
ments.
 The amount you must pay to use the
property for a short time is a large part
of the amount you would pay to get title
to the property.
 You pay much more than the current fair
rental value of the property.
 You have an option to buy the property
at a nominal price compared to the value
of the property when you may exercise
the option. Determine this value when
you make the agreement.
 You have an option to buy the property
at a nominal price compared to the total
amount you have to pay under the
agreement.
 The agreement designates part of the
payments as interest, or that part is easy
to recognize as interest.
Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease
transactions may not be considered leases.
Leveraged leases generally involve three
parties: a lessor, a lessee, and a lender to the
lessor. Usually the lease term covers a large
part of the useful life of the leased property,
and the lessee's payments to the lessor are
enough to cover the lessor's payments to the
lender.
If you plan to take part in what appears to
be a leveraged lease, you may want to get
an advance ruling. The following revenue
procedures contain the guidelines the IRS will
use to determine if a leveraged lease is a
lease for federal income tax purposes.
 Revenue Procedure 75–21, in Cumula-
tive Bulletin 1975–1.
 Revenue Procedure 75–28, in Cumula-
tive Bulletin 1975–1.
 Revenue Procedure 76–30, in Cumula-
tive Bulletin 1976–2.
 Revenue Procedure 79–48, in Cumula-
tive Bulletin 1979–2.
In general, the revenue procedures pro-
vide that, for advance ruling purposes only,
the IRS will consider the lessor in a leveraged
lease transaction to be the owner of the
property and the transaction to be a valid
lease if all the factors in the revenue proce-
dures are met, including the following.
 The lessor must maintain a minimum
unconditional “at risk” equity investment
in the property (at least 20% of the cost
of the property) during the entire lease
term.
 The lessee may not have a contractual
right to buy the property from the lessor
at less than fair market value when the
right is exercised.
 The lessee may not invest in the property,
except as provided by Revenue Proce-
dure 79–48.
 The lessee may not lend any money to
the lessor to buy the property or guaran-
tee the loan used by the lessor to buy the
property.
 The lessor must show that it expects to
receive a profit apart from the tax de-
ductions, allowances, credits, and other
tax attributes.
The IRS may charge you a user fee for
issuing a tax ruling. For more information,
see Revenue Procedure 2001–1, in Internal
Revenue Bulletin No. 2001–1, or Publication
1375, Procedures for Issuing Rulings, Deter-
mination Letters, and Information Letters,
etc., which is a reprint of Revenue Procedure
2001–1.
Leveraged leases of limited-use prop-
erty.The IRS will not issue advance rulings
on leveraged leases of so-called limited-use
Chapter 4 Rent Expense Page 13

property. Limited-use property is property not
expected to be either useful to or usable by
a lessor at the end of the lease term except
for continued leasing or transfer to a lessee.
See Revenue Procedure 76–30 for examples
of limited-use property and property that is
not limited-use property.
Leases over $250,000. Special rules are
provided for certain leases of tangible prop-
erty. The rules apply if the lease calls for total
payments of more than $250,000 and any of
the following apply.
 Rents increase during the lease.
 Rents decrease during the lease.
 Rents are deferred (rent is payable after
the close of the calendar year following
the calendar year in which the use occurs
and the rent is allocated).
 Rents are prepaid (rent is payable before
the close of the calendar year preceding
the calendar year in which the use occurs
and the rent is allocated).
Thus, these rules do not apply if your lease
specifies equal amounts of rent for each
month in the lease term and all rent payments
are due in the calendar year to which the rent
relates (or in the preceding or following cal-
endar year).
Generally, if the special rules do apply,
you must use an accrual method of account-
ing (and time value of money principles) for
your rental expenses, regardless of your
overall method of accounting. In addition, in
certain cases in which the IRS has deter-
mined that a lease was designed to achieve
tax avoidance, you must take rent and stated
or imputed interest into account under a con-
stant rental accrual method in which the rent
is treated as accruing ratably over the entire
lease term. For details, see the regulations
under section 467 of the Internal Revenue
Code.
Taxes on
Leased Property 
If you lease business property, you can de-
duct as additional rent any taxes you have to
pay to or for the lessor. When you can deduct
these taxes as additional rent depends on
your accounting method.
Cash method. If you use the cash method
of accounting, you can deduct the taxes as
additional rent only for the tax year in which
you pay them.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual
method of accounting, you can deduct taxes
as additional rent for the tax year in which you
can determine all the following.
 That you have a liability for taxes on the
leased property.
 How much the liability is.
 That economic performance occurred.
The liability and amount of taxes are de-
termined by state or local law and the lease
agreement. Economic performance occurs as
you use the property.
Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calen-
dar year taxpayer that uses an accrual
method of accounting. Oak leases land for
use in its business. Under state law, owners
of real property become liable (incur a lien on
the property) for real estate taxes for the year
on January 1 of that year. However, they do
not have to pay these taxes until July 1 of the
next year (18 months later) when tax bills are
issued. Under the terms of the lease, Oak
becomes liable for the real estate taxes in the
later year when the tax bills are issued. If the
lease ends before the tax bill for a year is
issued, Oak is not liable for the taxes for that
year.
Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes
as rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when
Oak's liability under the lease becomes fixed.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1 except that, according to the terms
of the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real
estate taxes when the owner of the property
becomes liable for them. As a result, Oak will
deduct the real estate taxes as rent on its tax
return for the earlier year. This is the year in
which Oak's liability under the lease becomes
fixed.
Cost of
Getting a Lease 
You may either enter into a new lease with
the lessor of the property or get an existing
lease from another lessee. Very often when
you get an existing lease from another lessee,
you must pay the previous lessee money to
get the lease, besides having to pay the rent
on the lease.
If you get an existing lease on property
or equipment for your business, you generally
must amortize any amount you pay to get that
lease over the remaining term of the lease.
For example, if you pay $10,000 to get a
lease and there are 10 years remaining on the
lease with no option to renew, you can deduct
$1,000 each year.
The cost of getting an existing lease of
tangible property is not subject to the amorti-
zation rules for section 197 intangibles dis-
cussed in chapter 9.
Option to renew.The term of the lease for
amortization includes all renewal options plus
any other period for which you and the lessor
reasonably expect the lease to be renewed.
However, this applies only if less than 75%
of the cost of getting the lease is for the term
remaining on the purchase date (not including
any period for which you may choose to re-
new, extend, or continue the lease). Allocate
the lease cost to the original term and any
option term based on the facts and circum-
stances. In some cases, it may be appropriate
to make the allocation using a present value
computation. For more information, see sec-
tion 1.178–1(b)(5) of the regulations.
Example 1. You paid $10,000 to get a
lease with 20 years remaining on it and two
options to renew for 5 years each. Of this
cost, you paid $7,000 for the original lease
and $3,000 for the renewal options. Because
$7,000 is less than 75% of the total $10,000
cost of the lease (or $7,500), you must
amortize the $10,000 over 30 years. That is
the remaining life of your present lease plus
the periods for renewal.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1, except that you paid $8,000 for
the original lease and $2,000 for the renewal
options. You can amortize the entire $10,000
over the 20-year remaining life of the original
lease. The $8,000 cost of getting the original
lease was not less than 75% of the total cost
of the lease (or $7,500).
Cost of a modification agreement.You
may have to pay an additional “rent” amount
over part of the lease period to change certain
provisions in your lease. You must capitalize
these payments and amortize them over the
remaining period of the lease. You cannot
deduct the payments as additional rent, even
if they are described as rent in the agreement.
Example. You are a calendar year tax-
payer and sign a 20-year lease to rent part
of a building starting on January 1. However,
before you occupy it, you decide that you re-
ally need less space. The lessor agrees to
reduce your rent from $7,000 to $6,000 per
year and to release the excess space from
the original lease. In exchange, you agree to
pay an additional rent amount of $3,000,
payable in 60 monthly installments of $50
each.
You must capitalize the $3,000 and
amortize it over the 20-year term of the lease.
Your amortization deduction each year will
be $150 ($3,000 ÷ 20). You cannot deduct the
$600 (12 × $50) that you will pay during each
of the first 5 years as rent.
Commissions, bonuses, and fees. Com-
missions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts
that you pay to get a lease on property you
use in your business are capital costs. You
must amortize these costs over the term of
the lease.
Loss on merchandise and fixtures.If you
sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that
you bought solely to get a lease, the loss is
a cost of getting the lease. You must capital-
ize the loss and amortize it over the remaining
term of the lease.
Improvements
by Lessee 
If you add buildings or make other permanent
improvements to leased property, depreciate
the cost of the improvements using the mod-
ified accelerated cost recovery system
(MACRS). Depreciate the property over its
appropriate recovery period. You cannot
amortize the cost over the remaining term of
the lease.
If you do not keep the improvements when
you end the lease, figure your gain or loss
based on your adjusted basis in the im-
provements at that time.
For more information, see the discussion
of MACRS in Publication 946.
Assignment of a lease.If a long-term lessee
who makes permanent improvements to land
later assigns all lease rights to you for money
and you pay the rent required by the lease,
the amount you pay for the assignment is a
capital investment. If the rental value of the
leased land increased since the lease began,
part of your capital investment is for that in-
crease in the rental value. The rest is for your
investment in the permanent improvements.
Page 14 Chapter 4  Rent Expense

The part that is for the increased rental
value of the land is a cost of getting a lease,
and you amortize it over the remaining term
of the lease. You can depreciate the part that
is for your investment in the improvements
over the recovery period of the property as
discussed earlier, without regard to the lease
term.
Capitalizing
Rent Expenses 
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you
have to capitalize the direct costs and part of
the indirect costs for production or resale ac-
tivities.
Generally, you are subject to the uniform
capitalization rules if you do any of the fol-
lowing in the course of a trade or business
or an activity carried on for profit.
 Produce real or tangible personal prop-
erty for use in the business or activity.
 Produce real or tangible personal prop-
erty for sale to customers.
 Acquire property for resale. However, this
rule does not apply to personal property
if your average annual gross receipts for
the 3 previous tax years were not more
than $10 million.
Indirect costs include amounts incurred for
renting or leasing equipment, facilities, or
land.
Example 1. You rent construction equip-
ment to build a storage facility. You must
capitalize as part of the cost of the building
the rent you paid for the equipment. You re-
cover your cost by claiming a deduction for
depreciation on the building.
Example 2. You rent space in a facility
to conduct your business of manufacturing
tools. You must include the rent you paid to
occupy the facility in the cost of the tools you
produce.
More information. For more information,
see the regulations under section 263A of the
Internal Revenue Code.
5.
Interest
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of
business interest expense. Business interest
expense is an amount charged for the use of
money you borrowed for business activities.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Allocation of interest
 Interest you can deduct
 Interest you cannot deduct
 Capitalization of interest
 When to deduct interest
 A below-market loan
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554 53 7 Installment Sales
/H18554 538 Accounting Periods and Methods
/H18554550 Investment Income and Expenses
/H18554 936 Home Mortgage Interest
Deduction
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554 Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions
/H18554 Sch E (Form 1040) Supplemental In-
come and Loss
/H18554 Sch K–1 (Form 1065) Partner's Share
of Income, Credits, Deductions,
etc.
/H18554 Sch K–1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder's
Share of Income, Credits, De-
ductions, etc.
/H18554 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement
/H18554 3115 Application for Change in Ac-
counting Method
/H18554 4952 Investment Interest Expense
Deduction
/H18554 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
Allocation of Interest
The rules for deducting interest vary, de-
pending on whether the loan proceeds are
used for business, personal, investment, or
passive activities. If you use the proceeds of
a loan for more than one type of expense, you
must make an allocation to determine the in-
terest for each use of the loan's proceeds.
Allocate your interest expense to the fol-
lowing categories.
 Trade or business interest
 Passive activity interest
 Investment interest
 Portfolio interest
 Personal interest
In general, you allocate interest on a loan the
same way you allocate the loan proceeds.
You allocate loan proceeds by tracing dis-
bursements to specific uses.
TIP
The easiest way to trace disburse-
ments to specific uses is to keep the
proceeds of a particular loan separate
from any other funds.
Secured loan. The allocation of loan pro-
ceeds and the related interest is not generally
affected by the use of property that secures
the loan.
Example. You secure a loan with prop-
erty used in your business. You use the loan
proceeds to buy an automobile for personal
use. You must allocate interest expense on
the loan to personal use (purchase of the
automobile) even though the loan is secured
by business property.
TIP
If the property that secures the loan
is your home, you generally do not
allocate the loan proceeds or the re-
lated interest. The interest is usually deduct-
ible as qualified home mortgage interest, re-
gardless of how the loan proceeds are used.
For more information, see Publication 936.
Allocation period.The period for which a
loan is allocated to a particular use begins on
the date the proceeds are used and ends on
the earlier of the following dates.
 The date the loan is repaid.
 The date the loan is reallocated to an-
other use.
Proceeds not disbursed to borrower.Even
if the lender disburses the loan proceeds to
a third party, the allocation of the loan is still
based on your use of the funds. This applies
whether you pay for property, services, or
anything else by incurring a loan, or you take
property subject to a debt.
Proceeds deposited in borrower's ac-
count. Treat loan proceeds deposited in an
account as property held for investment. It
does not matter whether the account pays
interest. Any interest you pay on the loan is
investment interest expense. If you withdraw
the proceeds of the loan, you must reallocate
the loan based on the use of the funds.
Example. Connie, a calendar-year tax-
payer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and
immediately uses the proceeds to open a
checking account. No other amounts are
deposited in the account during the year and
no part of the loan principal is repaid during
the year. On April 1, Connie uses $20,000
from the checking account for a passive ac-
tivity expenditure. On September 1, Connie
uses an additional $40,000 from the account
for personal purposes.
Under the interest allocation rules, the
entire $100,000 loan is treated as property
held for investment for the period from Janu-
ary 4 through March 31. From April 1 through
August 31, Connie must treat $20,000 of the
loan as used in the passive activity and
$80,000 of the loan as property held for in-
vestment. From September 1 through De-
cember 31, she must treat $40,000 of the loan
as used for personal purposes, $20,000 as
used in the passive activity, and $40,000 as
property held for investment.
Order of funds spent. Generally, you
treat loan proceeds deposited in an account
as used (spent) before either of the following.
 Any unborrowed amounts held in the
same account.
 Any amounts deposited after these loan
proceeds.
Example. On January 9, Edith opened a
checking account, depositing $500 of the
proceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unbor-
rowed funds. The following table shows the
transactions in her account during the tax
year.
Chapter 5 Interest Page 15

Edith treats the $800 used for personal
purposes as made from the $500 proceeds
of Loan A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan
B. She treats the $700 used for a passive
activity as made from the remaining $200
proceeds of Loan B and $500 of unborrowed
funds. She treats the $800 used for an in-
vestment as made entirely from the proceeds
of Loan C.
Edith treats the $600 used for personal
purposes as made from the remaining $200
proceeds of Loan C and $400 of unborrowed
funds. Note that for the periods during which
loan proceeds are held in the account, they
are treated as property held for investment.
Payments from checking accounts.
Generally, you treat a payment from a
checking or similar account as made at the
time the check is written if you mail or deliver
it to the payee within a reasonable period af-
ter you write it. You can treat checks written
on the same day as written in any order.
Amounts paid within 30 days. If you
receive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan
proceeds are deposited in an account, you
can treat any payment (up to the amount of
the proceeds) made from any account you
own, or from cash, as made from those pro-
ceeds. This applies to any payment made
within 30 days before or after the proceeds
are received in cash or deposited in your ac-
count. 
If the loan proceeds are deposited in an
account, you can apply this rule even if the
rules stated earlier under Order of funds
spent would otherwise require you to treat the
proceeds as used for other purposes. If you
apply this rule to any payments, disregard
those payments (and the proceeds from
which they are made) when applying the rules
stated under Order of funds spent.
If you received the loan proceeds in cash,
you can treat the payment as made on the
date you received the cash instead of the date
you actually made the payment.
Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 on
August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.
Frank deposits $1,500 in an account on Au-
gust 18 and on August 28 writes a check on
the account for a passive activity expense.
Also, Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits
other loan proceeds, and pays his bills during
the same period. Regardless of these other
transactions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the
deposit he made on August 18 as being paid
on August 4 from the loan proceeds. In addi-
tion, Frank can treat the passive activity ex-
pense he paid on August 28 as made from
the $1,000 loan proceeds treated as depos-
ited in the account.
Optional method for determining date
of reallocation.You can use the following
method to determine the date loan proceeds
Date Transaction are reallocated to another use. You can treat
all payments from loan proceeds in the ac-
count during any month as taking place on the
later of the following dates.
 The first day of that month.
 The date the loan proceeds are deposited
in the account.
However, you can use this optional method
only if you treat all payments from the account
during the same calendar month in the same
way.
Interest on a separate account.If you
have an account that contains only loan pro-
ceeds and interest earned on the account,
you can treat any payment from that account
as being made first from the interest. When
the interest earned is used up, any remaining
payments are from loan proceeds.
Example. You borrowed $20,000 and
used the proceeds of this loan to open a new
savings account. When the account had
earned interest of $867, you withdrew
$20,000 for personal purposes. You can treat
the withdrawal as coming first from the inter-
est earned on the account, $867, and then
from the loan proceeds, $19,133 ($20,000 −
$867). All of the interest charged on the part
of the loan from the time it was deposited in
the account until the time of the withdrawal is
investment interest expense. The interest
charged on the part of the proceeds used for
personal purposes ($19,133) from the time
you withdrew it until you either repay it or re-
allocate it to another use is personal interest
expense. The interest charged on the loan
proceeds you left in the account ($867) con-
tinues to be investment interest expense until
you either repay it or reallocate it to another
use.
Loan repayment. When you repay any part
of a loan allocated to more than one use, treat
it as being repaid in the following order.
 1) Personal use.
2) Investments and passive activities (other
than those included in (3)).
3) Passive activities in connection with a
rental real estate activity in which you
actively participate.
4) Former passive activities.
5) Trade or business use and to expenses
for certain low-income housing projects.
Line of credit (continuous borrowings).
The following rules apply if you have a line
of credit or similar arrangement.
1) Treat all borrowed funds on which inter-
est accrues at the same fixed or variable
rate as a single loan.
2) Treat borrowed funds or parts of bor-
rowed funds on which interest accrues
at different fixed or variable rates as dif-
ferent loans. Treat these loans as repaid
in the order shown on the loan agree-
ment.
Loan refinancing.Allocate the replacement
loan to the same items to which the repaid
loan was allocated. Make the allocation only
to the extent you use the proceeds of the new
loan to repay any part of the original loan.
Partnerships
and S Corporations
The following rules apply to the allocation of
interest expense in connection with debt-
financed acquisitions of interests in partner-
ships and S corporations. These rules also
apply to the allocation of interest expense in
connection with debt-financed distributions
from partnerships and S corporations.
CAUTION
!
These rules do not apply if the part-
nership or S corporation is formed or
used for the principal purpose of
avoiding the interest allocation rules.
Debt-financed acquisition.A debt-financed
acquisition is the use of loan proceeds to buy
an interest in a partnership or S corporation
or to make a contribution to the capital of one.
You must allocate the loan proceeds and
the related interest expense among all the
assets of the entity. You can use any rea-
sonable method. If you buy an interest in a
partnership or S corporation (other than by
way of a contribution to capital), reasonable
methods include a pro rata allocation based
on the fair market value, book value, or ad-
justed basis of the assets, reduced by any
debts allocated to the assets.
If you contribute to the capital of a part-
nership or S corporation, reasonable methods
ordinarily include allocating the debt among
all the assets or tracing the loan proceeds to
the entity's expenditures.
Treat the purchase of an interest in a
partnership or S corporation as a contribution
to capital to the extent the entity receives any
proceeds of the purchase.
Example. You buy an interest in a part-
nership for $20,000 using borrowed funds.
The partnership's only assets include ma-
chinery used in its business valued at
$60,000 and stocks valued at $15,000. You
allocate the loan proceeds based on the value
of the assets. Therefore, you allocate $16,000
of the loan proceeds ($60,000/$75,000 ×
$20,000) and the interest expense on that
part to trade or business use. You allocate the
remaining $4,000 ($15,000/$75,000 ×
$20,000) and the interest on that part to in-
vestment use.
Reallocation. If you allocate the loan
proceeds among the assets, you must make
a reallocation if the assets or the use of the
assets change.
How to report.Individuals should report
their deductible interest expense on either
Schedule A or Schedule E of Form 1040,
depending on the type of asset (or expendi-
ture if the allocation is based on the tracing
of loan proceeds) to which the interest ex-
pense is allocated.
For interest allocated to trade or business
assets (or expenditures), report the interest
in Part II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a
separate line, put “business interest” and the
name of the partnership or S corporation in
column (a) and the amount in column (i).
For interest allocated to passive activity
use, enter the interest on Form 8582 as a
deduction from the passive activity of the
partnership or S corporation. Show any
deductible amount in Part II, Schedule E
(Form 1040). On a separate line, put “passive
interest” and the name of the entity in column
(a) and the amount in column (g).
For interest allocated to investment use,
enter the interest on Form 4952. Carry any
deductible amount allocated to royalties to
January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan A and
$1,000 unborrowed funds
deposited
January 13 $500 proceeds of Loan B
deposited
February 18 $800 used for personal purposes
February 27 $700 used for passive activity
June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan C
deposited
November 20 $800 used for an investment
December 18 $600 used for personal purposes
Page 16 Chapter 5  Interest

Part II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a sepa-
rate line enter “investment interest” and the
name of the partnership or S corporation in
column (a) and the amount in column (i).
Carry the balance of the deductible amount
to line 13, Schedule A (Form 1040).
Any interest allocated to proceeds used
for personal purposes is generally not
deductible.
Debt-financed distribution.A debt-financed
distribution occurs when a partnership or S
corporation borrows funds and allocates
those funds to distributions made to partners
or shareholders. The distributed loan pro-
ceeds and related interest expense must be
reported to the partners and shareholders
separately. This is because the loan proceeds
and the interest expense must be allocated
depending on how the partner or shareholder
uses the proceeds.
This treatment of debt-financed distribu-
tions follows the general allocation rules dis-
cussed earlier. For example, if a shareholder
uses distributed loan proceeds to invest in a
passive activity, that shareholder's portion of
the entity's interest expense on the loan pro-
ceeds is allocated to a passive activity use.
Optional allocation method.The part-
nership or S corporation can choose to allo-
cate the distributed loan proceeds to other
expenditures it makes during the tax year of
the distribution. This allocation is limited to the
difference between the other expenditures
and any loan proceeds already allocated to
them. For any distributed loan proceeds that
are more than the amount allocated to the
other expenditures, the rules in the previous
paragraph apply.
How to report.If the entity does not use
the optional allocation method, it reports the
interest expense on the loan proceeds on the
line on Schedule K–1 (Form 1065 or Form
1120S) for “Other deductions.” The expense
is identified on an attached schedule as “In-
terest expense allocated to debt-financed
distributions.” The partner or shareholder
claims the interest expense depending on
how the distribution was used.
If the entity uses the optional allocation
method, it reports the interest expense on the
loan proceeds allocated to other expenditures
on the appropriate line or lines of Schedule
K–1. For example, if the entity chooses to
allocate the loan proceeds and related inter-
est to a rental activity expenditure, the entity
will take the interest into account in figuring
the net rental income or loss reported on
Schedule K–1.
More information.For more information on
allocating and reporting these interest ex-
penses, see Notice 88–37 in Cumulative
Bulletin 1988–1. Also see Notice 89–35 in
Cumulative Bulletin 1989–1.
Interest You
Can Deduct
You can generally deduct all interest you pay
or accrue during the tax year on debts related
to your trade or business. Interest relates to
your trade or business if you use the pro-
ceeds of the loan for a trade or business ex-
pense. It does not matter what type of prop-
erty secures the loan. You can deduct
interest on a debt only if you meet all the fol-
lowing requirements.
 You are legally liable for that debt.
 Both you and the lender intend that the
debt be repaid.
 You and the lender have a true debtor-
creditor relationship.
Partial liability.If you are liable for part of
a business debt, you can deduct only your
share of the total interest paid or accrued.
Example. You and your brother borrow
money. You are liable for 50% of the note.
You use your half of the loan in your busi-
ness, and you make one-half of the loan
payments. You can deduct your half of the
total interest payments as a business de-
duction.
Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paid
or accrued on real estate you own legally or
equitably is deductible. However, rather than
deducting the interest currently, you may
have to add it to the cost basis of the property
as explained later under Capitalization of In-
terest.
Statement. If you paid $600 or more of
mortgage interest (including certain points)
during the year on any one mortgage, you
generally will receive a Form 1098 or a simi-
lar statement. You will receive the statement
if you pay interest to a person (including a
financial institution or a cooperative housing
corporation) in the course of that person's
trade or business. A governmental unit is a
person for purposes of furnishing the state-
ment.
If you receive a refund of interest you
overpaid in an earlier year, this amount will
be reported in box 3 of Form 1098. You can-
not deduct this amount. For information on
how to report this refund, see Refunds of in-
terest later in this chapter.
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mort-
gage cannot be deducted as interest. These
expenses, which include mortgage commis-
sions, abstract fees, and recording fees, are
capital expenses. If the property mortgaged
is business or income-producing property,
you can amortize the costs over the life of the
mortgage.
Prepayment penalty.If you pay off your
mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty
for doing this, you can deduct the penalty as
interest.
Interest on employment tax deficiency.
Interest charged on employment taxes as-
sessed on your business is deductible.
Original issue discount (OID).Original is-
sue discount is a form of interest. A loan
(mortgage or other debt) generally has OID
when its proceeds are less than its principal
amount. The OID is the difference between
the stated redemption price at maturity and
the issue price of the loan.
 A loan's stated redemption price at
maturity is the sum of all amounts (principal
and interest) payable on it other than qualified
stated interest.
Stated interest, in general, is qualified
stated interest if it is unconditionally payable
in cash or property (other than another loan
of the issuer) at least annually over the term
of the loan at a single fixed rate.
You generally deduct OID over the term
of the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each
year using the constant-yield method, un-
less the OID on the loan is de minimis.
De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis
if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the
stated redemption price of the loan at maturity
multiplied by the number of full years from the
date of original issue to maturity (the term of
the loan).
If the OID is de minimis, you can choose
one of the following ways to figure the amount
you can deduct each year.
 On a constant-yield basis over the term
of the loan.
 On a straight-line basis over the term of
the loan.
 In proportion to stated interest payments.
 In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
You make this choice by deducting the OID
in a manner consistent with the method cho-
sen on your timely filed tax return for the tax
year in which the loan is issued.
Example. On January 1, 2000, you took
out a $100,000 discounted loan and received
$98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on
January 1, 2010 (a 10-year term), and the
$100,000 principal is payable on that date.
Interest of $10,000 is payable on January 1
of each year, beginning January 1, 2001. The
$1,500 OID on the loan is de minimis because
it is less than $2,500 ($100,000 × .0025 × 10).
You choose to deduct the OID on a straight-
line basis over the term of the loan. Beginning
in 2000, you can deduct $150 each year for
10 years.
Constant-yield method.If the OID is not
de minimis, you must use the constant-yield
method to figure how much you can deduct
each year. You figure your deduction for the
first year using the following steps.
1) Determine the issue price of the loan.
Generally, this equals the proceeds of
the loan. If you paid points on the loan
(as discussed later), the issue price
generally is the difference between the
proceeds and the points.
2) Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to
maturity.
3) Subtract any qualified stated interest
payments from the result in (2). This is
the OID you can deduct in the first year.
To figure your deduction in any subse-
quent year, use the adjusted issue price in
step (1) above. To get the adjusted issue
price, add to the issue price any OID previ-
ously deducted. Then follow steps (2) and (3)
above.
The yield to maturity (YTM) is generally
shown in the literature you receive from your
lender. If you do not have this information,
consult your lender or tax advisor. In general,
the YTM is the discount rate that, when used
in computing the present value of all principal
and interest payments, produces an amount
equal to the principal amount of the loan.
Qualified stated interest (QSI) generally
is stated interest that is unconditionally pay-
able in cash or property (other than debt in-
struments of the issuer) at least annually at
a single fixed rate.
Example. The facts are the same as in
the previous example, except that you deduct
the OID on a constant yield basis over the
term of the loan. The yield to maturity on your
loan is 10.2467%, compounded annually. For
2000, you can deduct $93 [($98,500 ×
Chapter 5 Interest Page 17

.102467) − $10,000]. For 2001, you can de-
duct $103 [($98,593 × .102467) − $10,000].
Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan or
mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct
any remaining OID in the tax year in which the
loan or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage
may end due to a refinancing, prepayment,
foreclosure, or similar event.
CAUTION
!
If you refinance with the same lender,
you generally cannot deduct the re-
maining OID in the year in which the
refinancing occurs, but you may be able to
deduct it over the term of the new mortgage
or loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed
from same lender under Interest You Cannot
Deduct, later.
Points. The term “points” is often used to
describe some of the charges paid by a bor-
rower when the borrower takes out a loan or
a mortgage. These charges are also called
loan origination fees, maximum loan
charges, or premium charges. If any of these
charges (points) are solely for the use of
money, they are interest.
Because points are prepaid interest, you
cannot deduct the full amount in the year
paid. (For an exception for points paid on your
home mortgage, see Publication 936.) In-
stead, the points reduce the issue price of the
loan and result in original issue discount,
deductible as explained in the preceding dis-
cussion.
Partial payments on a nontax debt.If you
make partial payments on a debt (other than
a debt owed the IRS), the payments are ap-
plied, in general, first to interest and any re-
mainder to principal. You can deduct only the
interest. This rule does not apply when it can
be inferred the borrower and lender under-
stood that a different allocation of the pay-
ments would be made.
Installment purchase.If you make an in-
stallment purchase of business property, the
contract between you and the seller generally
provides for the payment of interest. If no in-
terest or a low rate of interest is charged un-
der the contract, a portion of the stated prin-
cipal amount payable under the contract may
be recharacterized as interest (unstated in-
terest). The amount recharacterized as inter-
est reduces your basis in the property and
increases your interest expense. For more
information on installment sales and unstated
interest, see Publication 537.
Interest You
Cannot Deduct
Certain interest payments cannot be de-
ducted. In addition, certain other expenses
that may seem to be interest are not, and you
cannot deduct them as interest.
You cannot currently deduct interest that
must be capitalized and (except for corpo-
rations) you generally cannot deduct personal
interest.
Interest paid with funds borrowed from
same lender. If you use the cash method
of accounting, you cannot deduct interest you
pay with funds borrowed from the original
lender through a second loan, an advance,
or any other arrangement similar to a loan.
You can deduct the interest expense once
you start making payments on the new loan.
When you make a payment on the new
loan, you first apply the payment to interest
and then to the principal. All amounts you
apply to the interest on the first loan are
deductible, along with any interest you pay
on the second loan, subject to any limits that
apply.
Capitalized interest.You cannot deduct in-
terest you are required to capitalize under the
uniform capitalization rules. See Capitaliza-
tion of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy
property and pay interest owed by the seller
(for example, by assuming the debt and any
interest accrued on the property), you cannot
deduct the interest. Add this interest to the
basis of the property.
Commitment fees or standby charges.
Fees you incur to have business funds avail-
able on a standby basis, but not for the actual
use of the funds, are not deductible as inter-
est payments. You may be able to deduct
them as business expenses.
If the funds are for inventory or certain
property used in your business, the fees are
indirect costs and you must capitalize them
under the uniform capitalization rules. For
more information on uniform capitalization
rules, see section 1.263A–8 through
1.263A–15 of the regulations.
Interest on income tax.Interest charged on
income tax assessed on your individual in-
come tax return is not a business deduction
even though the tax due is related to income
from your trade or business. Treat this inter-
est as a business deduction only in figuring
a net operating loss deduction.
Penalties.Penalties on underpaid defi-
ciencies and underpaid estimated tax are not
interest. You cannot deduct them. Generally,
you cannot deduct any fines or penalties.
Interest on loans with respect to life in-
surance policies.For contracts issued be-
fore June 9, 1997, you generally cannot de-
duct interest paid or accrued on a debt
incurred with respect to any life insurance,
annuity, or endowment contract covering
someone who is or was an employee, officer,
or someone financially interested in your
business unless that person is a key person.
For contracts issued or considered issued
after June 8, 1997, you generally cannot de-
duct interest with respect to any life insur-
ance, annuity, or endowment contract that
covers any individual unless that individual is
a key person.
If the policy or contract covers a key per-
son, you can deduct the interest on up to
$50,000 of debt for that person. However, the
deduction for any month cannot be more than
the interest figured using Moody's Corporate
Bond Yield Average-Monthly Average Corpo-
rates (Moody's rate) for that month.
Who is a key person? A key person is
an officer or 20% owner. However, the num-
ber of individuals you can treat as key per-
sons is limited to the greater of the following.
 Five individuals.
 The lesser of 5% of the total officers and
employees of the company or 20 individ-
uals.
Pre-June 21, 1986 contracts.With a few
exceptions, otherwise allowable interest (not
in excess of the maximum rates set by law)
paid or accrued on debt with respect to con-
tracts purchased before June 21, 1986, can
be deducted no matter when the debt was
incurred.
Interest allocated to unborrowed policy
cash value. Corporations and partnerships
generally cannot deduct any interest expense
allocable to unborrowed cash values of life
insurance, annuity, or endowment contracts.
This rule applies to contracts issued after
June 8, 1997, that cover someone other than
an officer, director, employee, or 20% owner.
For more information, see section 264(f) of
the Internal Revenue Code.
Capitalization
of Interest
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you
generally must capitalize interest on debt
equal to your expenditures to produce real
property or certain tangible personal property.
The property must be produced by you for
use in your trade or business or for sale to
customers. You cannot capitalize interest re-
lated to property that you acquire in any other
manner.
Interest you paid or incurred during the
production period must be capitalized if the
property produced is designated property.
Designated property is any of the following.
 Real property.
 Tangible personal property with a class
life of 20 years or more.
 Tangible personal property with an esti-
mated production period of more than 2
years.
 Tangible personal property with an esti-
mated production period of more than 1
year if the estimated cost of production
is more than $1 million.
Property you produce.You produce prop-
erty if you construct, build, install, manufac-
ture, develop, improve, create, raise, or grow
it. Treat property produced for you under a
contract as produced by you up to the amount
you pay or incur for the property.
Capitalized interest.Treat capitalized inter-
est as a cost of the property produced. You
recover your interest when you sell or use the
property. If the property is inventory, recover
capitalized interest through cost of goods
sold. If the property is used in your trade or
business, recover capitalized interest through
an adjustment to basis, depreciation, amorti-
zation, or other method.
Partnerships and S corporations.The in-
terest capitalization rules are applied first at
the partnership or S corporation level. The
rules are then applied at the partners' or
shareholders' level to the extent the partner-
ship or S corporation has insufficient debt to
support the production or construction costs.
If you are a partner in a partnership or a
shareholder in an S corporation, you may
have to capitalize interest you incur during the
tax year for the production costs of the part-
nership or S corporation. You may also have
to capitalize interest incurred by the partner-
ship or S corporation for your own production
costs. You must provide the required infor-
mation in an attachment to the Schedule K–1
to properly capitalize interest for this purpose.
Page 18 Chapter 5  Interest

Additional information.The procedures for
applying the uniform capitalization rules are
beyond the scope of this publication. For
more information, see section 1.263A–8
through 1.263A–15 of the regulations and
Notice 88–99 (as amended by Announcement
89–72). Notice 88–99 is in Cumulative Bul-
letin 1988–2. Announcement 89–72 is in Cu-
mulative Bulletin 1989–1.
When To
Deduct Interest
If the uniform capitalization rules, discussed
earlier, do not apply to you, deduct interest
as follows.
Cash method. In general, you can deduct
only the interest you actually paid during the
tax year. You cannot deduct a promissory
note you gave as payment because it is a
promise to pay and not an actual payment.
Prepaid interest. Under the cash
method, you generally cannot deduct any in-
terest paid before the year it is due. Interest
paid in advance can be deducted only in the
tax year in which it is due.
Discounted loan.If interest or a discount
is subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is
not a payment of interest and you cannot
deduct it when you get the loan. 
For more information, see Original issue
discount (OID) under Interest You Can De-
duct, earlier.
Refunds of interest.If you pay interest
and then receive a refund in the same tax
year of any part of the interest, reduce your
interest deduction by the refund. If you re-
ceive the refund in a later tax year, include the
refund in income if the deduction for the in-
terest reduced your tax. You should include
in income only the interest deduction that re-
duced your tax.
Accrual method. You can deduct only in-
terest that has accrued during the tax year.
Prepaid interest. Under the accrual
method, you generally cannot deduct any in-
terest paid before it is due. Instead, deduct it
in the year in which it is due.
Discounted loan.If interest or a discount
is subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is
not a payment of interest and you cannot
deduct it when you get the loan. For more
information, see Original issue discount (OID)
under Interest You Can Deduct, earlier.
Tax deficiency.If you contest a federal
income tax deficiency, interest does not ac-
crue until the tax year the final determination
of liability is made. If you do not contest the
deficiency, then the interest accrues in the
year the tax was asserted and agreed to by
you.
However, if you contest but pay the pro-
posed tax deficiency and interest, and you do
not designate the payment as a cash bond,
then the interest is deductible in the year paid.
Related person. If you use the accrual
method, you cannot deduct interest owed to
a related person who uses the cash method
until payment is made and the interest is
includible in the gross income of that person.
The relationship is determined as of the end
of the tax year for which the interest would
otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is de-
nied under this rule, the rule will continue to
apply even if your relationship with the person
ceases to exist before the interest is includible
in the gross income of that person. See Re-
lated Persons in Publication 538.
Below-Market Loan
If you receive a below-market gift or demand
loan and use the proceeds in your trade or
business, you may be able to deduct the for-
gone interest. See Treatment of gift and de-
mand loans later in this discussion.
A below-market loan is a loan on which
no interest is charged or on which interest is
charged at a rate below the applicable federal
rate. A gift or demand loan that is a below-
market loan generally is considered an
arm's-length transaction in which you, the
borrower, are considered as having received
both the following.
 A loan in exchange for a note that re-
quires the payment of interest at the ap-
plicable federal rate.
 An additional payment.
The additional payment is treated as a gift,
dividend, contribution to capital, payment of
compensation, or other payment, depending
on the substance of the transaction.
For any period, forgone interest is:
1) The interest that would be payable for
that period if interest accrued on the loan
at the applicable federal rate and was
payable annually on December 31,
minus
2) Any interest actually payable on the loan
for the period.
TIP
Applicable federal rates are published
by the IRS each month in the Internal
Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenue
Bulletins are available on the IRS web site at
www.irs.gov.You can also contact an Inter-
nal Revenue Service office to get these rates.
Loans subject to the rules.The rules for
below-market loans apply to the following.
1) Gift loans (below-market loans where the
forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).
2) Compensation-related loans (below-
market loans between an employer and
an employee or between an independent
contractor and a person for whom the
contractor provides services).
 3) Corporation-shareholder loans.
4) Tax avoidance loans (below-market
loans where the avoidance of federal tax
is one of the main purposes of the inter-
est arrangement).
5) Loans to qualified continuing care facili-
ties under a continuing care contract
(made after October 11, 1985).
Except as noted in (5) above, these rules
apply to demand loans (loans payable in full
at any time upon the lender's demand) out-
standing after June 6, 1984, and to term
loans (loans that are not demand loans)
made after that date.
Treatment of gift and demand loans.If you
receive a below-market gift loan or demand
loan, you are treated as receiving an addi-
tional payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal
to the forgone interest on the loan. You are
then treated as transferring this amount back
to the lender as interest. These transfers are
considered to occur annually, generally on
December 31. If you use the loan proceeds
in your trade or business, you can deduct the
forgone interest each year as a business in-
terest expense. The lender must report it as
interest income.
Limit on forgone interest for gift loans
of $100,000 or less. For gift loans between
individuals, forgone interest treated as trans-
ferred back to the lender is limited to the
borrower's net investment income for the
year. This limit applies if the outstanding
loans between the lender and borrower total
$100,000 or less. If the borrower's net in-
vestment income is $1,000 or less, it is
treated as zero. This limit does not apply to
a loan if the avoidance of any federal tax is
one of the main purposes of the interest ar-
rangement.
Treatment of term loans.If you receive a
below-market term loan other than a gift loan,
you are treated as receiving an additional
cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on the
date the loan is made. This payment is equal
to the loan amount minus the present value,
at the applicable federal rate, of all payments
due under the loan. The same amount is
treated as original issue discount on the loan.
See Original issue discount (OID) under In-
terest You Can Deduct, earlier.
Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less.
The rules for below-market loans do not apply
to certain loans on days on which the total
outstanding loans between the borrower and
lender is $10,000 or less. This exception ap-
plies only to the following.
1) Gift loans between individuals if the gift
loan is not directly used to buy or carry
income-producing assets.
2) Compensation-related loans or
corporation-shareholder loans if the
avoidance of any federal tax is not a
principal purpose of the interest ar-
rangement.
This exception does not apply to a term loan
described in (2) above that was previously
subject to the below-market loan rules. Those
rules will continue to apply even if the out-
standing balance is reduced to $10,000 or
less.
Exceptions for loans without significant
tax effect.The following loans are specif-
ically exempted from the rules for below-
market loans because their interest arrange-
ments do not have a significant effect on the
federal tax liability of the borrower or the
lender.
1) Loans made available by lenders to the
general public on the same terms and
conditions that are consistent with the
lender's customary business practices.
2) Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or
municipal government that are made
available under a program of general
application to the public.
3) Certain employee-relocation loans.
4) Certain loans to or from a foreign person,
unless the interest income would be ef-
fectively connected with the conduct of
a U.S. trade or business and not exempt
from U.S. tax under an income tax treaty.
Chapter 5 Interest Page 19

5) Any other loan if the taxpayer can show
that the interest arrangement has no
significant effect on the federal tax li-
ability of the lender or the borrower.
Whether an interest arrangement has a
significant effect on the federal tax li-
ability of the lender or the borrower will
be determined by all the facts and cir-
cumstances. Consider all the following
factors.
a) Whether items of income and de-
duction generated by the loan offset
each other.
b) The amount of the items.
c) The cost of complying with the
below-market loan provisions if they
were to apply.
d) Any reasons, other than taxes, for
structuring the transaction as a
below-market loan.
Exception for certain loans to a qualified
continuing care facility. The below-market
interest rules do not apply to a loan made to
a qualified continuing care facility under a
continuing care contract if the lender (or
lender's spouse) is age 65 or older by the end
of the calendar year. For 2000, this exception
applies only to the part of the total outstanding
loans from the lender (or lender's spouse) that
does not exceed $139,700.
A qualified continuing care facility is
one or more facilities that are designed to
provide services under continuing care con-
tracts and where substantially all of the resi-
dents have entered into continuing care con-
tracts. In addition, substantially all of the
facilities used to provide services required
under the continuing care contract must be
owned or operated by the loan borrower.
A continuing care contract is a written
contract between an individual and a qualified
continuing care facility that meets all the fol-
lowing conditions.
1) The individual and/or the individual's
spouse must be entitled to use the facil-
ity for the rest of their life or lives.
2) The residential use must begin in a
separate, independent living unit pro-
vided by the continuing care facility and
continue until the individual (or individ-
ual's spouse) is incapable of living inde-
pendently. The facility must provide var-
ious “personal care” services to the
resident such as maintenance of the
residential unit, meals, and daily aid and
supervision relating to routine medical
needs.
3) The facility must be obligated to provide
long-term nursing care if the resident is
no longer capable of living independ-
ently.
4) The contract must require the facility to
provide the “personal services” and
“long-term nursing care” without sub-
stantial additional cost to the individual.
Sale or exchange of property. Different
rules generally apply to a loan connected with
the sale or exchange of property. If the loan
does not provide adequate stated interest,
part of the principal payment may be consid-
ered interest. However, there are exceptions
that may require you to apply the below-
market interest rate rules to these loans. See
Unstated Interest and Original Issue Discount
in Publication 537.
More information.For more information on
below-market loans, see section 7872 of the
Internal Revenue Code and section
1.7872–5T of the regulations.
6.
Taxes
Introduction
You can deduct various federal, state, local,
and foreign taxes directly attributable to your
trade or business as business expenses.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct federal income
taxes, estate and gift taxes, or state
inheritance, legacy, and succession
taxes.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 When to deduct taxes
 Real estate taxes
 Income taxes
 Employment taxes
 Other taxes
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H1855415 Circular E, Employer's Tax Guide
/H18554378 Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
/H18554 53 3 Self-Employment Tax
/H18554538 Accounting Periods and Methods
/H18554551 Basis of Assets
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Sch A (1040) Itemized Deductions
/H18554Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment
Tax
/H185543115 Application for Change in Ac-
counting Method
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
When To
Deduct Taxes
Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the
year you pay them. This applies whether you
use the cash method or an accrual method
of accounting.
Under an accrual method, you can deduct
a tax before you pay it if you meet the ex-
ception for recurring items discussed under
Economic Performance in Publication 538.
You can also choose to ratably accrue real
estate taxes as discussed later under Real
Estate Taxes. 
Limit on accrual of taxes.A taxing juris-
diction can require the use of a date for ac-
cruing taxes that is earlier than the date it
originally required. However, if you use an
accrual method and can deduct the tax before
you pay it, the accrual date for federal income
tax purposes is the original accrual date. Use
the original accrual date for all future years
as well.
Example. Your state imposes a tax on
intangible and tangible personal property
used in a trade or business conducted in the
state. This tax is assessed and becomes a
lien as of July 1. In 2000, the state, by legis-
lative action, changes the assessment and
lien dates from July 1, 2001, to December 31,
2000, for property tax year 2001. Because
December 31 is earlier than the original ac-
crual date, the tax for federal income tax
purposes accrues on July 1, 2001.
Uniform capitalization rules.Uniform cap-
italization rules apply to certain taxpayers who
produce real or tangible personal property for
use in a trade or business or for sale to cus-
tomers. They also apply to taxpayers who
acquire property for resale. Under these rules,
you may have to either include in inventory
costs or capitalize certain expenses related
to the property, such as taxes. For more in-
formation, see Publication 551.
Carrying charges.Carrying charges include
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate
or to carry, transport, or install personal
property. You can choose to capitalize carry-
ing charges not subject to the uniform cap-
italization rules if they are otherwise deduct-
ible. For more information, see chapter 8.
Refunds of taxes.If you receive a refund for
any taxes you deducted in an earlier year,
include the refund in income only to the extent
the deduction reduced your tax in the earlier
year. For more information, see Recovery of
amount deducted in chapter 1.
TIP
You must include in income any in-
terest you receive on state or local tax
refunds.
Real Estate Taxes
Deductible real estate taxes are any state,
local, or foreign taxes on real estate levied for
the general public welfare. The taxing au-
thority must base the taxes on the assessed
value of the real estate and charge them
uniformly against all property under its juris-
diction. Deductible real estate taxes generally
do not include taxes charged for local benefits
and improvements that increase the value of
the property. See Taxes for local benefits,
later.
If you use an accrual method, you gener-
ally cannot accrue real estate taxes until you
pay them to the government authority. You
can, however, choose to ratably accrue the
taxes during the year. See Election to ratably
accrue, later.
Page 20 Chapter 6  Taxes

Taxes for local benefits.Generally, you
cannot deduct taxes charged for local benefits
and improvements that tend to increase the
value of your property. These include as-
sessments for streets, sidewalks, water
mains, sewer lines, and public parking facili-
ties. You should increase the basis of your
property by the amount of the assessment.
You can deduct taxes for these local
benefits only if the taxes are for maintenance,
repairs, or interest charges related to those
benefits. If part of the tax is for maintenance,
repairs, or interest, you must be able to show
how much of the tax is for these expenses to
claim a deduction for that part of the tax.
Example. City X, to improve downtown
commercial business, converted a downtown
business area street into an enclosed pedes-
trian mall. The city assessed the full cost of
construction, financed with 10-year bonds,
against the affected properties. The city is
paying the principal and interest with the an-
nual payments made by the property owners.
The assessments for construction costs
are not deductible as taxes or as business
expenses, but are depreciable capital ex-
penses. The part of the payments used to pay
the interest charges on the bonds is deduct-
ible as taxes.
Charges for services.Water bills, sewer-
age, and other service charges assessed
against your business property are not real
estate taxes, but are deductible as business
expenses.
Purchase or sale of real estate.If real es-
tate is sold during the year, the real estate
taxes must be divided between the buyer and
the seller.
The buyer and seller must divide the real
estate taxes according to the number of days
in the real property tax year (the period to
which the tax imposed relates) that each
owned the property. Treat the seller as pay-
ing the taxes up to but not including the date
of sale. Treat the buyer as paying the taxes
beginning with the date of sale. For this pur-
pose, disregard the accrual or lien dates un-
der local law. You can usually find this infor-
mation on the settlement statement you
received at closing.
If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until
they are paid because you use the cash
method and the buyer of your property is
personally liable for the tax, you are consid-
ered to have paid your part of the tax at the
time of the sale. This lets you deduct the part
of the tax up to the date of sale even though
you did not pay it. You must also include the
amount of that tax in the selling price of the
property.
If you (the seller) use an accrual method
and have not chosen to ratably accrue real
estate taxes, you are considered to have ac-
crued your part of the tax on the date you sell
the property.
Example. Al Green, a calendar year ac-
crual method taxpayer, owns real estate in X
County. He has not chosen to ratably accrue
property taxes. November 30 of each year is
the assessment and lien date. He sold the
property on June 30, 2000. Under his ac-
counting method he would not be able to
claim a deduction for the taxes because the
sale occurred before November 30. He is
treated as having accrued his part of the tax,
181 / 366 (January 1–June 29), on June 30 and
he can deduct it for 2000.
Election to ratably accrue.If you use an
accrual method, you can choose to accrue
real estate tax related to a definite period
ratably over that period.
Example. John Smith is a calendar year
taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His
real estate taxes for the real property tax year,
July 1, 2000, to June 30, 2001, amount to
$1,200. July 1 is the assessment and lien
date.
If John chooses to ratably accrue the
taxes, $600 will accrue in 2000 ($1,200 ×
6 / 12, July 1–December 31) and the balance
will accrue in 2001.
Separate elections.You can make an
election for each separate trade or business
and for nonbusiness activities if you account
for them separately. Once you elect to ratably
accrue real estate taxes, you must use that
method unless you get permission from the
IRS to revoke the election. See Revoking the
election, later.
Making the election.If you make your
election for the first year in which you incur
real estate taxes, attach a statement to your
income tax return for that year. The statement
should show all the following items.
 The trades or businesses to which the
election applies and the accounting
method or methods used.
 The period to which the taxes relate.
 The computation of the real estate tax
deduction for the first year of the election.
Generally, you must file your return by the
due date (including extensions). However, if
you timely filed your return for the year with-
out making the election, you can still make the
election by filing an amended return within 6
months of the due date of the return (exclud-
ing extensions). Attach the election to the
amended return and write “FILED PURSU-
ANT TO SECTION 301.9100–2” on the
election statement. File the amended return
at the same address you filed the original re-
turn.
If you make the election for a year after
the first year in which you incur real estate
taxes, file Form 3115. Generally, you must
file this form during the tax year for which the
election is to be effective. For more informa-
tion, see the instructions for Form 3115.
Revoking the election.To revoke an
election to ratably accrue real estate taxes,
file Form 3115 during the tax year for which
the change is requested.
Income Taxes
This section discusses federal, state, local,
and foreign income taxes.
Federal income taxes.You cannot deduct
federal income taxes.
State and local income taxes.A corpo-
ration or partnership can deduct state income
taxes imposed on the corporation or partner-
ship as business expenses. An individual can
deduct state income taxes only as an item-
ized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040).
However, an individual can deduct a state
tax on gross income (as distinguished from
net income) directly attributable to a trade or
business as a business expense.
Accrual of contested income taxes.If
you use an accrual method, can deduct taxes
before you pay them, and contest a state or
local income tax liability, a special rule ap-
plies. Under this special rule, you must accrue
and deduct any contested amount in the tax
year in which the liability is finally determined.
Filing a tax return is not considered con-
testing a liability. If you do not make an ob-
jective act of protest or show some affirmative
evidence of denial of the liability, you can
deduct any additional state or local income
taxes found to be due for a prior year in the
year for which they were originally imposed.
You cannot deduct them in the year in which
the liability is finally determined.
Foreign income taxes.Generally, you can
take either a deduction or a credit for income
taxes imposed on you by a foreign country
or a U.S. possession. However, an individual
cannot take a deduction or credit for foreign
income taxes paid on income that is exempt
from U.S. tax under the foreign earned in-
come exclusion or the foreign housing exclu-
sion. For information on these exclusions, see
Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens
and Resident Aliens Abroad. For information
on the foreign tax credit, see Publication 514,
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals.
Employment Taxes
If you have employees, you must withhold
various taxes from your employees' pay. Most
employers must withhold their employees'
share of social security and Medicare taxes
along with state and federal income taxes.
You may also need to pay certain employ-
ment taxes from your own funds. These in-
clude your share of social security and Medi-
care taxes as an employer, along with
unemployment taxes.
You should treat the taxes you withhold
from your employees' pay as wages on your
tax return. You can deduct the employment
taxes you must pay from your own funds as
taxes.
Example. You pay your employee
$18,000 a year. However, after you withhold
various taxes, your employee receives
$14,500. You also pay an additional $1,500
in employment taxes. You should deduct the
full $18,000 as wages. You can deduct the
$1,500 you pay from your own funds as taxes.
For more information on employment
taxes, see Publication 15.
Unemployment fund taxes. As an em-
ployer, you may have to make payments to
a state unemployment compensation fund or
to a state disability benefit fund. Deduct these
payments as taxes.
Other Taxes
The following are other taxes you can deduct
if you incur them in the ordinary course of
your trade or business.
Excise taxes.You can deduct as a business
expense all excise taxes that are ordinary and
necessary expenses of carrying on your trade
or business.
Chapter 6 Taxes Page 21

Franchise taxes.You can deduct corporate
franchise taxes as a business expense.
Fuel taxes.Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel,
and other motor fuels that you use in your
business are usually included as part of the
cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes
as a separate item.
You may be entitled to a credit or refund
for federal excise tax you paid on fuels used
for certain purposes. For more information,
see Publication 378.
Occupational taxes.You can deduct as a
business expense an occupational tax
charged at a flat rate by a locality for the
privilege of working or conducting a business
in the locality.
Personal property tax.You can deduct any
tax imposed by a state or local government
on personal property used in your trade or
business.
Sales tax.Treat any sales tax you pay on a
service or on the purchase or use of property
as part of the cost of the service or property.
If the service or the cost or use of the property
is a deductible business expense, you can
deduct the tax as part of that service or cost.
If the property is merchandise bought for re-
sale, the sales tax is part of the cost of the
merchandise. If the property is depreciable,
add the sales tax to the basis for depreciation.
For more information on basis, see Publica-
tion 551.
CAUTION
!
Do not deduct state and local sales
taxes imposed on the buyer that you
must collect and pay over to the state
or local government. Do not include these
taxes in gross receipts or sales.
Self-employment tax.You can deduct one-
half of your self-employment tax as a busi-
ness expense in figuring your adjusted gross
income. This deduction only affects your in-
come tax. It does not affect your net earnings
from self-employment or your self-employ-
ment tax.
To deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040,
line 27, the amount shown on the “Deduction
for one-half of self-employment tax” line of
Schedule SE (Form 1040).
For more information on self-employment
tax, see Publication 533.
7.
Insurance
Important Reminder
Health insurance deduction for the self-
employed. For 2000 and 2001, this de-
duction remains 60% of the amount you paid
for health insurance for yourself and your
family. After 2001, the deduction will in-
crease. See Health Insurance Deduction for
the Self-Employed, later.
Introduction
You generally can deduct the ordinary and
necessary cost of insurance as a business
expense if it is for your trade, business, or
profession. However, you may have to capi-
talize certain insurance costs under the uni-
form capitalization rules. For more informa-
tion, see Capitalizing Premiums, later.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Deductible premiums
 Nondeductible premiums
 Capitalizing premiums
 When to deduct premiums
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
/H18554538 Accounting Periods and Methods
/H18554547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
(Business and Nonbusiness)
Form (and Instructions)
/H185541040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
Deductible Premiums
You can generally deduct premiums you pay
for the following kinds of insurance related to
your trade or business.
1) Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
2) Credit insurance on losses from unpaid
debts.
3) Group hospitalization and medical insur-
ance for employees, including long-term
care insurance.
a) If a partnership pays accident and
health insurance premiums for its
partners, it generally can deduct
them as guaranteed payments
made to the partners.
b) If an S corporation pays accident
and health insurance premiums for
its 2% shareholder-employees, it
generally can deduct them.
For more details, see Accident and
Health Benefits in chapter 2 of Publica-
tion 15–B, Employer's Tax Guide to
Fringe Benefits.
 4) Liability insurance.
5) Malpractice insurance that covers your
personal liability for professional
negligence resulting in injury or damage
to patients or clients.
6) Workers' compensation insurance set by
state law that covers any claims for
bodily injuries or job-related diseases
suffered by employees in your business,
regardless of fault.
a) If a partnership pays workers' com-
pensation premiums for its partners,
it generally can deduct these
amounts as guaranteed payments
to the partners.
b) If an S corporation pays the work-
ers' compensation premiums for its
2% shareholder-employees, it gen-
erally can deduct these amounts.
7) Contributions to a state unemployment
insurance fund are deductible as taxes
if they are considered taxes under state
law.
8) Overhead insurance that pays you for
business overhead expenses you have
during long periods of disability caused
by your injury or sickness.
9) Car and other vehicle insurance that
covers vehicles used in your business for
liability, damages, and other losses. If
you operate a vehicle partly for personal
use, you can deduct only the part of your
insurance premiums that applies to the
business use of the vehicle. If you use
the standard mileage rate to figure your
car expenses, you cannot deduct any
car insurance premiums.
10) Life insurance covering your officers and
employees if you are not directly or indi-
rectly a beneficiary under the contract.
11) Use and occupancy and business inter-
ruption insurance that pays you for lost
profits if your business is shut down due
to a fire or other cause.
Health Insurance
Deduction for the
Self-Employed 
You can deduct 60% of the amount paid
during 2000 for medical insurance and qual-
ified long-term care insurance for yourself and
your family if you are one of the following.
 A self-employed individual.
 A general partner (or a limited partner
receiving guaranteed payments) in a
partnership.
 A shareholder owning more than 2% of
the outstanding stock of an S corporation.
You are allowed this deduction whether you
paid the premiums yourself or your partner-
ship or S corporation paid them and you in-
cluded the premium amounts in your gross
income. Take this deduction on line 28 of
Form 1040.
Deductible percentage increases after
2001. For tax years beginning after 2001, the
deductible percentage of your health insur-
ance premiums gradually increases. The in-
creases are shown in the following table.
Long-term care insurance.If you pay the
premiums on a qualified long-term care in-
surance contract for yourself, your spouse,
or your dependents, you can include those
premiums when figuring your deduction. But,
For Tax Years Beginning in:
Deductible
Percentage
2000 and 2001 ................................... 60%
2002 .................................................... 70%
After 2002 ........................................... 100%
Page 22 Chapter 7  Insurance

for each person covered, you can include only
the smaller of the following amounts.
1) The amount you pay for that person.
2) The amount shown below. (Use the
person's age at the end of the tax year.)
a) Age 40 or younger — $220
b) Age 41 to 50 — $410
c) Age 51 to 60 — $820
d) Age 61 to 70 — $2,200
e) Age 71 and older — $2,750
Long-term care insurance contract.A
long-term care insurance contract is any in-
surance contract that only provides coverage
of qualified long-term care services. The
contract must meet all the following require-
ments.
 It must be guaranteed renewable.
 It must provide that refunds, other than
refunds on the death of the insured or
complete surrender or cancellation of the
contract, and dividends under the con-
tract may be used only to reduce future
premiums or increase future benefits.
 It must not provide for a cash surrender
value or other money that can be paid,
assigned, pledged as collateral for a loan,
or borrowed.
 It generally must not pay or reimburse
expenses incurred for services or items
that would be reimbursed under Medi-
care, except where Medicare is a sec-
ondary payer or the contract makes per
diem or other periodic payments without
regard to expenses.
Qualified long-term care services.
Qualified long-term care services are:
 Necessary diagnostic, preventive,
therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating,
and rehabilitative services, and
 Maintenance or personal care services.
The services must be required by a chron-
ically ill individual and prescribed by a li-
censed health care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual.A chronically
ill individual is a person who has been certi-
fied as one of the following.
 An individual who, for at least 90 days, is
unable to perform at least two activities
of daily living without substantial assist-
ance due to loss of functional capacity.
Activities of daily living are eating,
toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing,
and continence.
 An individual who requires substantial
supervision to be protected from threats
to health and safety due to severe cog-
nitive impairment.
The certification must have been made by a
licensed health care practitioner within the
previous 12 months.
Benefits received.For information on
excluding from gross income benefits you re-
ceive from a long-term care contract, see
Publication 525.
Limits. You cannot deduct more than your
net earnings from the trade or business in
which the medical insurance plan or long-term
care insurance plan is established. If the
Table 7-1. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction
Worksheet (Keep for your records.)
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
Enter total payments made during the tax year for health insurance
established under your business for yourself, your spouse, and your
dependents. ( Do not include payments for any month you were
eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or your
spouse’s employer. Also, do not include payments for qualified
long-term care insurance.)
Percentage used to figure deduction for 2000 .60
Multiply the amount on line 3 by the percentage on line 4
Enter your net profit and any other earned income* from the trade
or business under which the insurance plan is established. (If the
business is an S corporation, skip to line 13.)
Enter the total of all net profits from: line 31, Schedule C (Form
1040); line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F
(Form 1040); or line 15a, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065); plus any
other income allocable to the profitable businesses. See the
instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040). ( Do not include any
net losses shown on these schedules.)
Divide line 6 by line 7
Multiply Form 1040, line 27, by the percentage on line 8
Subtract line 9 from line 6
Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 29, attributable to
the same trade or business in which the health insurance plan is
established
Subtract line 11 from line 10
Enter your wages from an S corporation in which you are a
more-than-2% shareholder and in which the health insurance plan
is established
Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 43, attributable to the
amount entered on line 6 or 13 above, or the amount from Form
2555-EZ, line 18, attributable to the amount entered on line 13
above
Subtract line 14 from line 12 or 13, whichever applies
Compare the amounts on lines 5 and 15 above. Enter the smaller
of the two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 28. (Do not include
this amount when figuring a medical expense deduction on
Schedule A (Form 1040).)
*Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you
created. It does not include capital gain income.
For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract,
enter for each person covered the lesser of:
a)
b)
Total payments made for that person during the year, or
$220—if that person is age 40 or younger
$410—if age 41 to 50
$820—if age 51 to 60
$2,200—if age 61 to 70
$2,750—if age 71 or older
(Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to
participate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your
or your spouse’s employer.) If more than one person is covered,
figure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter
the total of those amounts
Add the total of lines 1 and 2
15)
16)
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
15)
16)
business in which the insurance plan is es-
tablished is an S corporation, you cannot de-
duct more than your wages from the S cor-
poration.
Other coverage. You cannot take the
deduction for any month you were eligible to
participate in any employer (including your
spouse's) subsidized health plan at any time
during that month. This rule is applied sepa-
rately to plans that provide long-term care in-
surance and plans that do not provide long-
term care insurance. However, any medical
insurance payments not deductible on line 28
of Form 1040 can be included as part of your
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form
1040) if you itemize your deductions.
Effect on self-employment tax.Do not
subtract the health insurance deduction when
figuring net earnings for your self-employment
tax.
Effect on itemized deductions.Subtract
the health insurance deduction from your
medical insurance when figuring your medical
expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you
itemize your deductions.
How to figure the deduction.Generally,
you can use the worksheet in the Form 1040
instructions to figure your deduction. How-
ever, if any of the following apply, you must
use the worksheet in this chapter.
Chapter 7 Insurance Page 23

 You have more than one source of in-
come subject to self-employment tax.
 You file Form 2555 or Form 2555–EZ
(relating to foreign earned income).
 You are using amounts paid for long-term
care insurance to figure the deduction.
More than one health plan and busi-
ness. If you have more than one health plan
during the year and each plan is established
under a different business, you must use
separate worksheets (Table 7–1) to figure
each plan's net earnings limit. Include the
premium you paid under each plan on line 1
of that separate worksheet and your net profit
(or wages) from that business on line 6 (or
line 13). For a plan that provides long-term
care insurance, enter the premiums paid on
line 2 instead, but the total of the amounts
entered for each person on line 2 of all
worksheets cannot be more than the appro-
priate limit shown on line 2 for that person.
Nondeductible
Premiums
You cannot deduct premiums on the following
kinds of insurance.
1) Self-insurance reserve funds.   You
cannot deduct amounts credited to a re-
serve you set up for self-insurance. This
applies even if you cannot get business
insurance coverage for certain business
risks. However, your actual losses may
be deductible. See Publication 547.
2) Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct
premiums for a policy that pays for your
lost earnings due to sickness or disabil-
ity. However, see the discussion on
overhead insurance, item (8), under
Deductible Premiums, earlier.
3) Certain life insurance and annuities.
For contracts issued before June 9,
1997, you cannot deduct the premiums
on a life insurance policy covering your-
self, an employee, or any person with a
financial interest in your business if you
are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of
the policy. You are included among
possible beneficiaries of the policy if the
policy owner is obligated to repay a loan
from you using the proceeds of the pol-
icy. A person has a financial interest in
your business if the person is an owner
or part owner of the business or has lent
money to the business.
For contracts issued after June 8,
1997, you generally cannot deduct the
premiums on any life insurance policy,
endowment contract, or annuity contract
if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary. The disallowance applies without
regard to whom the policy covers.
Partners. If, as a partner in a part-
nership, you take out an insurance policy
on your own life and name your partners
as beneficiaries to induce them to retain
their investments in the partnership, you
are considered a beneficiary. You cannot
deduct the insurance premiums.
4) Insurance to secure a loan. If you take
out a policy on your life or on the life of
another person with a financial interest
in your business to get or protect a
business loan, you cannot deduct the
premiums as a business expense. Nor
can you deduct the premiums as interest
on business loans or as an expense of
financing loans. In the event of death,
the proceeds of the policy are not taxed
as income even if they are used to liqui-
date the debt.
Capitalizing Premiums
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you
must capitalize the direct costs and part of the
indirect costs for production or resale activ-
ities. Include these costs in the basis of
property you produce or acquire for resale
rather than claiming them as a current de-
duction. You recover the costs through de-
preciation, amortization, or cost of goods sold
when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of
the property.
Indirect costs include premiums for insur-
ance on your plant or facility, machinery,
equipment, materials, property produced, or
property acquired for resale.
When the uniform capitalization rules ap-
ply. You must use the uniform capitalization
rules if, in your trade or business or activity
carried on for profit, you do any of the fol-
lowing.
 Produce real property or tangible per-
sonal property for use in the business or
activity.
 Produce real property or tangible per-
sonal property for sale to customers.
 Acquire property for resale. However, you
generally do not have to use the uniform
capitalization rules for personal property
acquired for resale if your average annual
gross receipts are not more than
$10,000,000 for the 3 prior tax years.
More information.For more information on
the uniform capitalization rules, see Uniform
Capitalization Rules in Publication 538 and
the regulations under Internal Revenue Code
section 263A.
When To
Deduct Premiums
You can usually deduct insurance premiums
in the tax year to which they apply.
Cash method. If you use the cash method
of accounting, you must generally deduct in-
surance premiums in the tax year in which
you actually pay them, even if you incurred
them in an earlier year.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual
method of accounting, you cannot deduct in-
surance premiums before the tax year in
which you incur a liability for them, even if you
paid them in an earlier year. In addition, you
cannot deduct insurance premiums before the
tax year in which you actually pay them (un-
less the exception for recurring items applies).
For more information about accrual methods
of accounting, see chapter 1. For information
about the exception for recurring items, see
Publication 538.
Cash or accrual method prepayments.
You cannot deduct in one year the entire
premium for an insurance policy that covers
more than one year. You can deduct only the
part of the premium that applies to that year.
For each later tax year, you can deduct the
part that applies to that tax year. This applies
whether you use the cash or accrual method.
Example. You operate a business and
file your returns on a calendar-year basis.
You bought a fire insurance policy on your
building effective October 1, 2000, and paid
a premium of $1,200 for 2 years of coverage.
On your 2000 return, you can deduct only the
part of the total premium that applies to the
3 months of coverage in 2000. For 2001 and
2002, you can deduct the part of the premium
that applies to each of those years. Since the
total policy premium is $1,200 for 2 years, the
yearly rate is $600 and the monthly rate is
$50. For the 3-month period in 2000, you can
deduct $150; for 2001, you can deduct $600;
and for the 9-month period in 2002, you can
deduct $450.
If you use the cash method of accounting
and you pay the $1,200 premium in January
2001, you cannot deduct any amount on your
2000 return. However, you can deduct $750
(the $150 that applies to 2000 plus the $600
that applies to 2001) on your return for 2001.
Dividends received.If you receive dividends
from business insurance and you deducted
the premiums in prior years, at least part of
the dividends generally are income. For more
information, see Recoveries in Publication
525.
8.
Costs You
Can Deduct
or Capitalize
Introduction
This chapter discusses two ways of treating
certain costs—deduction or capitalization.
You generally deduct a cost as a current
business expense by subtracting it from your
income in either the year you incur it or the
year you pay it.
If you capitalize a cost, you may be able
to recover it over a period of years through
periodic deductions for amortization, de-
pletion, or depreciation. When you capitalize
a cost, you add it to the basis of property to
which it relates.
Except for exploration costs for mineral
deposits, a partnership, corporation, estate,
or trust makes the choice to deduct or capi-
talize the costs discussed in this chapter.
Each individual partner, shareholder, or ben-
eficiary chooses whether to deduct or capi-
talize exploration costs.
CAUTION
!
You may be subject to the alternative
minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct any
of the expenses discussed in this
Page 24 Chapter 8  Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

chapter, other than carrying charges and the
costs of removing architectural barriers.
For more information on alternative mini-
mum tax, see the instructions for one of the
following.
 Form 6251, Alternative Minimum
Tax—Individuals
 Form 4626, Alternative Minimum
Tax—Corporations
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Carrying charges
 Research and experimental costs
 Intangible drilling costs
 Exploration costs
 Development costs
 Circulation costs
 Costs of removing a retired asset
 Costs of removing barriers to the disabled
and the elderly
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554544  Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
Form (and Instructions)
/H185543468  Investment Credit
/H185548826  Disabled Access Credit
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
Carrying Charges
Carrying charges include the taxes and inter-
est you pay to carry or develop real property
or to carry, transport, or install personal
property. Certain carrying charges must be
capitalized under the uniform capitalization
rules. (For information on capitalization of in-
terest, see chapter 5.) You can choose to
capitalize carrying charges not subject to the
uniform capitalization rules, but only if they
are otherwise deductible.
You can choose to capitalize carrying
charges separately for each project you have
and for each type of carrying charge. For un-
improved and unproductive real property,
your choice is good for only 1 year. You must
decide whether to capitalize carrying charges
each year the property remains unimproved
and unproductive. For other property, your
choice to capitalize carrying charges remains
in effect until construction, development, or
installation is completed (or, for personal
property, the date you first use it, if later).
How to make the choice. To make the
choice to capitalize a carrying charge, write
a statement saying which charges you
choose to capitalize. Attach it to your original
tax return for the year the choice is to be ef-
fective. However, if you timely filed your re-
turn for the year without making the choice,
you can still make the choice by filing an
amended return within 6 months of the due
IF you . . . THEN . . .
Deduct research and experimental costs as
a current business expense,
Do not deduct research and experimental
costs as a current business expense,
Deduct all research and experimental costs
for the year of choice and all later years.
Amortize them over at least 60 months,
starting with the month you first receive an
economic benefit from the research.
date of the return (excluding extensions). At-
tach the statement to the amended return and
write “FILED PURSUANT TO SECTION
301.9100–2” on the statement. File the
amended return at the same address you filed
the original return.
Research and
Experimental Costs
The costs of research and experimentation
are generally capital expenses. However, you
can choose to deduct these costs as a current
business expense.
For information on amortizing these costs,
see Research and Experimental Costs in
chapter 9.
Research and experimental costs defined.
Research and experimental costs are rea-
sonable costs you incur in your trade or
business for activities intended to provide in-
formation to help eliminate uncertainty about
the development or improvement of a prod-
uct. Uncertainty exists if the information
available to you does not establish how to
develop or improve a product or the appro-
priate design of a product. Whether costs
qualify as research and experimental costs
depends on the nature of the activity to which
the costs relate. Neither the nature of the
product or improvement being developed nor
the level of technological advancement mat-
ters when making this determination.
The costs of obtaining a patent, including
attorneys' fees in making and perfecting a
patent application, are research and exper-
imental costs.
Product. The term “product” includes any
of the following.
 Formula.
 Invention.
 Patent.
 Pilot model.
 Process.
 Technique.
 Similar property.
It also includes products used by you in your
trade or business or held for sale, lease, or
license.
Costs not included.Research and ex-
perimental costs do not include expenses for
any of the following.
 Advertising or promotions.
 Consumer surveys.
 Efficiency surveys.
 Management studies.
 Quality control testing.
 Research in connection with literary, his-
torical, or similar projects.
 The acquisition of another's patent,
model, production, or process.
When and how to choose. Generally, you
can make the choice to deduct these costs
only in the first year you incur research and
experimental costs.
You choose to deduct research and ex-
perimental costs, rather than capitalize them,
by deducting them on your tax return for the
year in which you first have research and
experimental costs.
Intangible
Drilling Costs
The costs of developing oil, gas, or
geothermal wells are ordinarily capital ex-
penses. You can usually recover them
through depreciation or depletion. However,
you can choose to deduct intangible drilling
costs as a current business expense. These
are certain drilling and development costs for
wells in the United States in which you hold
an operating or working interest. You can
deduct only costs for drilling or preparing a
well for the production of oil, gas, geothermal
steam, or geothermal hot water.
You can choose to deduct only the costs
of items with no salvage value. These include
wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies
related to drilling wells and preparing them for
production. Your cost for any drilling or de-
velopment work done by contractors under
any form of contract is also an intangible
drilling and development cost. However, see
Amounts paid to a contractor that must be
capitalized, next.
You can also choose to deduct the cost
of drilling bore holes to determine the location
and delineation of offshore hydrocarbon de-
posits if the shaft is capable of conducting
hydrocarbons to the surface on completion.
It does not matter whether there is any intent
to produce hydrocarbons.
If you do not choose to deduct your in-
tangible drilling and development costs cur-
rently, you can choose to deduct them over
the 60-month period beginning with the month
they were paid or incurred.
Amounts paid to a contractor that must
be capitalized.Amounts paid to a contractor
must be capitalized if they are either of the
following.
 Amounts properly allocable to the cost
of depreciable property.
 Amounts paid only out of production or
proceeds from production if the amount
is depletable income to the recipient.
How to make the choice. You choose to
deduct intangible drilling and development
costs currently by taking the deduction on
your income tax return for the first tax year
you have eligible costs. No formal statement
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 25

is required. If you file Form Schedule C (Form
1040), enter these costs under “Other ex-
penses.”
Energy credit for costs of geothermal
wells. If you capitalize the drilling and de-
velopment costs of geothermal wells that you
place in service during the tax year, you may
be able to claim a business energy credit.
See Form 3468 for more information.
Nonproductive well.If you capitalize your
intangible drilling and development costs, you
have another option if the well is nonproduc-
tive. You can deduct the intangible drilling
and development costs of the nonproductive
well as an ordinary loss. You must indicate
and clearly state your choice on your tax re-
turn for the year the well is completed. Once
made, the choice for oil and gas wells is
binding for all later years. You can revoke
your choice for a geothermal well by filing an
amended return that does not claim the loss.
Costs incurred outside the United States.
You cannot deduct in one year all the intan-
gible drilling and development costs paid or
incurred for an oil, gas, or geothermal well
located outside the United States. However,
you can choose to include the costs in the
adjusted basis of the well to figure depletion.
If you do not make this choice, you can de-
duct the costs over the 10-year period begin-
ning with the tax year in which you paid or
incurred them. These rules do not apply to a
nonproductive well.
Exploration Costs
The costs of determining the existence, lo-
cation, extent, or quality of any mineral de-
posit are ordinarily capital expenses if the
costs lead to the development of a mine. You
recover these costs through depletion as the
mineral is removed from the ground. How-
ever, you can choose to deduct domestic ex-
ploration costs paid or incurred before the
development stage began (except those for
oil, gas, and geothermal wells).
How to make the choice. You choose to
deduct exploration costs by taking the de-
duction on your income tax return or an
amended income tax return for the tax year
you paid or incurred the costs. Your return
must adequately describe and identify each
property or mine, and clearly state how much
is being deducted for each one. The choice
applies to the tax year you make this choice
and all later tax years.
Partnerships. Each partner, not the
partnership, chooses whether to capitalize or
to deduct that partner's share of exploration
costs.
Reduced corporate deductions for explo-
ration costs.A corporation (other than an
S corporation) can deduct only 70% of its
domestic exploration costs. It must capitalize
the remaining 30% and amortize them over
the 60-month period starting with the month
the exploration costs are paid or incurred. The
30% the corporation capitalizes cannot be
added to its basis in the property for purposes
of figuring cost depletion. However, the
amount amortized is treated as additional
depreciation and is subject to recapture as
ordinary income on a disposition of the prop-
erty. See Section 1250 Property under De-
preciation Recapture in chapter 3 of Publica-
tion 544.
These rules also apply to the deduction
of development costs for corporations. See
Development Costs, later.
Recapture of exploration expenses.When
your mine reaches the producing stage, you
must recapture any exploration costs you
chose to deduct. Use either of the following
methods.
Method 1—Include the deducted costs in
gross income for the tax year the mine
reaches the producing stage. Your choice
must be clearly indicated on the return.
Increase your adjusted basis in the mine
by the amount included in income. Gener-
ally, you must choose this recapture
method by the due date (including exten-
sions) of your return. However, if you
timely filed your return for the year without
making the choice, you can still make the
choice by filing an amended return within
6 months of the due date of the return
(excluding extensions). Make the choice
on your amended return and write “FILED
PURSUANT TO SECTION 301.9100–2”
on the form where you are including the
income. File the amended return at the
same address you filed the original return.
Method 2—Do not claim any depletion de-
duction for the tax year the mine reaches
the producing stage and any later tax years
until the amount of depletion you would
have deducted equals the amount of de-
ducted exploration costs.
You also must recapture deducted explo-
ration costs if you receive a bonus or royalty
from mine property before it reaches the
producing stage. Do not claim any depletion
deduction for the tax year you receive the
bonus or royalty and any later tax years, until
the amount of depletion you would have de-
ducted equals the amount of your deducted
exploration costs.
If you dispose of the mine before your
deducted exploration costs have been fully
recaptured, recapture the balance by treating
all or part of your gain as ordinary income.
Foreign exploration costs.If you pay or
incur exploration costs for a mine or other
natural deposit located outside the United
States, you cannot deduct all the costs in the
current year. You can choose to include the
costs (other than for an oil, gas, or geothermal
well) in the adjusted basis of the mineral
property to figure cost depletion. (Cost de-
pletion is discussed in chapter 10.) If you do
not make this choice, you must deduct the
costs over the 10-year period beginning with
the tax year in which you pay or incur them.
These rules also apply to foreign develop-
ment costs.
Development Costs
You can deduct costs paid or incurred during
the tax year for developing a mine or any
other natural deposit (other than an oil or gas
well) located in the United States. These
costs must be paid or incurred after the dis-
covery of ores or minerals in commercially
marketable quantities. Development costs in-
clude those incurred for you by a contractor.
Also, development costs include depreciation
on improvements used in the development
of ores or minerals. They do not include costs
of depreciable property.
Instead of deducting development costs in
the year paid or incurred, you can choose to
treat them as deferred expenses and deduct
them ratably as the units of produced ores
or minerals related to the expenses are sold.
This choice applies each tax year to ex-
penses paid or incurred in that year. Once
made, the choice is binding for the year and
cannot be revoked for any reason.
How to make the choice. The choice to
deduct development costs ratably as the ores
or minerals are sold must be made for each
mine or other natural deposit by a clear indi-
cation on your return or by a statement filed
with the IRS office where you file your return.
Generally, you must make the choice by the
due date of the return (including extensions).
However, if you timely filed your return for the
year without making the choice, you can still
make the choice by filing an amended return
within 6 months of the due date of the return
(excluding extensions). Clearly indicate the
choice on your amended return and write
“FILED PURSUANT TO SECTION
301.9100–2.” File the amended return at the
same address you filed the original return.
Foreign development costs.The rules dis-
cussed earlier for foreign exploration costs
apply to foreign development costs.
Reduced corporate deductions for devel-
opment costs. The rules discussed earlier
for reduced corporate deductions for explo-
ration costs also apply to corporate de-
ductions for development costs.
Circulation Costs
A publisher can deduct as a business ex-
pense the costs of establishing, maintaining,
or increasing the circulation of a newspaper,
magazine, or other periodical. For example,
a publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extra
employees for a limited time to get new sub-
scriptions through telephone calls. Circulation
costs are deductible even if they normally
would be capitalized.
This rule does not apply to the following
costs that must be capitalized.
 The purchase of land or depreciable
property.
 The acquisition of circulation through the
purchase of any part of the business of
another publisher of a newspaper, mag-
azine, or other periodical, including the
purchase of another publisher's circu-
lation list.
Other treatment of circulation costs.If a
publisher does not want to currently deduct
circulation costs, the publisher can choose
one of the following ways to recover these
costs.
 Capitalize all circulation costs that are
properly chargeable to a capital account.
 Amortize circulation costs over the 3-year
period beginning with the tax year they
were paid or incurred.
How to make the choice. You choose to
capitalize circulation costs by attaching a
statement to your return for the first tax year
the choice applies. Your choice is binding for
Page 26 Chapter 8  Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

the year it is made and for all later years,
unless you get IRS approval to revoke it.
Costs of Removing a
Retired Asset
If you retire and remove a depreciable asset
in connection with the installation or pro-
duction of a replacement asset, you can de-
duct the costs of removing the retired asset.
However, if you replace a component (part)
of a depreciable asset, capitalize the removal
costs if the replacement is an improvement
and deduct the costs if the replacement is a
repair.
Costs of
Removing Barriers
to the Disabled
and the Elderly
The cost of an improvement to a business
asset is normally a capital expense. However,
you can choose to deduct the costs of making
a facility or public transportation vehicle more
accessible to and usable by those who are
disabled or elderly. The facility or vehicle
must be owned or leased by you for use in
connection with your trade or business.
A facility is all or any part of buildings,
structures, equipment, roads, walks, parking
lots, or similar real or personal property. A
public transportation vehicle is a vehicle, such
as a bus or railroad car, that provides trans-
portation service to the public (including ser-
vice for your customers, even if you are not
in the business of providing transportation
services).
You cannot deduct any costs that you paid
or incurred to completely renovate or build a
new facility or public transportation vehicle,
or to replace depreciable property in the
normal course of business.
Deduction limit.The most you can deduct
as a cost of removing barriers to the disabled
and the elderly for any tax year is $15,000.
However, you can add any costs over this
limit to the basis of the property and depreci-
ate them.
Partners and partnerships.The $15,000
limit applies to a partnership and also to each
partner in the partnership. A partner can di-
vide the $15,000 limit in any manner among
the partner's individually incurred costs and
the partner's distributive share of partnership
costs. If the partner cannot deduct the entire
share of partnership costs, the partnership
can add any costs not deducted back to the
basis of the improved property.
A partnership must be able to show that
any amount added back to basis was not
deducted by the partner and that it was over
a partner's $15,000 limit (as determined by
the partner). If the partnership cannot show
this, it is presumed that the partner was able
to deduct the distributive shares of the part-
nership's costs in full.
Example. John Duke's distributive share
of ABC partnership's deductible expenses for
the removal of architectural barriers was
$14,000. John had $12,000 of similar ex-
penses in his sole proprietorship. He chose
to deduct $7,000 of them. John allocated the
remaining $8,000 of the $15,000 limit to his
share of ABC's expenses. John can capital-
ize the excess $5,000 of his own expenses.
Also, if ABC can show that John could not
deduct $6,000 of his share of the partner-
ship's expenses because of how John applied
the limit, ABC can add $6,000 to the basis of
its property.
Qualification standards.You must meet the
following specific standards for improved ac-
cess for the disabled or the elderly to deduct
your costs as a current expense.
Grading. The ground must be graded to
the level of a normal entrance to make the
facility accessible to people with physical
disabilities.
Walks.
1) A public walk must be at least 48 inches
wide and cannot slope more than 5%.
A fairly long walk of maximum or near
maximum steepness must have level
areas at regular intervals. A walk or
driveway must have a nonslip surface.
2) A walk must have a continuing common
surface and must not have steps or
sudden changes in level.
3) Where a walk crosses another walk, a
driveway, or a parking lot, they must
blend to a common level. However, this
does not require the removal of curbs
that are a safety feature for those with
disabilities, especially blindness.
4) A sloping walk must have a level plat-
form at the top and at the bottom. If a
door swings out onto the platform at the
top or bottom of the walk, the platform
must be at least 5 feet deep and 5 feet
wide. If a door does not swing onto the
platform, the platform must be at least 3
feet deep and 5 feet wide. The platform
must extend at least 1 foot past the
opening side of any doorway.
Parking lots.
1) At least one parking space close to a
facility must be set aside and marked for
use by persons with disabilities.
2) A parking space must be open on one
side to allow room for a person in a
wheelchair or on braces or crutches to
get in and out of a car onto a level sur-
face suitable for wheeling and walking.
3) A parking space marked for use by per-
sons with disabilities, when placed be-
tween two regular diagonal or head-on
parking spaces, must be at least 12 feet
wide.
4) A parking space must be located so that
a person in a wheelchair or on braces
or crutches does not have to go behind
parked cars.
Ramps.
1) A ramp must not rise more than 1 inch
in each foot of length.
2) A ramp must have at least one handrail
that is 32 inches high, measured from
the surface of the ramp. The handrail
must be smooth and extend at least 1
foot past the top and bottom of the ramp.
However, this does mean that a handrail
extension which is itself a hazard is re-
quired.
3) A ramp must have a nonslip surface.
4) A ramp must have a level platform at the
top and at the bottom. If a door swings
out onto the platform, the platform must
be at least 5 feet deep and 5 feet wide.
If a door does not swing onto the plat-
form, the platform must be at least 3 feet
deep and 5 feet wide. The platform must
extend at least 1 foot past the opening
side of any doorway.
5) A ramp must have level platforms no
farther than 30 feet apart and at any turn.
6) A curb ramp with a nonslip surface must
be provided at an intersection. The curb
ramp must not be less than 4 feet wide
and must not rise more than 1 inch in
each foot of length. The two surfaces
must blend smoothly.
Entrances. A building must have at least
one main entrance a person in a wheelchair
can use. The entrance must be on a level
accessible to an elevator.
Doors and doorways.
1) A door must have a clear opening of at
least 32 inches and must be operable
by a single effort.
2) The floor on the inside and outside of a
doorway must be level for at least 5 feet
from the door in the direction the door
swings and must extend at least 1 foot
past the opening side of the doorway.
3) There must not be any sharp slopes or
sudden changes in level at a doorway.
The threshold must be flush with the
floor. The door closer must be selected,
placed, and set so as not to impair the
use of the door by persons with disabili-
ties.
Stairs.
1) Stairsteps must have round nosing of
between 1 and 1
1/2 inch radius.
2) Stairs must have a handrail 32 inches
high, measured from the tread at the
face of the riser.
3) Stairs must have at least one handrail
that extends at least 18 inches past the
top step and the bottom step. But this
does not mean that a handrail extension
which is itself a hazard is required.
4) Each step must not be more than 7
inches high.
Floors.
1) Floors must have a nonslip surface.
2) Floors on each story of a building must
be on the same level or must be con-
nected by a ramp of the type discussed
previously.
Toilet rooms.
1) A toilet room must have enough space
for persons in wheelchairs to move
around.
2) A toilet room must have at least one toi-
let stall that:
a) Is at least 36 inches wide,
b) Is at least 56 inches deep,
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 27

c) Has a door, if any, that is at least
32 inches wide and swings out,
d) Has handrails on each side that are
33 inches high and parallel to the
floor, 1
1 / 2 inches in outside diam-
eter, 11 / 2 inches away from the wall,
and fastened securely at the ends
and center, and
e) Has a toilet with a seat 19 to 20
inches from the finished floor.
3) A toilet room must have, in addition to
or instead of the toilet stall described in
(2), at least one toilet stall that:
a) Is at least 66 inches wide,
b) Is at least 60 inches deep,
c) Has a door, if any, that is at least
32 inches wide and swings out,
d) Has a handrail on one side, 33
inches high and parallel to the floor,
1
1 / 2 inches in outside diameter, 11 / 2
inches away from the wall, and
fastened securely at the ends and
center, and
e) Has a toilet with a seat 19 to 20
inches from the finished floor with
a centerline 18 inches from the side
wall on which the handrail is lo-
cated.
4) A toilet room must have sinks with nar-
row aprons. Drain pipes and hot water
pipes under a sink must be covered or
insulated.
5) A mirror and a shelf above a sink must
not be higher than 40 inches above the
floor, measured from the top of the shelf
and the bottom of the mirror.
6) A toilet room for men must have wall-
mounted urinals with the opening of the
basin 15 to 19 inches from the finished
floor or floor-mounted urinals that are
level with the main floor.
7) Towel racks, towel dispensers, and other
dispensers and disposal units must not
be mounted higher than 40 inches from
the floor.
Water fountains.
1) A water fountain and a cooler must have
up-front spouts and controls.
2) A water fountain and a cooler must be
hand-operated or hand-and-foot-
operated.
3) A water fountain mounted on the side
of a floor-mounted cooler must not be
more than 30 inches above the floor.
4) A wall-mounted, hand-operated water
cooler must be mounted with the basin
36 inches from the floor.
5) A water fountain must not be fully re-
cessed and must not be set into an
alcove unless the alcove is at least 36
inches wide.
Public telephones.
1) A public telephone must be placed so
that the dial and the headset can be
reached by a person in a wheelchair.
2) A public telephone must be equipped for
a person who is hearing impaired and it
must be identified as such with in-
structions for its use.
3) Coin slots of public telephones must not
be more than 48 inches from the floor.
Elevators.
1) An elevator must be accessible to, and
usable by, persons with disabilities and
the elderly on the levels they use to enter
the building and all levels and areas
normally used.
2) Cab size must measure at least 54 by
68 inches to allow for turning a wheel-
chair.
3) Door clear opening width must be at
least 32 inches.
4) All controls needed must be within 48 to
54 inches from the cab floor. These
controls must be usable by a person with
a visual impairment and must be iden-
tifiable by touch.
Controls.Switches and controls for light,
heat, ventilation, windows, draperies, fire
alarms, and all similar controls needed or
used often must be placed within the reach
of a person in a wheelchair. These switches
and controls must not be higher than 48
inches from the floor.
Identification.
1) Raised letters or numbers must be used
to identify rooms and offices. These
identification marks must be placed on
the wall to the right or left of the door at
a height of 54 to 66 inches above the
finished floor.
2) A door that might prove dangerous if
used by a visually impaired person, such
as a door leading to a loading platform,
boiler room, stage, or fire escape, must
be identifiable by touch.
Warning signals.
1) An audible warning signal must be ac-
companied by a simultaneous visual
signal for the benefit of those who are
hearing impaired.
2) A visual warning signal must be accom-
panied by a simultaneous audible signal
for the benefit of persons who are visu-
ally impaired.
Hazards. Hanging signs, ceiling lights,
and similar objects and fixtures must be at
least 7 feet above the floor.
International accessibility symbol.The
international accessibility symbol must be
displayed on routes to a wheelchair-
accessible entrance to a facility, at the en-
trance itself, and at wheelchair-accessible
entrances to public transportation vehicles.
Rail facilities.
1) A rail facility must have a fare control
area with at least one entrance with a
clear opening at least 36 inches wide.
2) A boarding platform edge bordering a
drop-off or other dangerous condition
must be marked with a strip of floor ma-
terial different in color and texture from
the rest of the floor surface. The gap
between the boarding platform and ve-
hicle doorway must be as small as pos-
sible.
Buses.
1) A bus must have a mechanism such as
a lift or ramp to enter the bus and
enough clearance to let a wheelchair
user reach a secure location.
2) The bus must have a wheelchair-
securing device. However, this does not
mean that a wheelchair-securing device
that is itself a barrier or hazard is re-
quired.
3) The vertical distance from a curb or from
street level to the first front doorstep
must not be more than 8 inches. Each
front doorstep after the first step up from
the curb or street level must also not be
more than 8 inches high. The steps at
the front and rear doors must be at least
12 inches deep.
4) The bus must have clear signs that indi-
cate that seats in the front of the bus are
priority seats for persons who have a
disability or are elderly. The signs must
encourage other passengers to make
these seats available to those who have
priority.
5) Handrails and stanchions must be pro-
vided in the entrance to the bus so that
passengers who have a disability or are
elderly can grasp them from outside the
bus and use them while boarding and
paying the fare. This system must in-
clude a rail across the front of the bus
interior that passengers can lean against
while paying fares. Overhead handrails
must be continuous except for a gap at
the rear doorway.
6) Floors and steps must have nonslip sur-
faces. Step edges must have a band of
bright contrasting color running the full
width of the step.
7) A stepwell next to the driver must have,
when the door is open, at least 2 foot-
candles of light measured on the step
Page 28 Chapter 8  Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

tread. Other stepwells must have, at all
times, at least 2 foot-candles of light
measured on the step tread.
8) The doorways of the bus must have
outside lighting that provides at least 1
foot-candle of light on the street surface
for a distance of 3 feet from the bottom
step edge. This lighting must be below
window level and must be shielded from
the eyes of entering and exiting pas-
sengers.
9) The fare box must be located as far for-
ward as practical and must not block
traffic in the vestibule.
Rapid and light rail vehicles.
1) Passenger doorways on the vehicle
sides must have clear openings at least
32 inches wide.
2) Audible or visual warning signals must
be provided to alert passengers of clos-
ing doors.
3) Handrails and stanchions must permit
safe boarding, moving around, sitting
and standing assistance, and getting off
by persons who have a disability or are
elderly. On a level-entry vehicle,
handrails, stanchions, and seats must
be located to allow a wheelchair user to
enter the vehicle and position the
wheelchair in a location that does not
block the movement of other passen-
gers. On a vehicle with steps that must
be used in boarding, handrails and
stanchions must be provided in the en-
trance so that persons who have a dis-
ability or are elderly can grasp them and
use them from outside the vehicle while
boarding.
4) Floors must have nonslip surfaces. Step
edges on a light rail vehicle must have
a band of bright contrasting color running
the full width of the step.
5) A stepwell next to the driver must have,
when the door is open, at least 2 foot-
candles of light measured on the step
tread. Other stepwells must have, at all
times, at least 2 foot-candles of light
measured on the step tread.
6) Doorways on a light rail vehicle must
have outside lighting that provides at
least 1 foot-candle of light on the street
surface for a distance of 3 feet from the
bottom step edge. This lighting must be
below window level and must be
shielded from the eyes of entering and
exiting passengers.
Other barrier removals.To be deduct-
ible, expenses of removing any barrier not
covered by the above standards must meet
all three of the following tests.
1) The removed barrier must be a sub-
stantial barrier to access or use of a fa-
cility or public transportation vehicle by
persons who have a disability or are el-
derly.
2) The removed barrier must have been a
barrier for at least one major group of
persons who have a disability or are el-
derly (such as people who are blind,
deaf, or wheelchair users).
3) The barrier must be removed without
creating any new barrier that significantly
impairs access to or use of the facility
or vehicle by a major group of persons
who have a disability or are elderly.
How to make the choice.If you choose to
deduct your costs for removing barriers to the
disabled or the elderly, claim the deduction
on your income tax return (partnership return
for partnerships) for the tax year the ex-
penses were paid or incurred. Identify the
deduction as a separate item. The choice
applies to all the qualifying costs you have
during the year, up to the $15,000 limit. If you
make this choice, you must maintain ade-
quate records to support your deduction.
For your choice to be valid, you generally
must file your return by its due date, including
extensions. However, if you timely filed your
return for the year without making the choice,
you can still make the choice by filing an
amended return within 6 months of the due
date of the return (excluding extensions).
Clearly indicate the choice on your amended
return and write “FILED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 301.9100–2.” File the amended
return at the same address you filed the ori-
ginal return. Your choice is irrevocable after
the due date, including extensions, of your
return.
Disabled access credit.If you make your
business accessible to persons with disabili-
ties and your business is an eligible small
business, you may be able to take the disa-
bled access credit. If you make this choice,
you must reduce the amount you deduct or
capitalize by the amount of the credit.
For more information, see Form 8826.
9.
Amortization
Introduction
Amortization is a method of recovering (de-
ducting) certain capital costs over a fixed pe-
riod of time. It is similar to the straight line
method of depreciation.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 How to deduct amortization
 Amortizing costs of section 197 intangi-
bles
 Amortizing costs of going into business
 Amortizing reforestation costs
 Amortizing costs of pollution control fa-
cilities
 Amortizing costs of research and exper-
imentation
 Amortizing bond premium
 Amortizing the cost of getting a lease
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
/H18554550 Investment Income and Expenses
/H18554946 How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
/H185543468 Investment Credit 
/H185544562 Depreciation and Amortization 
/H18554 6251 Alternative Minimum
Tax—Individuals 
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
How To Deduct
Amortization
The purpose of this section is to explain how
you deduct amortization.
Form 4562. You deduct amortization that
begins during the current year by completing
Part VI of Form 4562 and attaching it to your
current year's return.
For later years, do not report your de-
duction for amortization on Form 4562 unless
you must file the form for another reason.
You must file Form 4562 in any of the fol-
lowing situations.
 You deduct amortization that begins this
year.
 You claim depreciation on property
placed in service this year.
 You claim a section 179 deduction.
 You claim a deduction for any vehicle
reported on a form other than Schedule
C (Form 1040) or Schedule C–EZ (Form
1040).
 You claim depreciation on any vehicle or
other listed property (regardless of when
it was placed in service).
 You claim depreciation on a return for a
corporation (other than an S corporation).
Other forms to use.If you do not have to
file Form 4562, claim amortization directly on
the “Other expenses” line of Schedule C or
F (Form 1040) or the “Other deductions” line
of Form 1065, Form 1120, Form 1120-A, or
Form 1120-S. However, if you are amortizing
reforestation costs, see Where to report under
Reforestation Costs.
Bond premium amortization. Do not use
Form 4562 to report bond premium amorti-
zation. How you report this amortization de-
pends on when you got the bond. For infor-
mation on how to report bond premium
amortization, see Publication 550.
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 29

Section 197
Intangibles
You must amortize over 15 years the capital-
ized costs of “section 197 intangibles” you
acquired after August 10, 1993. You must
amortize these costs if you hold the section
197 intangibles in connection with your trade
or business or in an activity engaged in for
profit.
CAUTION
!
You may not be able to amortize
section 197 intangibles acquired in a
transaction that did not result in a
significant change in ownership or use. See
Anti-Churning Rules, later.
Your amortization deduction each year is
the applicable part of the intangible's adjusted
basis (for purposes of determining gain), fig-
ured by amortizing it ratably over 15 years
(180 months). The 15-year period begins with
the later of:
 The month acquired, or
 The month the trade or business or ac-
tivity engaged in for profit begins.
You cannot deduct amortization for the month
you dispose of the intangible.
If you pay or incur an amount that in-
creases the basis of an amortizable section
197 intangible after the 15-year period begins,
amortize it over the remainder of the 15-year
period beginning with the month the basis in-
crease occurs.
You are not allowed any other depreci-
ation or amortization deduction for an amor-
tizable section 197 intangible.
Cost attributable to other property.The
rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply
to any amount that is taken into account in
determining the cost of property that is not a
section 197 intangible. For example, if the
cost of computer software is not separately
stated from the cost of hardware or other
tangible property and you consistently treat it
as part of the cost of the hardware or other
tangible property, these rules do not apply.
Similarly, none of the cost of acquiring real
property held for the production of rental in-
come is considered the cost of goodwill, going
concern value, or any other section 197 in-
tangible.
Section 197
Intangibles Defined
The following assets are section 197 intangi-
bles.
 1) Goodwill.
2) Going concern value. 
3) Workforce in place. 
4) Business books and records, operating
systems, or any other information base,
including lists or other information con-
cerning current or prospective custom-
ers.
5) A patent, copyright, formula, process,
design, pattern, know-how, format, or
similar item. 
6) A customer-based intangible. 
7) A supplier-based intangible. 
8) Any item similar to items (3) through (7).
9) A license, permit, or other right granted
by a governmental unit or agency (in-
cluding renewals). 
10) A covenant not to compete entered into
in connection with the acquisition of an
interest in a trade or business.
11) A franchise, trademark, or trade name
(including renewals).
12) A contract for the use of, or a term in-
terest in, any item in this list.
CAUTION
!
You cannot amortize any of the in-
tangibles listed in items (1) through
(8) that you created unless you cre-
ated them in connection with the acquisition
of assets constituting a trade or business or
a substantial part of a trade or business.
Goodwill. This is the value of a trade or
business based on expected continued cus-
tomer patronage due to its name, reputation,
or any other factor.
Going concern value.This is the additional
value of a trade or business that attaches to
property because the property is an integral
part of an ongoing business activity. It in-
cludes value based on the ability of a busi-
ness to continue to function and generate in-
come even though there is a change in
ownership (but does not include any other
section 197 intangible). It also includes value
based on the immediate use or availability of
an acquired trade or business, such as the
use of earnings during any period in which the
business would not otherwise be available or
operational.
Workforce in place, etc.This includes the
composition of a workforce (for example, its
experience, education, or training). It also in-
cludes the terms and conditions of employ-
ment, whether contractual or otherwise, and
any other value placed on employees or any
of their attributes.
For example, you must amortize the part
of the purchase price that is for the existence
of a highly skilled workforce. Also, you must
amortize the cost of acquiring an existing
employment contract or relationship with em-
ployees or consultants.
Business books and records, etc.This in-
cludes the intangible value of technical man-
uals, training manuals or programs, data files,
and accounting or inventory control systems.
It also includes the cost of customer lists,
subscription lists, insurance expirations, pa-
tient or client files, and lists of newspaper,
magazine, radio, and television advertisers.
Patents, copyrights, etc.This includes
package design, computer software, and any
interest in a film, sound recording, videotape,
book, or other similar property, except as
discussed later under Assets That Are Not
Section 197 Intangibles. 
Customer-based intangible. This is the
composition of market, market share, and any
other value resulting from the future provision
of goods or services because of relationships
with customers in the ordinary course of
business. For example, you must amortize
the part of the purchase price that is for the
following intangibles.
 A customer base.
 A circulation base.
 An undeveloped market or market
growth.
 Insurance in force.
 A mortgage servicing contract.
 An investment management contract.
 Any other relationship with customers in-
volving the future provision of goods or
services.
Accounts receivable or other similar rights
to income for goods or services provided to
customers before the acquisition of a trade
or business are not section 197 intangibles.
Supplier-based intangible.This is the value
resulting from the future acquisition, because
of business relationships with suppliers, of
goods or services that are used or sold by the
business. 
For example, you must amortize the part
of the purchase price that is for the following
intangibles.
 A favorable relationship with distributors
(such as favorable shelf or display space
at a retail outlet).
 A favorable credit rating.
 A favorable supply contract.
Government-granted license, permit, etc.
This is any right granted by a governmental
unit or an agency or instrumentality of a gov-
ernmental unit. For example, you must
amortize the capitalized costs of acquiring
(including issuing or renewing) a liquor li-
cense, a taxicab medallion or license, or a
television or radio broadcasting license.
Covenant not to compete.A covenant not
to compete (or similar arrangement) entered
into in connection with the acquisition of an
interest in a trade or business, or a substantial
portion of a trade or business, is a section 197
intangible. An interest in a trade or business
includes an interest in a partnership or a cor-
poration engaged in a trade or business.
An arrangement that requires the former
owner to perform services (or to provide
property or the use of property) is not similar
to a covenant not to compete to the extent the
amount paid under the arrangement repre-
sents reasonable compensation for services
rendered or for the property or use of the
property provided.
Franchise, trademark, or trade name.A
franchise, trademark, or trade name is a
section 197 intangible. You must amortize its
purchase or renewal costs, other than certain
contingent payments that you can deduct
currently. For information on currently
deductible contingent payments, see Fran-
chise, trademark, trade name under Miscel-
laneous Expenses in chapter 13.
Contract for the use of, or a term interest
in, a section 197 intangible. This includes
any right under a license, contract, or other
arrangement providing for the use of any
section 197 intangible. It also includes any
term interest in any section 197 intangible,
whether the interest is outright or in trust.
Page 30 Chapter 9  Amortization

Assets That Are Not
Section 197 Intangibles
The following assets are not section 197 in-
tangibles.
1) Any interest in a corporation, partner-
ship, trust, or estate.
2) Any interest under an existing futures
contract, foreign currency contract,
notional principal contract, interest rate
swap, or similar financial contract.
3) Any interest in land.
4) Most computer software. (See Computer
software, later.)
5) Any of the following assets not acquired
in connection with the acquisition of a
trade or business or a substantial part
of a trade or business.
a) An interest in a film, sound record-
ing, videotape, book, or similar
property.
b) A right to receive tangible property
or services under a contract or from
a governmental agency.
c) An interest in a patent or copyright.
d) Certain rights that have a fixed du-
ration or amount. (See Rights of
fixed duration or amount, later.)
6) An interest under either of the following.
a) An existing lease or sublease of
tangible property.
b) A debt that was in existence when
the interest was acquired.
7) A professional sports franchise or any
item acquired in connection with the
franchise.
8) A right to service residential mortgages
unless the right is acquired in the acqui-
sition of a trade or business or a sub-
stantial part of a trade or business.
9) Certain transaction costs under a corpo-
rate organization or reorganization in
which any part of a gain or loss is not
recognized.
Intangible property that is not amortizable
under the rules for section 197 intangibles
can be depreciated if it has a determinable
useful life. You generally must use the
straight line method over its useful life. For
certain intangibles, the depreciation period is
specified in the law and regulations. For ex-
ample, the depreciation period for computer
software that is not a section 197 intangible
is 36 months.
For more information on depreciating in-
tangible property, see What Can Be Depreci-
ated in chapter 1 of Publication 946.
Computer software.Section 197 intangibles
do not include the following computer soft-
ware.
1) Software that meets all the following re-
quirements.
a) It is (or has been) readily available
to the general public on similar
terms.
b) It is subject to a nonexclusive li-
cense.
c) It has not been substantially modi-
fied. This requirement is considered
met if the cost of all modifications
is not more than the greater of 25%
of the price of the publicly available
unmodified software or $2,000.
2) Software that is not acquired in the ac-
quisition of a trade or business or a
substantial part of a trade or business.
Computer software defined.Computer
software includes all programs designed to
cause a computer to perform a desired func-
tion. It also includes any database or similar
item that is in the public domain and is inci-
dental to the operation of qualifying software.
Rights of fixed duration or amount.Sec-
tion 197 intangibles do not include any right
under a contract or from a governmental
agency if the right is acquired in the ordinary
course of a trade or business (or in an activity
engaged in for profit) and either:
1) Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or
2) Is of a fixed amount that, except for the
section 197 intangible rules, would be
recovered under a method similar to the
unit-of-production method of cost recov-
ery.
However, this does not apply to the following
intangibles.
 Goodwill.
 Going concern value.
 A covenant not to compete.
 A franchise, trademark, or trade name.
 A customer-related information base,
customer-based intangible, or similar
item.
Anti-Churning Rules
Anti-churning rules prevent you from amor-
tizing most section 197 intangibles if the
transaction in which you acquired them did
not result in a significant change in ownership
or use. These rules apply to goodwill and
going concern value, and to any other section
197 intangible that is not otherwise deprecia-
ble or amortizable.
Under the anti-churning rules, you cannot
use 15-year amortization for the intangible if
any of the following conditions apply.
1) You or a related person (defined later)
held or used the intangible at any time
from July 25, 1991, through August 10,
1993.
2) You acquired the intangible from a per-
son who held the intangible at any time
from July 25, 1991, through August 10,
1993, and, as part of the transaction, the
user did not change.
3) You granted the right to use the intangi-
ble to a person (or a person related to
that person) who held or used the in-
tangible at any time from July 25, 1991,
through August 10, 1993. This applies
only if the transaction in which you
granted the right and the transaction in
which you acquired the intangible are
part of a series of related transactions.
Exceptions. The anti-churning rules do not
apply in the following situations.
 You acquired the intangible from a dece-
dent and its basis was stepped up to its
fair market value.
 The intangible was amortizable as a
section 197 intangible by the person you
acquired it from. This exception does not
apply if the transaction in which you ac-
quired the intangible and the transaction
in which it was acquired by the person
you acquired it from are part of a series
of related transactions.
 The gain-recognition exception, dis-
cussed later, applies.
Related person. For purposes of the anti-
churning rules, the following are related per-
sons.
 An individual and his or her brothers,
sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters,
spouse, ancestors (parents, grand-
parents, etc.), and lineal descendants
(children, grandchildren, etc.).
 An individual and a corporation when the
individual owns, directly or indirectly,
more than 20% in value of the corpo-
ration's outstanding stock.
 Two corporations that are members of
the same controlled group as defined in
section 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code, except that “more than 20%” is
substituted for “at least 80%” in that defi-
nition and the determination is made
without regard to subsections (a)(4) and
(e)(3)(C) of section 1563. (For an excep-
tion, see section 1.197–2(h)(6)(iv) of the
regulations.)
 A trust fiduciary and a corporation when
the trust or grantor of the trust owns, di-
rectly or indirectly, more than 20% in
value of the corporation's outstanding
stock.
 A grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduciary
and beneficiary, of any trust.
 Fiduciaries of two different trusts, and the
fiduciary and beneficiary of two different
trusts, if the same person is the grantor
of both trusts.
 A tax-exempt educational or charitable
organization and a person who directly
or indirectly controls the organization (or
whose family members control it).
 A corporation and a partnership if the
same persons own more than 20% in
value of the outstanding stock of the
corporation and more than 20% of the
capital or profits interest in the partner-
ship.
 Two S corporations if the same persons
own more than 20% in value of the out-
standing stock of each corporation.
 Two corporations, one of which is an S
corporation, if the same persons own
more than 20% in value of the outstand-
ing stock of each corporation.
 Two partnerships if the same persons
own, directly or indirectly, more than 20%
of the capital or the profits interests in
both partnerships.
 A person and a partnership when the
person owns, directly or indirectly, more
than 20% of the capital or profits interests
in the partnership.
 Two persons who are engaged in trades
or businesses under common control (as
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 31

described in section 41(f)(1) of the Inter-
nal Revenue Code).
The relationship must have existed —
 In the case of a single transaction, im-
mediately before or immediately after the
transaction in which the intangible was
acquired, and
 In the case of a series of related trans-
actions (or a series of transactions that
together comprise a qualified stock pur-
chase under section 338(d)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code), immediately
before the earliest transaction or imme-
diately after the last transaction.
Ownership of stock. In determining
whether an individual owns, directly or indi-
rectly, any of the outstanding stock of a cor-
poration, the following rules apply.
Rule 1. Stock owned, directly or indi-
rectly, by or for a corporation, partnership,
estate, or trust is considered owned propor-
tionately by or for its shareholders, partners,
or beneficiaries.
Rule 2. An individual is considered as
owning the stock owned, directly or indirectly,
by or for his or her family. Family includes
only brothers and sisters, half-brothers and
half-sisters, spouse, ancestors, and lineal
descendants.
Rule 3. An individual owning (other than
by applying rule 2) any stock in a corporation
is considered to own the stock owned, directly
or indirectly, by or for his or her partner.
Rule 4. For purposes of applying rule 1,
2, or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a
person under rule 1 as actually owned by that
person. Do not treat stock constructively
owned by an individual under rule 2 or 3 as
owned by the individual for reapplying rule 2
or 3 to make another person the constructive
owner of the stock.
Gain-recognition exception.This exception
to the anti-churning rules applies if the person
you acquired the intangible from (the trans-
feror) meets both the following requirements.
1) That person would not be related to you
(as described under Related person,
earlier) if the 20% test for ownership of
stock and partnership interests were re-
placed by a 50% test.
2) That person chose to recognize gain on
the disposition of the intangible and pay
income tax on the gain at the highest tax
rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for
information on making this choice.
If this exception applies, the anti-churning
rules apply only to the amount of your ad-
justed basis in the intangible that is more than
the gain recognized by the transferor.
Notification.If the person you acquired
the intangible from chooses to recognize gain
under the rules for this exception, that person
must notify you in writing by the due date of
the return on which the choice is made.
Anti-abuse rule.You cannot amortize any
section 197 intangible acquired in a trans-
action for which the principal purpose was
either of the following.
1) To avoid the requirement that the intan-
gible be acquired after August 10, 1993.
2) To avoid any of the anti-churning rules.
More information. For more information
about the anti-churning rules, including addi-
tional rules for partnerships, see section
1.197–2(h) of the regulations.
Incorrect Amount of
Amortization Deducted
If you did not deduct the correct amortization
for a section 197 intangible in any year, you
may be able to make a correction for that year
by filing an amended return. See Amended
Return, later. If you are not allowed to make
the correction on an amended return, you can
change your accounting method to claim the
correct amortization. See Changing Your Ac-
counting Method, later.
Basis adjustment. If you could have de-
ducted amortization but you did not take the
deduction, you must reduce the basis of the
section 197 intangible by the amortization you
were entitled to deduct. If you deducted more
amortization than you should have, you must
reduce your basis by the correct amortization
plus any of the excess for which you received
a tax benefit.
Amended Return
If you did not deduct the correct amortization,
you can file an amended return to make any
of the following corrections.
 Correction of a mathematical error made
in any year.
 Correction of a posting error made in any
year.
 Correction of amortization for a section
197 intangible for which you have not
adopted a method of accounting.
If an amended return is allowed, you must
file it by the later of the following dates.
 3 years from the date you filed your ori-
ginal return for the year in which you did
not deduct the correct amount.
 2 years from the time you paid your tax
for that year.
A return filed early is considered filed on the
due date.
If you did not deduct the correct amorti-
zation for a section 197 intangible on two or
more consecutively filed tax returns, you
have adopted a method of accounting for the
intangible. You cannot file amended returns
to correct the amount of amortization.
Changing Your
Accounting Method
If you cannot correct your amortization de-
ductions for a section 197 intangible by filing
amended returns, you can claim the correct
amount only by changing your method of ac-
counting for the intangible. You will then be
able to take into account any unclaimed or
excess amortization from years before the
year of change.
Approval required.You must get IRS ap-
proval to change your method of accounting.
File Form 3115, Application for Change in
Accounting Method, to request a change to
a permissible method of accounting for
amortization. Revenue Procedure 97–27,
which is in Cumulative Bulletin 1997–1, gives
general instructions for getting approval. Cu-
mulative Bulletins are available at many li-
braries and IRS offices. You do not need IRS
approval to correct any mathematical or
posting error. See Amended Return, earlier.
Automatic approval. You may be able to
get automatic approval from the IRS to
change your method of accounting for a sec-
tion 197 intangible if you meet both the fol-
lowing conditions.
 You did not deduct amortization or you
deducted the incorrect amount of amorti-
zation for the intangible in at least the 2
years immediately preceding the year of
change.
 You owned the intangible at the begin-
ning of the year of change.
File Form 3115 to request a change to a
permissible method of accounting for amorti-
zation. Revenue Procedure 99–49 and sec-
tion 2.01 of its Appendix, which is in Internal
Revenue Bulletin No. 1999–52, has in-
structions for getting automatic approval and
lists exceptions to the automatic approval
procedures.
Exceptions. You generally cannot use
the automatic approval procedure in any of
the following situations.
 You (your federal income tax return) are
under examination.
 You are before a federal court or an ap-
peals office for any income tax issue and
the method of accounting to be changed
is an issue under consideration by the
federal court or appeals office.
 You changed the same method of ac-
counting (with or without obtaining IRS
approval) during the last 5 years (includ-
ing the year of change).
 You filed a Form 3115 to change the
same method of accounting during the
last 5 years (including the year of
change), but did not make the change
because the Form 3115 was withdrawn,
not perfected, denied, or not granted.
Also, see the exceptions listed in section
2.01(2)(b) of the Appendix of Revenue Pro-
cedure 99–49.
Disposition of
Section 197 Intangibles
A section 197 intangible is treated as depre-
ciable property used in your trade or busi-
ness. If you held the intangible for more than
1 year, any gain on its disposition, up to the
amount of allowable amortization, is ordinary
income (section 1245 gain). Any remaining
gain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or
loss. If you held the intangible 1 year or less,
any gain or loss on its disposition is an ordi-
nary gain or loss. For more information on
ordinary or capital gain or loss on business
property, see chapter 3 in Publication 544.
Nondeductible loss. If you acquire more
than one section 197 intangible in a trans-
action (or series of related transactions) and
later dispose of one of them or if one of them
becomes worthless, you cannot deduct any
loss on the intangible. Instead, increase the
adjusted basis of each remaining amortizable
section 197 intangible by the part of the non-
deductible loss. Figure the increase by multi-
Page 32 Chapter 9  Amortization

plying the nondeductible loss on the disposi-
tion of the intangible by the following fraction.
 The numerator is the adjusted basis of
the remaining intangible on the date of
the disposition.
 The denominator is the total adjusted
basis of all remaining amortizable section
197 intangibles on the date of the dispo-
sition.
Covenant not to compete.A covenant not
to compete, or similar arrangement, is not
considered disposed of or worthless before
you dispose of your entire interest in the trade
or business for which you entered into the
covenant.
Nonrecognition transfers.If you dispose
of one section 197 intangible and acquire
another in a nonrecognition transfer, treat the
part of the adjusted basis of the acquired in-
tangible that is not more than the adjusted
basis of the transferred intangible as if it were
the transferred section 197 intangible. You
continue to amortize this part of the adjusted
basis over the remaining amortization period
of the transferred section 197 intangible.
Nonrecognition transfers include transfers to
a corporation, partnership contributions and
distributions, like-kind exchanges, and invol-
untary conversions.
Example. You own a section 197 intan-
gible you have amortized for 4 full years. It
has a remaining unamortized basis of
$30,000. You exchange the asset plus
$10,000 for a like-kind section 197 intangible.
The nonrecognition provisions of like-kind
exchanges apply. You amortize $30,000 of
the adjusted basis of the acquired section 197
intangible over the 11 years remaining in the
original 15-year amortization period for the
transferred asset and the other $10,000 of
adjusted basis over 15 years.
Going Into Business
When you go into business, treat all costs you
incur to get your business started as capital
expenses. Capital expenses are part of your
basis in the business. Generally, you recover
costs for particular assets through depreci-
ation deductions. However, you generally
cannot recover other costs until you sell the
business or otherwise go out of business. See
Capital Expenses in chapter 1 for a dis-
cussion of how to treat these costs if you do
not go into business.
You can choose to amortize certain costs
for setting up your business over a period of
60 months or more. The cost must qualify as
one of the following.
 A business start-up cost.
 An organizational cost for a corporation.
 An organizational cost for a partnership. 
Business Start-Up Costs
Start-up costs are costs for creating an active
trade or business or investigating the creation
or acquisition of an active trade or business.
Start-up costs include any amounts paid or
incurred in connection with any activity en-
gaged in for profit and for the production of
income before the trade or business begins
in anticipation of the activity becoming an
active trade or business.
Qualifying costs.A start-up cost is amor-
tizable if it meets both the following tests.
1) It is a cost you could deduct if you paid
or incurred it to operate an existing ac-
tive trade or business (in the same field).
2) It is a cost you pay or incur before the
day your active trade or business begins.
Start-up costs include costs for the fol-
lowing items.
 A survey of potential markets.
 An analysis of available facilities, labor,
supplies, etc.
 Advertisements for the opening of the
business. 
 Salaries and wages for employees who
are being trained and their instructors.
 Travel and other necessary costs for se-
curing prospective distributors, suppliers,
or customers.
 Salaries and fees for executives and
consultants, or for other professional
services.
Nonqualifying costs.Start-up costs do not
include deductible interest, taxes, or research
and experimental costs. See Research and
Experimental Costs, later.
Purchasing an active trade or business.
Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an
active trade or business include only costs
incurred in the course of a general search for
or preliminary investigation of the business.
Costs you incur in the attempt to purchase a
specific business are capital expenses that
you cannot amortize.
Investigative costs.Investigative costs
are the costs that help you decide whether to
purchase a business and which business to
purchase.
Example. In June, you hired an ac-
counting firm to assist you in the potential
purchase of XYZ. They researched XYZ's in-
dustry and analyzed the financial projections
of XYZ. In September, you hired a law firm to
prepare and submit a letter of intent to XYZ.
The letter stated that a binding commitment
would result only after a purchase agreement
was signed. The law firm and accounting firm
continued to provide services including a re-
view of XYZ's books and records and the
preparation of a purchase agreement. In Oc-
tober, you signed a purchase agreement with
XYZ.
The costs to investigate the business be-
fore submitting the letter of intent to XYZ are
amortizable investigative costs. The costs for
services after that time relate to the attempt
to purchase the business and must be capi-
talized.
Disposition of business.If you completely
dispose of your business before the end of
the amortization period, you can deduct any
remaining deferred start-up costs. However,
you can deduct these deferred start-up costs
only to the extent they qualify as a loss from
a business.
Costs of Organizing
a Corporation
The costs of organizing a corporation are the
direct costs of creating the corporation.
Qualifying costs. You can amortize an or-
ganizational cost only if it meets all the fol-
lowing tests.
 It is for the creation of the corporation.
 It is chargeable to a capital account.
 It could be amortized over the life of the
corporation if the corporation had a fixed
life.
 It is incurred before the end of the first tax
year in which the corporation is in busi-
ness. A corporation using the cash
method of accounting can amortize or-
ganizational costs incurred within the first
tax year, even if it does not pay them in
that year.
The following are examples of organiza-
tional costs.
 The cost of temporary directors.
 The cost of organizational meetings.
 State incorporation fees.
 The cost of accounting services for set-
ting up the corporation.
 The cost of legal services (such as draft-
ing the charter, bylaws, terms of the ori-
ginal stock certificates, and minutes of
organizational meetings).
Nonqualifying costs. The following costs are
not organizational costs. They are capital ex-
penses that you cannot amortize.
 Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-
curities, such as commissions, profes-
sional fees, and printing costs.
 Costs associated with the transfer of as-
sets to the corporation.
Costs of Organizing
a Partnership
The costs of organizing a partnership are the
direct costs of creating the partnership.
Qualifying costs. You can amortize an or-
ganizational cost only if it meets all the fol-
lowing tests.
 It is for the creation of the partnership and
not for starting or operating the partner-
ship trade or business.
 It is chargeable to a capital account.
 It could be amortized over the life of the
partnership if the partnership had a fixed
life.
 It is incurred by the due date of the part-
nership return (excluding extensions) for
the first tax year in which the partnership
is in business. However, if the partnership
uses the cash method of accounting and
pays the cost after the end of its first tax
year, see Cash method partnership under
How To Amortize, later.
Organizational costs include the following
fees.
 Legal fees for services incident to the
organization of the partnership, such as
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 33

negotiation and preparation of the part-
nership agreement.
 Accounting fees for services incident to
the organization of the partnership.
 Filing fees.
Nonqualifying costs. The following costs
cannot be amortized.
 The cost of acquiring assets for the part-
nership or transferring assets to the
partnership.
 The cost of admitting or removing part-
ners, other than at the time the partner-
ship is first organized.
 The cost of making a contract concerning
the operation of the partnership trade or
business (including a contract between a
partner and the partnership).
 Syndication fees. These are costs for is-
suing and marketing interests in the
partnership (such as commissions, pro-
fessional fees, and printing costs). They
are capital expenses that cannot be de-
preciated or amortized.
How To Amortize
You deduct start-up and organizational costs
in equal amounts over a period of 60 months
or more. You can choose a period for start-up
costs that is different from the period you
choose for organizational costs, as long as
both are 60 months or more. Once you
choose an amortization period, you cannot
change it.
To figure your deduction, divide your total
start-up or organizational costs by the months
in the amortization period. The result is the
amount you can deduct each month.
Cash method partnership. A partnership
using the cash method of accounting cannot
deduct an organizational cost it has not paid
by the end of the tax year. However, any cost
the partnership could have deducted as an
organizational cost in an earlier tax year (if it
had been paid that year) can be deducted in
the tax year of payment.
When to begin amortization. The amorti-
zation period starts with the month you begin
business operations.
How To Make the Choice
To choose to amortize start-up or organiza-
tional costs, you must attach Form 4562 and
an accompanying statement (explained later)
to your return for the first tax year you are in
business. If you have both start-up and or-
ganizational costs, attach a separate state-
ment to your return for each type of costs.
Generally, you must file the return by the
due date (including any extensions). How-
ever, if you timely filed your return for the year
without making the choice, you can still make
the choice by filing an amended return within
6 months of the due date of the return (ex-
cluding extensions). For more information,
see the instructions for Part VI of Form 4562.
Once you make the choice to amortize
start-up or organizational costs, you cannot
revoke it.
Corporations and partnerships. If your
business is organized as a corporation or
partnership, only your corporation or partner-
ship can choose to amortize its start-up or
organizational costs. A shareholder or partner
cannot make this choice. You, as shareholder
or partner, cannot amortize any costs you
incur in setting up your corporation or part-
nership. The corporation or partnership can
amortize these costs.
TIP
You, as an individual, can choose to
amortize costs you incur to investigate
an interest in an existing partnership.
These costs qualify as business start-up costs
if you succeed in acquiring an interest in the
partnership.
Start-up costs.If you choose to amortize
your start-up costs, complete Part VI of Form
4562 and prepare a separate statement that
contains the following information.
 A description of the business to which the
start-up costs relate.
 A description of each start-up cost in-
curred.
 The month your active business began
(or the month you acquired the business).
 The number of months in your amorti-
zation period (not less than 60).
Filing the statement early.You can
choose to amortize your start-up costs by fil-
ing the statement with a return for any tax
year before the year your active business
begins. If you file the statement early, the
choice becomes effective in the month of the
tax year your active business begins.
Revised statement. You can file a re-
vised statement to include any start-up costs
not included in your original statement. How-
ever, you cannot include on the revised
statement any cost you previously treated on
your return as a cost other than a start-up
cost. You can file the revised statement with
a return filed after the return on which you
choose to amortize your start-up costs.
Organizational costs. If you choose to
amortize your corporation's or partnership's
organizational costs, complete Part VI of
Form 4562 and prepare a separate statement
that contains the following information.
 A description of each cost.
 The amount of each cost.
 The date each cost was incurred.
 The month your corporation or partner-
ship began active business (or the month
it acquired the business).
 The number of months in your amorti-
zation period (not less than 60).
Partnerships. The statement prepared
for a cash basis partnership must also indi-
cate the amount paid before the end of the
year for each cost.
TIP
You do not need to separately list any
partnership organizational cost that is
less than $10. Instead, you can list the
total amount of these costs with the dates the
first and last costs were incurred.
After a partnership makes the choice to
amortize organizational costs, it can file an
amended return to include additional organ-
izational costs.
Reforestation Costs
You can choose to amortize a limited amount
of reforestation costs for qualified timber
property over a period of 84 months. Refor-
estation costs are the direct costs of planting
or seeding for forestation or reforestation.
The choice to amortize reforestation costs
incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or
estate must be made by the partnership,
corporation, or estate. A partner, shareholder,
or beneficiary cannot make that choice.
Qualifying costs.Qualifying costs include
only those costs you must capitalize and in-
clude in the adjusted basis of the property.
They include costs for the following items.
 Site preparation.
 Seeds or seedlings.
 Labor.
 Tools.
 Depreciation on equipment used in
planting and seeding.
Costs you can deduct currently are not quali-
fying costs.
If the government reimburses you for re-
forestation costs under a cost-sharing pro-
gram, you can amortize these costs only if
you include the reimbursement in your in-
come.
Qualified timber property.Qualified timber
property is property that contains trees in
significant commercial quantities. It can be a
woodlot or other site that you own or lease.
The property qualifies only if it meets all the
following requirements.
1) It is located in the United States.
2) It is held for the growing and cutting of
timber you will either use in, or sell for
use in, the commercial production of
timber products.
3) It consists of at least one acre planted
with tree seedlings in the manner
normally used in forestation or refor-
estation.
Qualified timber property does not include
property on which you have planted shelter
belts or ornamental trees, such as Christmas
trees.
Annual limit.Each year, you can choose to
amortize up to $10,000 ($5,000 if you are
married filing separately) of qualifying costs
you pay or incur during the tax year. You
cannot carry over or carry back qualifying
costs over the annual limit. The annual limit
applies to qualifying costs for all your qualified
timber property.
If your qualifying costs are more than
$10,000 for more than one piece of timber
property, you can divide the annual limit
among any of the properties in any manner
you wish.
Example. You incurred $10,000 of quali-
fying costs on each of four qualified timber
properties last year. You can allocate $2,500
to each property, $5,000 to two properties,
or the entire $10,000 to any one property, or
you can divide the $10,000 among some or
all of the properties in any other manner.
Page 34 Chapter 9  Amortization

Partnerships and S corporations. A
partnership or S corporation can choose to
amortize up to $10,000 of qualifying refor-
estation costs each tax year. A partner's or
shareholder's share of these amortizable
costs is figured under the general rules for
allocating items of income, loss, deductions,
etc., of a partnership or S corporation.
The partner or shareholder is also subject
to an annual limit of $10,000 ($5,000 if mar-
ried filing separately) on qualifying costs. This
limit applies to all the partner's or sharehold-
er's qualifying costs, regardless of their
source.
Example. You are single and a partner
in two partnerships, both of which incurred
qualifying reforestation costs of more than
$10,000 for the year. Each partnership chose
to amortize these costs up to the $10,000
annual limit. Your share of that $10,000 is
$6,000 for one partnership and $8,000 for the
other. Although your qualifying costs total
$14,000, the amount you can amortize is
limited to $10,000.
Estates.Estates can choose to amortize
up to $10,000 of qualified reforestation costs
each tax year. These amortizable costs are
divided between the estate and the income
beneficiary based on the income of the estate
allocable to each. The amortizable cost allo-
cated to the beneficiary is subject to the
beneficiary's annual limit.
Amortization period.The 84-month amorti-
zation period starts on the first day of the first
month of the second half of the tax year you
incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year
taxpayer). You can claim amortization de-
ductions for no more than 6 months of the first
and last (eighth) tax years of the period.
Example. Last year (a full 12-month tax
year), John Jones incurred qualifying refor-
estation costs of $8,400. His monthly amorti-
zation deduction ($100) is figured by dividing
$8,400 by 84 months. Since it was the first
year of the 84-month period, he can deduct
only $600 ($100 × 6 months).
Maximum annual amortization deduction.
The maximum annual amortization deduction
for costs incurred in any tax year is $1,428.57
($10,000 ÷ 7). The maximum deduction in the
first and last tax year of the 84-month
amortization period is one half of $1,428.57,
or $714.29.
Life tenant and remainderman.If one per-
son holds the property for life with the re-
mainder going to another person, the life
tenant is entitled to the full amortization (up
to the annual limit) for reforestation costs
made by the life tenant. Any remainder inter-
est in the property is ignored for amortization
purposes.
Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timber
property within 10 years after the tax year you
incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report
any gain as ordinary income up to the
amortization you took. See chapter 3 of Pub-
lication 544 for more information.
Investment credit.Amortizable reforestation
costs qualify for the investment credit,
whether or not they are amortized. See the
instructions for Form 3468 for information on
the investment credit.
How to make the choice. To choose to
amortize qualifying reforestation costs, enter
your deduction in Part VI of Form 4562 and
attach a statement that contains the following
information.
 A description of the costs and the dates
you incurred them.
 A description of the type of timber being
grown and the purpose for which it is
grown.
Attach a separate statement for each property
for which you amortize reforestation costs.
Generally, you must make the choice on
a timely filed return (including extensions) for
the tax year in which you incurred the costs.
However, if you timely filed your return for the
year without making the choice, you can still
make the choice by filing an amended return
within 6 months of the due date of the return
(excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562
and the statement to the amended return and
write “FILED PURSUANT TO SECTION
301.9100–2” on Form 4562. File the amended
return at the same address you filed the ori-
ginal return.
Where to report.The following chart shows
where to report your amortization deduction
for reforestation costs.
Partner or shareholder.If you are a
partner in a partnership or a shareholder in
an S corporation, report any allocated
amortization for reforestation costs on a sep-
arate line in Part II of Schedule E (Form
1040). However, if you have other reforesta-
tion costs you are amortizing, this deduction
may be limited. See Annual limit and Maxi-
mum annual amortization deduction, earlier.
Estate.If the estate does not file Sched-
ule C or F for the activity in which the refor-
estation costs were incurred, include the
amortization deduction on line 15a of Form
1041.
Revoking the choice. You must get IRS
approval to revoke your choice to amortize
reforestation costs. Your application to revoke
the choice must include your name, address,
the years for which your choice was in effect,
and your reason for revoking it. You, or your
duly authorized representative, must sign the
application and file it at least 90 days before
the due date (without extensions) for filing
your income tax return for the first tax year for
which your choice is to end.
Send the application to:
Commissioner of Internal Revenue
Washington, DC 20224
Pollution
Control Facilities
You can choose to amortize over 60 months
the cost of a certified pollution control facility.
Certified pollution control facility.A certi-
fied pollution control facility is a new identifi-
able treatment facility used, in connection with
a plant or other property in operation before
1976, to reduce or control water or atmo-
spheric pollution or contamination. The facility
must do so by removing, changing, disposing,
storing, or preventing the creation or emission
of pollutants, contaminants, wastes, or heat.
The facility must be certified by state and
federal certifying authorities.
The facility must not significantly increase
the output or capacity, extend the useful life,
or reduce the total operating costs of the plant
or other property. Also, it must not signif-
icantly change the nature of the manufactur-
ing or production process or facility.
The federal certifying authority will not
certify your property to the extent it appears
you will recover (over the property's useful
life) all or part of its cost from the profit based
on its operation (such as through sales of re-
covered wastes). The federal certifying au-
thority will describe the nature of the potential
cost recovery. You must then reduce the
amortizable basis of the facility.
New identifiable treatment facility.A
new identifiable treatment facility is tangible
depreciable property that is identifiable as a
treatment facility. It does not include a build-
ing and its structural components unless the
building is exclusively a treatment facility.
Basis reduction for corporations.A cor-
poration must reduce the amortizable basis
of a pollution control facility by 20% before
figuring the amortization deduction.
More information.For more information on
the amortization of pollution control facilities,
see section 169 of the Internal Revenue Code
and the related regulations.
Research and
Experimental Costs
You can amortize your research and exper-
imental costs, deduct them as current busi-
ness expenses, or write them off over a
10-year period. If you choose to amortize
these costs, deduct them in equal amounts
over 60 months or more. The amortization
period begins the month you first receive an
economic benefit from the research. For a
definition of “research and experimental
costs” and information on deducting them as
current business expenses, see chapter 8.
Optional write-off method. Rather than
amortize these costs or deduct them as a
current expense, you have the option of de-
ducting (writing off) research and exper-
imental costs ratably over a 10-year period
beginning with the tax year in which you in-
curred the costs.
For more information on the optional
write-off method, see Internal Revenue Code
section 59(e).
If you file . . . The deduction goes on . . .
Schedule C
(Form 1040) Line 27
Schedule F
(Form 1040) Line 34
Form 1120 Line 26
Form 1120-A Line 22
Form 1120S Schedules K and K-1
Form 1065 Schedules K and K-1
None of the above
Line 32 of Form 1040
(identify as “RFST”)
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 35

Costs you can amortize.You can amortize
costs chargeable to a capital account if you
meet both the following requirements.
 You paid or incurred the costs in your
trade or business.
 You are not deducting the costs currently.
How to make the choice. To choose to
amortize research and experimental costs,
enter your deduction in Part VI of Form 4562
and attach it to your income tax return. Gen-
erally, you must file the return by the due date
(including extensions). However, if you timely
filed your return for the year without making
the choice, you can still make the choice by
filing an amended return within 6 months of
the due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). Attach Form 4562 to the amended
return and write “FILED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 301.9100–2” on Form 4562. File
the amended return at the same address you
filed the original return.
Your choice is binding for the year it is
made and for all later years unless you get
IRS approval to change to a different method.
More information.For more information on
amortizing research and development costs,
see section 174 of the Internal Revenue Code
and the related regulations.
Bond Premium
Bond premium is the amount by which your
basis in a bond right after you get it is more
than the total of all amounts payable on the
bond after you get it (other than payments of
qualified stated interest).
The term “bond,” as used in this dis-
cussion, means any interest-bearing bond,
debenture, note, or certificate or other evi-
dence of debt. The term does not include any
obligation listed below.
 Your stock in trade.
 Property that would properly be included
in your inventory if on hand at the close
of the tax year.
 Property held by you primarily for sale to
customers in the ordinary course of your
trade or business.
Tax-exempt bonds. If the bond yields tax-
exempt interest, you must amortize the pre-
mium. You cannot deduct the amortizable
premium in figuring your taxable income.
However, each year you must reduce your
basis in the bond by the amortization for the
year.
Taxable bonds.You can choose to amortize
the premium on taxable bonds. This gener-
ally means that each year, over the life of the
bond, you use part of the premium to reduce
the amount of interest includible in your in-
come. If you make this choice, you must re-
duce your basis in the bond by the amorti-
zation for the year. The premium on the bond
is part of your basis in the bond.
Inflation-indexed instruments. An
inflation-indexed debt instrument is generally
a debt instrument on which the payments are
adjusted for inflation and deflation (such as
Treasury inflation-indexed securities). Deter-
mine the premium on an inflation-indexed
debt instrument as of the date you acquire the
instrument by assuming that there will be no
inflation or deflation over the remaining term
of the instrument. Allocate the premium over
the remaining term of the instrument by
making the same assumption. Reduce the
instrument's interest income for the tax year
by the premium allocable to the tax year. Use
any excess premium allocable to the tax year
to offset the original issue discount on the in-
strument for the year.
Basis adjustment. If you are required to
amortize bond premium, or choose to do so,
you must decrease the basis of the bond by
the amortizable bond premium. The result is
the adjusted basis you use to figure gain or
loss on the sale or redemption of the bond.
More information. For more information on
how to figure and report bond premium, see
Publication 550.
Cost of
Getting a Lease
If you get a lease for business property, you
recover the cost by amortizing it over the term
of the lease. The term of the lease for
amortization purposes includes all renewal
options (and any other period for which the
lessee and lessor reasonably expect the
lease to be renewed) if less than 75% of the
cost of getting the lease is attributable to the
term of the lease remaining on the acquisition
date. The term of the lease remaining on the
acquisition date does not include any period
for which the lease may later be renewed,
extended, or continued under an option
exercisable by the lessee.
Enter your deduction in Part VI of Form
4562 if you must file that form, or on the ap-
propriate line of your tax return.
10.
Depletion
Important Change
Marginal production of oil and gas.The
suspension of the taxable income limit on
percentage depletion from the marginal pro-
duction of oil and natural gas has been ex-
tended to tax years beginning after 1999 and
before 2002. For more information on mar-
ginal production, see section 613A(c) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
Important Reminder
Alternative minimum tax.Individuals, cor-
porations, estates, and trusts who claim de-
pletion deductions may be liable for alterna-
tive minimum tax.
For more information on alternative mini-
mum tax, see the following sources.
Introduction
Depletion is the using up of natural resources
by mining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The
depletion deduction allows an owner or oper-
ator to account for the reduction of a product's
reserves.
There are two ways of figuring depletion:
cost depletion and percentage depletion. For
mineral property, you generally must use the
method that gives you the larger deduction;
for standing timber, you must use cost de-
pletion.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Who can claim depletion
 Mineral property
 Timber
Who Can
Claim Depletion
If you have an economic interest in mineral
property or standing timber, you can take a
deduction for depletion. More than one per-
son can have an economic interest in the
same mineral deposit or timber.
You have an economic interest if both
the following apply.
 You have acquired by investment a legal
interest in mineral deposits or standing
timber.
 You have the right to income from the
extraction of the mineral or cutting of the
timber, to which you must look for a re-
turn of your capital investment.
A contractual relationship that allows you an
economic or monetary advantage from pro-
ducts of the mineral deposit or standing tim-
ber is not, in itself, an economic interest. A
production payment carved out of, or retained
on the sale of, mineral property is not an
economic interest.
Mineral Property
The term “mineral property” means each
separate interest you own in each mineral
deposit in each separate tract or parcel of
land. You can treat mineral properties sepa-
rately or as a group. See section 614 of the
Internal Revenue Code for rules on how to
treat separate properties.
Mineral property includes oil and gas
wells, mines, and other natural deposits (in-
cluding geothermal deposits).
There are two ways of figuring depletion
on mineral property.
If you are: See:
An individual The instructions for Form
6251, Alternative Minimum
Tax— Individuals.
A corporation Form 4626, Alternative Mini-
mum Tax — Corporations.
An estate or trust Form 1041, U.S. Income Tax
Return for Estates and Trusts,
and its instructions.
Page 36 Chapter 10  Depletion

 Cost depletion.
 Percentage depletion.
Generally, you must use the method that
gives you the larger deduction. However, un-
less you are an independent producer or
royalty owner, you generally cannot use per-
centage depletion for oil and gas wells. See
Oil and Gas Wells, later.
Cost Depletion
To figure cost depletion you must first deter-
mine the following.
 The property's basis for depletion.
 The total recoverable units in the proper-
ty's natural deposit.
 The number of units sold during the tax
year.
Basis for depletion.To figure the property's
basis for depletion, subtract all the following
from the property's adjusted basis.
1) The amounts recoverable through:
 a) Depreciation deductions,
b) Deferred expenses (including de-
ferred exploration and development
costs), and
c) Deductions other than depletion.
2) The residual value of land and improve-
ments at the end of operations.
3) The cost or value of land acquired for
purposes other than mineral production.
Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of
your property is your original cost or other
basis, plus certain additions and improve-
ments, and minus certain deductions such as
depletion allowed or allowable and casualty
losses. Your adjusted basis can never be less
than zero. See Publication 551, Basis of As-
sets, for more information on adjusted basis.
Total recoverable units.The total recover-
able units is the sum of the following.
1) The number of units of mineral remaining
at the end of the year (including units
recovered but not sold).
2) The number of units sold during the tax
year (determined under your method of
accounting, as explained next).
You must estimate or determine recover-
able units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels,
thousands of cubic feet, or other measure)
of mineral products using the current industry
method and using the most accurate and re-
liable information you can obtain.
Number of units sold.The number of units
sold during the tax year is one of the follow-
ing.
 The units sold for which you receive
payment during your tax year (regardless
of the year of sale), if you use the cash
method of accounting.
 The units sold based on your inventories,
if you use the accrual method of ac-
counting.
The number of units sold during the tax
year does not include any on which depletion
deductions were allowed or allowable in ear-
lier years.
Figuring the cost depletion deduction.
Once you have figured your property's basis
for depletion, the total recoverable units, and
the number of units sold during the tax year,
you can figure your cost depletion deduction
by taking the following steps.
Percentage Depletion
To figure percentage depletion, you multiply
a certain percentage, specified for each min-
eral, by your gross income from the property
during the tax year.
Gross income. When figuring your percent-
age depletion, subtract from your gross in-
come from the property the following
amounts.
 Any rents or royalties you pay or incur for
the property.
 The part of any bonus you paid for a
lease on the property allocable to the
product sold (or that otherwise gives rise
to gross income) for the tax year.
A bonus payment includes a bonus for either
a mineral lease or an oil and gas lease.
Use the following fraction to figure the part
of the bonus you must subtract.
Taxable income limit.The percentage de-
pletion deduction cannot be more than 50%
(100% for oil and gas property) of your taxa-
ble income from the property figured without
the depletion deduction.
The following rules apply when figuring
your taxable income from the property for
purposes of the taxable income limit.
 Do not deduct any net operating loss
deduction from the gross income from the
property.
 Corporations do not deduct charitable
contributions from the gross income from
the property.
 If, during the year, you dispose of an item
of section 1245 property that was used
in connection with mineral property, re-
duce any allowable deduction for mining
expenses by the part of any gain you
must report as ordinary income that is
allocable to the mineral property. See
section 1.613–5(b)(1) of the regulations
for information on how to figure the ordi-
nary gain allocable to the property.
CAUTION
!
For tax years beginning after 1997
and before 2002, percentage de-
pletion on the marginal production of
oil or natural gas is not limited to taxable in-
come from the property figured without the
depletion deduction.
Oil and Gas Wells
Generally, only independent producers and
royalty owners can claim percentage de-
pletion for any oil or gas well. However, if you
are not an independent producer or royalty
owner, you may be able to claim percentage
depletion for the following items.
 Natural gas sold under a fixed contract.
 Natural gas from geopressured brine.
For information on the depletion deduction for
these items, see Natural Gas Wells, later.
Independent Producers
If you are an independent producer, you fig-
ure percentage depletion using a rate of 15%
of the gross income from the property based
on your average daily production of domestic
crude oil or domestic natural gas up to your
depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-
ever, certain refiners and retailers, as ex-
plained next, cannot claim percentage de-
pletion. For information on figuring the
deduction, see Figuring percentage depletion,
later.
Refiners who cannot claim percentage
depletion. You cannot claim percentage
depletion if you or a related person refine
crude oil and you and the related person re-
fined more than 50,000 barrels on any day
during the tax year.
Related person.You and another person
are related persons if either of you holds a
significant ownership interest in the other
person or if a third person holds a significant
ownership interest in both of you.
For example, a corporation, partnership,
estate, or trust and anyone who holds a sig-
nificant ownership interest in it are related
persons. A partnership and a trust are related
persons if one person holds a significant
ownership interest in each of them.
For purposes of the related person rules,
significant ownership interest means direct
or indirect ownership of 5% or more of any
one of the following interests.
 The value of the outstanding stock of a
corporation.
 The interest in the profits or capital of a
partnership.
 The beneficial interests in an estate or
trust.
Any interest owned by or for a corporation,
partnership, trust, or estate is considered to
be owned directly both by itself and propor-
tionately by its shareholders, partners, or
beneficiaries.
Retailers who cannot claim percentage
depletion. You cannot claim percentage
depletion if both the following apply.
1) You sell oil or natural gas or their by-
products directly or through a related
person in any of the following situations.
a) Through a retail outlet operated by
you or a related person.
b) To any person who is required un-
der an agreement with you or a re-
lated person to use a trademark,
trade name, or service mark or
name owned by you or a related
person in marketing or distributing
oil, natural gas, or their by-products.
Step Action Result
 1 Divide your property's
basis for depletion by
total recoverable units.
Rate per unit.
 2 Multiply the rate per
unit by units sold
during the tax year.
Cost depletion
deduction.
Number of units sold in the tax year
Recoverable units from the property× Bonus
Payments
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 37

c) To any person given authority under
an agreement with you or a related
person to occupy any retail outlet
owned, leased, or controlled by you
or a related person.
2) The combined gross receipts from sales
(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas,
or their by-products of all retail outlets
taken into account in (1) are more than
$5 million for the tax year.
For the purpose of determining if this rule
applies, do not count the following.
 Bulk sales of oil or natural gas to com-
mercial or industrial users.
 Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the De-
partment of Defense.
 Sales of oil or natural gas or their by-
products outside the United States if
none of your domestic production or that
of a related person is exported during the
tax year or the prior tax year.
Sales through a related person.You
are considered to be selling through a related
person if any sale by the related person
produces gross income from which you may
benefit because of your direct or indirect
ownership interest in the person.
You are not considered to be selling
through a related person who is a retailer if
all the following apply.
 You do not have a significant ownership
interest in the retailer.
 You sell your production to persons who
are not related to either you or the
retailer.
 The retailer does not buy oil or natural
gas from your customers or persons re-
lated to your customers.
 There are no arrangements for the
retailer to acquire oil or natural gas you
produced for resale or made available for
purchase by the retailer.
 Neither you nor the retailer knows of or
controls the final disposition of the oil or
natural gas you sold or the original source
of the petroleum products the retailer ac-
quired for resale.
Transfers. You cannot claim percentage
depletion if you received your interest in a
proven oil or gas property by transfer after
1974 and before October 12, 1990. For a
definition of the term “transfer,” see section
1.613A–7(n) of the regulations.
Figuring percentage depletion.Generally,
as an independent producer you figure your
percentage depletion by computing your av-
erage daily production of domestic oil or gas
and comparing it to your depletable oil or gas
quantity. If your average daily production
does not exceed your depletable oil or gas
quantity, you figure your percentage depletion
by multiplying the gross income from the oil
or gas property by 15%. If your average daily
production of domestic oil or gas exceeds
your depletable oil or gas quantity, you must
make an allocation as explained later under
Average daily production exceeds depletable
quantities.
In addition, there is a limit on the per-
centage depletion deduction. See Taxable
income limit, later.
Average daily production.Figure your av-
erage daily production by dividing your total
domestic production for the tax year by the
number of days in your tax year.
Part interest.If you have a part interest
in the production from a property, figure your
share of the production by multiplying total
production from the property by your per-
centage of interest in the revenues from the
property.
You have a part interest in the production
from a property if you have a net profits in-
terest in the property. To figure the share of
production for your net profits interest, you
must determine your percentage participation
(as measured by the net profits) in the gross
revenue from the property. To figure this
percentage, you divide the income you re-
ceive for your net profits interest by the gross
revenue from the property.
Example. John Oak owns oil property in
which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits inter-
est. During the year, the property produced
10,000 barrels of oil, which John sold for
$200,000. John had expenses of $90,000 at-
tributable to the property. The property gen-
erated a net profit of $110,000. Paul received
income of $22,000 ($110,000 × .20) for his
net profits interest.
Paul determined his percentage partici-
pation to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the in-
come he received) by $200,000 (the gross
revenue from the property). Paul determined
his share of the oil production to be 1,100
barrels (10,000 barrels × 11%).
Depletable oil or natural gas quantity.
Generally, your depletable oil quantity is
1,000 barrels and your depletable natural gas
quantity is 6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the
number of barrels of your depletable oil
quantity that you choose to apply. If you claim
depletion on both oil and natural gas, you
must reduce your depletable oil quantity by
the number of barrels you use to figure your
depletable natural gas quantity. If you are in-
volved in marginal production, see section
613A(c) of the Internal Revenue Code to fig-
ure your depletable oil or natural gas quantity.
You must allocate the depletable oil or gas
quantity among the following in proportion to
each entity's or family member's production
of domestic oil or gas for the year.
 Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50%
or more of the beneficial interest is owned
by the same or related persons (consid-
ering only persons that own at least 5%
of the beneficial interest).
 You and your spouse and minor children.
For purposes of this allocation, a related per-
son is anyone mentioned under Related per-
son in chapter 12 except that item (1) in that
discussion includes only an individual, his or
her spouse, and minor children.
Members of the same controlled group of
corporations are treated as one taxpayer
when figuring the depletable oil or natural gas
quantity. They share the depletable quantity,
and one member's share of the group's
depletable quantity will reduce the other
members' share of the group's depletable
quantity. Under this rule, a controlled group
of corporations is defined in section 1563(a)
of the Internal Revenue Code, except that
“more than 50%” is substituted for “at least
80%” in that definition.
Gross income from oil and gas property.
For purposes of percentage depletion, gross
income from oil and gas property is the
amount you receive from the sale of the oil
or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well. If
you do not sell the oil or gas on the property,
but manufacture or convert it into a refined
product before sale or transport it before sale,
the gross income from the property is the
representative market or field price (RMFP)
of the oil or gas, before conversion or trans-
portation.
If you sold gas after you removed it from
the premises for a price that is lower than the
RMFP, determine gross income from the
property for percentage depletion purposes
without regard to the RMFP.
Gross income from the property does not
include lease bonuses, advance royalties, or
other amounts payable without regard to
production from the property.
Average daily production exceeds
depletable quantities.If your average daily
production for the year is more than your
depletable oil or natural gas quantity, figure
your allowance for depletion for each do-
mestic oil or natural gas property as follows.
1) Figure your average daily production of
oil or natural gas for the year.
2) Figure your depletable oil or natural gas
quantity for the year.
3) Figure depletion for all oil or natural gas
produced from the property using a per-
centage depletion rate of 15%.
4) Multiply the result figured in (3) by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the
result figured in (2) and the denominator
of which is the result figured in (1). This
is your depletion allowance for that
property for the year.
Taxable income limit.If you are an inde-
pendent producer of oil and gas, your de-
duction for percentage depletion is limited to
the smaller of the following.
 Your taxable income from the property
figured without the deduction for de-
pletion.
 65% of your taxable income from all
sources, figured without the depletion al-
lowance, any net operating loss
carryback, and any capital loss
carryback.
You can carry over to the following year any
amount you cannot deduct because of the
65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your
depletion allowance (before applying any
limits) for the following year.
Temporary suspension of taxable in-
come limit for marginal production. For tax
years beginning after 1997 and before 2002,
percentage depletion on the marginal pro-
duction of oil or natural gas is not limited to
taxable income from the property figured
without the depletion deduction. For informa-
tion on marginal production, see section
613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Partnerships and S Corporations
Generally, each partner or shareholder, and
not the partnership or S corporation, figures
the depletion allowance separately. (How-
ever, see Electing large partnerships must
figure depletion allowance, later.) Each part-
ner or shareholder must decide whether to
Page 38 Chapter 10  Depletion

use cost or percentage depletion. If a partner
or shareholder uses percentage depletion, he
or she must apply the 65%-of-taxable-income
limit using his or her taxable income from all
sources.
Partner's or shareholder's adjusted basis.
The partnership or S corporation must allo-
cate to each partner his or her share of the
adjusted basis of each oil or gas property held
by the partnership or S corporation. The
partnership or S corporation makes the allo-
cation as of the date it acquires the oil or gas
property.
The partner's share of the adjusted basis
of the oil or gas property generally is figured
according to that partner's interest in part-
nership capital. However, in some cases, it is
figured according to the partner's interest in
partnership income.
The partnership or S corporation adjusts
the partner's or shareholder's share of the
adjusted basis of the oil and gas property for
any capital expenditures made for the prop-
erty and for any change in partnership or S
corporation interests.
RECORDS
Each partner or shareholder must
separately keep records of his or her
share of the adjusted basis in each
oil and gas property of the partnership or S
corporation. The partner or shareholder must
reduce his or her adjusted basis by the de-
pletion he or she takes on the property each
year. The partner or shareholder must use
that reduced adjusted basis to figure cost
depletion or his or her gain or loss if the
partnership or S corporation disposes of the
property.
Reporting the deduction.Deduct oil and
gas depletion for a partnership or S corpo-
ration interest on Schedule E (Form 1040).
The instructions for Schedule E explain where
to report your income and deductions and
whether you need to file either of the following
forms.
 Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.
 Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-
tions.
Electing large partnerships must figure
depletion allowance.For partnership tax
years beginning after 1997, an electing large
partnership, rather than each partner, gener-
ally must figure the depletion allowance. The
partnership figures the depletion allowance
without taking into account the limits on the
amount of production and taxable income.
Also, the adjusted basis of a partner's interest
in the partnership is not affected by the de-
pletion allowance.
An electing large partnership is one that
meets both the following requirements.
 The partnership had 100 or more part-
ners in the preceding year.
 The partnership chooses to be an elect-
ing large partnership.
Disqualified partners.An electing large
partnership does not figure the depletion al-
lowance of its disqualified partners. The dis-
qualified partners must figure it themselves,
as explained earlier.
All the following are disqualified partners.
 Refiners who cannot claim percentage
depletion (discussed under Independent
Producers, earlier).
 Retailers who cannot claim percentage
depletion (discussed under Independent
Producers, earlier).
 Any partner whose average daily pro-
duction of domestic crude oil and natural
gas is more than 500 barrels during the
tax year in which the partnership tax year
ends. Average daily production is dis-
cussed earlier.
Natural Gas Wells
You can use percentage depletion for natural
gas sold under a fixed contract or produced
from geopressured brine.
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract.
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract quali-
fies for a percentage depletion rate of 22%.
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract is
domestic natural gas sold by the producer
under a contract provided that the price can-
not be adjusted to reflect any increase in the
seller's tax liability because of the repeal of
percentage depletion for gas. The contract
must have been in effect from February 1,
1975, until the date of sale of the gas. Price
increases after February 1, 1975, are pre-
sumed to take the increase in tax liability into
account unless demonstrated otherwise by
clear and convincing evidence.
Natural gas from geopressured brine.
Qualified natural gas from geopressured brine
is eligible for a percentage depletion rate of
10%. Qualified natural gas from geopres-
sured brine is natural gas that is both the fol-
lowing.
 Produced from a well you began to drill
after September 1978 and before 1984.
 Determined in accordance with section
503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978
to be produced from geopressured brine.
Mines and
Geothermal Deposits
Certain mines, wells, and other natural de-
posits, including geothermal deposits, qualify
for percentage depletion.
Mines and other natural deposits. The
percentage of your gross income from a na-
tural deposit that you can deduct as depletion
depends on the type of deposit.
The following is a list of the depletion
percentages for the more common minerals. 
You can find a complete list of deposits
and their percentage depletion rates in sec-
tion 613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Corporate deduction for iron ore and
coal. The percentage depletion deduction of
a corporation for iron ore and coal (including
lignite) is reduced by 20% of:
 The percentage depletion deduction for
the tax year (figured without regard to this
reduction), minus
 The adjusted basis of the property at the
close of the tax year (figured without the
depletion deduction for the tax year).
Gross income from mining. For property
other than a geothermal deposit or an oil or
gas well, gross income from the property
means the gross income from mining. Mining
includes all the following.
 Extracting ores or minerals from the
ground.
 Applying certain treatment processes.
 Transporting ores or minerals (generally,
not more than 50 miles) from the point
of extraction to the plants or mills in which
the treatment processes are applied.
Excise tax. Gross income from mining
includes the separately stated excise tax re-
ceived by a mine operator from the sale of
coal to compensate the operator for the ex-
cise tax the mine operator must pay to finance
black lung benefits.
Extraction.Extracting ores or minerals
from the ground includes extraction by mine
owners or operators of ores or minerals from
the waste or residue of prior mining. This
does not apply to extraction from waste or
residue of prior mining by the purchaser of the
waste or residue or the purchaser of the rights
to extract ores or minerals from the waste or
residue.
Treatment processes. The processes
included as mining depend on the ore or
mineral mined. To qualify as mining, the
treatment processes must be applied by the
mine owner or operator. For a listing of treat-
ment processes considered as mining, see
section 613(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue
Code and the related regulations.
Transportation of more than 50 miles.
If the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must
be transported more than 50 miles to plants
or mills to be treated because of physical and
other requirements, the additional authorized
transportation is included in the computation
of gross income from mining.
If you wish to include transportation
of more than 50 miles in the compu-
tation of gross income from mining,
file an application in duplicate with the IRS.
Include on the application the facts concern-
ing the physical and other requirements which
prevented the construction and operation of
the plant within 50 miles of the point of ex-
traction. Send this application to:
Internal Revenue Service
Washington, DC 20224
Attention: Assistant Chief Counsel,
Passthroughs and Special Industries
Disposal of coal or iron ore.You cannot
take a depletion deduction on coal (including
lignite) or iron ore mined in the United States
if both the following apply.
DEPOSITS PERCENT
Sulphur, uranium, and, if from deposits
in the United States, asbestos, lead ore,
zinc ore, nickel ore, and mica ............... 22
Gold, silver, copper, iron ore, and certain
oil shale, if from deposits in the United
States ..................................................... 15
Borax, granite, limestone, marble,
mollusk shells, potash, slate, soapstone,
and carbon dioxide produced from a well 14
Coal, lignite, and sodium chloride ......... 10
Clay and shale used or sold for use in
making sewer pipe or bricks or used or
sold for use as sintered or burned light-
weight aggregates ................................. 7
1 / 2
Clay used or sold for use in making
drainage and roofing tile, flower pots,
and kindred products, and gravel, sand,
and stone (other than stone used or sold
for use by a mine owner or operator as
dimension or ornamental stone) ............ 5
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 39

 You disposed of it after holding it for more
than 1 year.
 You retained an economic interest in it.
Treat any gain on the disposition as a capital
gain.
Disposal to related person.This rule
does not apply if you dispose of the coal or
iron ore to one of the following persons.
 A related person (as listed in chapter 12).
 A person owned or controlled by the
same interests that own or control you.
Geothermal deposits.Geothermal deposits
located in the United States or its pos-
sessions qualify for a percentage depletion
rate of 15%. A geothermal deposit is a
geothermal reservoir of natural heat stored in
rocks or in a watery liquid or vapor. For per-
centage depletion purposes, a geothermal
deposit is not considered a gas well.
Figure gross income from a geothermal
steam well in the same way as for oil and gas
wells. See Gross income from oil and gas
property, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells. 
Lessor's Gross Income
A lessor's gross income from the property that
qualifies for percentage depletion usually is
the total of the royalties received from the
lease. However, for purposes of oil, gas, or
geothermal property, gross income does not
include lease bonuses, advanced royalties,
or other amounts payable without regard to
production from the property.
Bonuses and advanced royalties.Bonuses
received upon the grant of rights and ad-
vanced royalties are payments a lessee
makes to a lessor for the lease or for min-
erals, gas, or oil to be extracted from leased
property. Both types of payments are made
before production. If you are the lessor, your
income from bonuses and advanced royalties
is subject to an allowance for depletion.
Figuring cost or percentage depletion.
To figure cost depletion on a bonus, multiply
your adjusted basis in the property by a frac-
tion, the numerator of which is the bonus and
the denominator of which is the total bonus
and royalties expected to be received. To
figure cost depletion on advanced royalties,
use the computation explained earlier under
Cost Depletion, treating the units for which
the advanced royalty is received as the units
sold.
To figure percentage depletion (for other
than gas, oil, or geothermal property), any
bonus or advanced royalty payments are part
of your gross income from the property.
Terminating the lease.If you receive a
bonus on a lease that expires, terminates, or
is abandoned before you derive any income
from the extraction of mineral or cutting of
timber, include in income the depletion de-
duction you took. Also increase your adjusted
basis in the property to restore the depletion
deduction you previously subtracted.
For advanced royalties, include in income
the depletion claimed on minerals for which
the advanced royalties were paid if the min-
erals were not produced before lease termi-
nation. Increase your adjusted basis in the
property by the amount you include in in-
come.
Delay rentals.These are payments for de-
ferring development of the property. Since
delay rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordi-
nary income that is not subject to depletion.
These rentals can be avoided by either
abandoning the lease, beginning develop-
ment operations, or obtaining production.
Timber
You can figure timber depletion only by the
cost method. Percentage depletion does not
apply to timber. Base your depletion on your
cost or other basis in the timber. Your cost
does not include the cost of land.
Depletion takes place when you cut
standing timber. You can figure your depletion
deduction when the quantity of cut timber is
first accurately measured in the process of
exploitation.
Figuring cost depletion.To figure your cost
depletion allowance, you multiply the number
of timber units cut by your depletion unit.
Timber units.When you acquire timber
property, you must make an estimate of the
quantity of marketable timber that exists on
the property. You measure the timber using
board feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If
you later determine that you have more or
less units of timber, you must adjust the ori-
ginal estimate.
The term timber property means your
economic interest in standing timber in each
tract or block representing a separate timber
account.
Depletion unit.You figure your depletion
unit each year by taking the following steps.
1) Determine your cost or adjusted basis
of the timber on hand at the beginning
of the year.
2) Add to the amount determined in (1) the
cost of any units acquired during the
year and any additions to capital.
3) Figure the number of units to take into
account by adding the number of units
acquired during the year to the number
of units on hand in the account at the
beginning of the year and then adding
(or subtracting) any correction to the es-
timate of the number of units remaining
in the account.
4) Divide the result of (2) by the result of
(3). This is your depletion unit.
Example. You bought a timber tract for
$160,000 and the land was worth as much
as the timber. Your basis for the timber is
$80,000. Based on an estimated one million
board feet (1,000 MBF) of standing timber,
you figure your depletion unit to be $80 per
MBF ($80,000 ÷ 1,000). If you cut 500 MBF
of timber, your depletion allowance would be
$40,000 (500 MBF × $80).
When to claim depletion.Claim your de-
pletion allowance as a deduction in the year
of sale or other disposition of the products cut
from the timber, unless you choose to treat
the cutting of timber as a sale or exchange.
Include allowable depletion for timber pro-
ducts not sold during the tax year the timber
is cut as a cost item in the closing inventory
of timber products for the year. The inventory
is your basis for determining gain or loss in
the tax year you sell the timber products.
Example. Assume the same facts as in
the previous example except that you sold
only half of the timber products in the cutting
year. You would deduct $20,000 of the
$40,000 depletion that year. You would add
the remaining $20,000 depletion to your
closing inventory of timber products.
Choosing to treat the cutting of timber as
a sale or exchange.You can choose, under
certain circumstances, to treat the cutting of
timber held for more than 1 year as a sale or
exchange. You must make the choice on your
income tax return for the tax year it applies.
If you make this choice, subtract the adjusted
basis for depletion from the fair market value
of the timber on the first day of the tax year
in which you cut it to figure the gain or loss
to report on the cutting. You generally report
the gain as long-term capital gain. The fair
market value then becomes your basis for
figuring your ordinary gain or loss on the sale
or other disposition of the products cut from
the timber. For more information, see Timber
in chapter 2 of Publication 544, Sales and
Other Dispositions of Assets.
Form T. Attach Form T, Forest Activities
Schedules, to your income tax return if you
are claiming a deduction for timber depletion
or choosing to treat the cutting of timber as
a sale or exchange.
11.
Business
Bad Debts
Introduction
If someone owes you money you cannot col-
lect, you have a bad debt. There are two
kinds of bad debts—business bad debts and
nonbusiness bad debts.
Generally, a business bad debt is one that
comes from operating your trade or business.
You can deduct business bad debts as an
expense on your business tax return.
All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad
debts and are deductible as short-term capital
losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more
information on nonbusiness bad debts, see
Publication 550.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Definition of business bad debt
 When a debt is worthless
 How to treat business bad debts
 Recovery of a business bad debt
 Where to deduct business bad debts
Page 40 Chapter 11  Business Bad Debts

Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
/H18554536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
/H18554544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
/H18554550 Investment Income and Expenses
/H18554556 Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
Business Bad Debt
Defined
A business bad debt is a loss from the
worthlessness of a debt that was either of the
following.
 Created or acquired in your trade or
business.
 Closely related to your trade or business
when it became partly or totally
worthless.
The bad debts of a corporation are always
business bad debts.
A debt is closely related to your trade or
business if your primary motive for incurring
the debt is a business reason.
Credit sales.Business bad debts are mainly
the result of credit sales to customers. Goods
and services customers have not paid for are
shown in your books as either accounts
receivable or notes receivable. If you are un-
able to collect any part of these accounts or
notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a
business bad debt. Accounts or notes
receivable valued at fair market value at the
time of the transaction are deductible only at
that value, even though the fair market value
may be less than face value.
You can take a bad debt deduction for
these accounts and notes receivable only if
the amount owed you was included in your
gross income for the year the deduction is
claimed or for a prior year. This applies to
amounts owed you from all sources of taxable
income, such as sales, services, rents, and
interest.
If you qualify under certain rules, you can
use the nonaccrual-experience method of
accounting discussed later. Under this
method, you do not have to accrue income
that, based on your experience, you expect
to be uncollectible.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual
method of accounting, you normally report
income as you earn it. You can take a bad
debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable
if you have included the uncollectible amount
in income.
Cash method. If you use the cash
method of accounting, you normally report
income when you receive payment. You
cannot take a bad debt deduction for amounts
owed to you that you have not received and
cannot collect because you never included
those amounts in income.
Debts from a former business.If you sell
your business but keep its accounts receiv-
able, these debts are business debts since
they arose in your trade or business. If an
account becomes worthless, the loss is a
business bad debt. These accounts would
also be business debts if sold to the new
owner of the business.
If you sell your business to one person
and sell your accounts receivable to someone
else, the character of the debts as business
or nonbusiness is based on the activities of
the new holder of these debts. A loss from the
debts is a business bad debt to the new
holder if that person acquired the debts in his
or her trade or business or if the debts were
closely related to the new holder's trade or
business when they became worthless. Oth-
erwise, a loss from these debts is a nonbusi-
ness bad debt.
Debt acquired from a decedent. The
character of a loss from debt of a business
acquired from a decedent is determined in the
same way as a debt sold by a business. If you
are in a trade or business, a loss from the
debts is a business bad debt if the debts were
closely related to your trade or business when
they became worthless. Otherwise, a loss
from these debts is a nonbusiness bad debt.
Liquidation.If you liquidate your busi-
ness and some of your accounts receivable
become worthless, they are business bad
debts.
Types of Business Bad
Debts
The following are situations that may result in
a business bad debt.
Loans to clients and suppliers.If you make
a loan to a client, supplier, employee, or dis-
tributor for a business reason and it becomes
worthless, you have a business bad debt.
Example. John Smith, an advertising
agent, made loans to certain clients to keep
their business. His main reason for making
these loans was to help his business. One of
these clients later went bankrupt and could
not repay him. Since John's business was the
main reason for making the loan, the debt
was a business debt and he can take a busi-
ness bad debt deduction.
Debts of political parties.If a political party
(or other organization that accepts contribu-
tions or spends money to influence elections)
owes you money and the debt becomes
worthless, you cannot take a bad debt de-
duction unless you use an accrual method of
accounting and meet all the following tests.
1) The debt was from the sale of goods or
services in the ordinary course of your
trade or business.
2) More than 30% of all your receivables
accrued in the year of the sale were from
sales made to political parties.
3) You made substantial continuing efforts
to collect on the debt.
Loan or capital contribution.You cannot
take a bad debt deduction for a loan you
made to a corporation if, based on the facts
and circumstances, the loan is actually a
contribution to capital.
Debts of an insolvent partner. If your
business partnership breaks up and one of
your former partners is insolvent and cannot
pay any of the partnership's debts, you may
have to pay more than your share of the
partnership's debts. If you pay any part of the
insolvent partner's share of the debts, you can
take a bad debt deduction.
Business loan guarantee.If you guarantee
a debt that becomes worthless, the debt can
qualify as a business bad debt if all the fol-
lowing requirements are met.
 You made the guarantee in the course
of your trade or business.
 You have a legal duty to pay the debt.
 You made the guarantee before the debt
became worthless. You meet this re-
quirement if you reasonably expected you
would not have to pay the debt without
full reimbursement from the issuer.
 You receive reasonable consideration for
making the guarantee. You meet this
requirement if you made the guarantee
in accord with normal business practice
or for a good faith business purpose.
Consider any guarantee you make to
protect or improve your job as closely related
to your trade or business as an employee.
Example. Bob Zayne owns the Zayne
Dress Company. He guaranteed payment of
a $20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress
outlet. Elegant Fashions is one of Zayne's
largest clients. Elegant Fashions later filed for
bankruptcy and defaulted on the loan. Mr.
Zayne made full payment to the bank. He can
take a business bad debt deduction, since his
guarantee was made in the course of his
trade or business for a good faith business
purpose. He was motivated by the desire to
retain one of his better clients and keep a
sales outlet.
Deductible in the year paid.You can
deduct a payment you make on a loan you
guaranteed in the year of payment unless you
have rights against the borrower.
Rights against a borrower.When you
make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you
may have the right to take the place of the
lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you
have this right, or some other right to demand
payment from the borrower, you cannot take
a bad debt deduction until these rights be-
come partly or totally worthless.
Bankruptcy claim.You can deduct as a bad
debt only the difference between the amount
owed to you by a bankrupt entity and the
amount you received from the distribution of
its assets.
Sale of mortgaged property.If mortgaged
or pledged property is sold for less than the
debt, the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the
debt after the sale is a bad debt. If the debt
represents capital or an amount you previ-
ously included in income, you can deduct it
as a bad debt in the year it becomes totally
worthless or in the year you charged it off as
partially worthless.
Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts Page 41

When Debt Is
Worthless
You do not have to wait until a debt is due to
determine whether it is worthless. A debt be-
comes worthless when there is no longer any
chance the amount owed will be paid.
It is not necessary to go to court if you can
show that a judgment from the court would
be uncollectible. You must only show that you
have taken reasonable steps to collect the
debt. Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally
good evidence of the worthlessness of at
least a part of an unsecured and unpreferred
debt.
Property received for debt.If you receive
property in partial settlement of a debt, reduce
the debt by the fair market value of the prop-
erty received. You can deduct the remaining
debt as a bad debt in the year you determine
it is worthless.
If you later sell the property, any gain on
the sale is due to the appreciation of the
property after it was used to partially settle the
debt. You must include any gain from the sale
in gross income. The gain is not a recovery
of a bad debt. For information on the sale of
an asset, see Publication 544.
How To Treat
There are two ways to treat business bad
debts.
 The specific charge-off method.
 The nonaccrual-experience method.
Generally, you must use the specific charge-
off method. However, you can use the non-
accrual-experience method if you meet the
requirements discussed later.
Specific Charge-Off Method
If you use the specific charge-off method, you
can deduct specific business bad debts that
become either partly or totally worthless dur-
ing the tax year.
Partly worthless debts.You can deduct
specific bad debts that are partly uncollect-
ible. Your deduction is limited to the amount
you charge off on your books during the tax
year. You do not have to charge off and de-
duct your partly worthless debts annually. You
can delay the charge-off until a later year. You
cannot, however, deduct any part of a debt
after the year it becomes totally worthless.
Deduction disallowed.You can gener-
ally take a partial bad debt deduction only in
the year you make the charge-off on your
books. If the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
does not allow your deduction and the debt
becomes partly worthless in a later tax year,
you can deduct the amount you charge off in
that year plus the amount charged off in the
earlier year. The charge-off in the earlier year,
unless reversed on your books, fulfills the
charge-off requirement for the later year.
Totally worthless debts.Deduct a totally
worthless debt only in the tax year it becomes
totally worthless. Do not include any amount
deducted in an earlier tax year when the debt
was only partly worthless.
You do not have to make an actual
charge-off on your books to claim a bad debt
deduction for a totally worthless debt. How-
ever, you may want to do so. If you do not
and the IRS later rules the debt is only partly
worthless, you will not be allowed a deduction
for the debt in that tax year. A deduction of
a partly worthless bad debt is limited to the
amount actually charged off.
Filing a claim for refund.If you did not de-
duct a bad debt on your original return for the
year it became worthless, you can file a claim
for a credit or refund. If the bad debt was
totally worthless, you must file the claim by
the later of the following dates.
 7 years from the date your original return
was due (not including extensions).
 2 years from the date you paid the tax.
If the claim is for a partly worthless bad
debt, you must file the claim by the later of the
following dates.
 3 years from the date you filed your ori-
ginal return.
 2 years from the date you paid the tax.
However, you may have longer to file the
claim if you were physically or mentally una-
ble to handle your financial affairs for a time.
For details, see Publication 556.
Use one of the following forms to file a
claim for a credit or refund.
For more information about filing a claim, see
Publication 556.
Nonaccrual-Experience
Method
If you use an accrual method of accounting
and qualify under the rules explained in this
section, you can use the nonaccrual-
experience method of accounting for bad
debts. Under this method, you do not accrue
income you expect to be uncollectible.
If you determine, based on your experi-
ence, that certain amounts (accounts receiv-
able) are uncollectible, do not include them in
your gross income for the tax year.
Amounts must be for performing services.
You can use the nonaccrual-experience
method only for amounts earned by perform-
ing services. You cannot use this method for
amounts owed to you from activities such as
lending money, selling goods, or acquiring
receivables or other rights to receive pay-
ments.
Interest or penalty charged.Generally, you
cannot use the nonaccrual-experience
method for amounts due on which you charge
interest or a late payment penalty. However,
do not treat a discount offered for early pay-
ment as the charging of interest or a penalty
if both the following apply.
 You otherwise accrue the full amount due
as gross income at the time you provide
the services.
 You treat the discount allowed for early
payment as an adjustment to gross in-
come in the year of payment.
How to apply this method.You can apply
the nonaccrual-experience method under ei-
ther of the following systems.
 Separate receivable system.
 Periodic system.
Under the separate receivable system, apply
the nonaccrual-experience method separately
to each account receivable. Under the peri-
odic system, apply the nonaccrual-experience
method to total qualified accounts receivable
at the end of your tax year.
Treat each system as a separate method
of accounting. You generally cannot change
from one system to the other without IRS
approval.
Generally, you also need IRS approval to
change from a different accounting method to
either system under the nonaccrual-
experience method.
For more information on the separate
receivable system, see section 1.448–2T of
the regulations. For more information on the
periodic system, see Notice 88–51 in Cumu-
lative Bulletin 1988–1.
Recovery of Bad Debt
If you deduct a bad debt and later recover
(collect) all or part of it, you may have to in-
clude all or part of the recovery in gross in-
come. The amount you include is limited to
the amount you actually deducted. However,
you can exclude the amount deducted that
did not reduce your tax. Report the recovery
as “Other income” on the appropriate busi-
ness form or schedule.
Example. In 1999, the Willow Corporation
had gross income of $158,000, a bad debt
deduction of $3,500, and other allowable de-
ductions of $49,437. The corporation reported
on the accrual method of accounting and
used the specific charge-off method for bad
debts. The entire bad debt deduction reduced
the tax on the 1999 corporate return. In 2000,
the corporation recovers part of the $3,500
deducted in 1999. It must include the part
recovered in income for 2000 as “Other in-
come” on its corporate return.
Net operating loss (NOL) carryover.If
a bad debt deduction increases an NOL car-
ryover that has not expired before the begin-
ning of the tax year in which the recovery
takes place, you treat the deduction as having
reduced your tax. A bad debt deduction that
contributes to a net operating loss helps lower
taxes in the year to which you carry the net
operating loss.
More information.See Publication 536
for more information about net operating
losses. See Recoveries in Publication 525 for
more information on recovered amounts.
Sale of property received for debt.If you
receive property in partial settlement of a debt
and you later sell the property, any gain on
the sale is not a recovery of a bad debt. See
Property received for debt, earlier.
If you are an: File:
Individual Form 1040X
Corporation Form 1120X
S Corporation Form 1120S (check box F(4))
Partnership Form 1065 (check box G(4))
Page 42 Chapter 11  Business Bad Debts

Where To Deduct
Use the following guide to find where to de-
duct your business bad debts.
12.
Electric and
Clean-Fuel
Vehicles
Introduction
You are allowed a limited deduction for the
cost of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-
fuel vehicle refueling property you place in
service during the tax year. Also, you are al-
lowed a tax credit of 10% of the cost of any
qualified electric vehicle you place in service
during the tax year.
TIP
You can take the electric vehicle
credit or the deduction for clean-fuel
vehicle property regardless of
whether you use the vehicle in a trade or
business. However, you can take a deduction
for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property only
if you use the property in your trade or busi-
ness.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle
property
 The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle re-
fueling property
 Recapture of the deductions
 The electric vehicle credit
 Recapture of the credit
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and
Car Expenses
/H18554544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
/H18554946 How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
/H185548834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Credit
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting publications and forms.
Definitions
The following definitions apply throughout this
chapter.
Clean-burning fuels. The following are
clean-burning fuels.
 1) Natural gas.
2) Liquefied natural gas.
3) Liquefied petroleum gas.
 4) Hydrogen.
 5) Electricity.
6) Any other fuel that is at least 85% alco-
hol (any kind) or ether.
Motor vehicle.A motor vehicle is any vehicle
that has four or more wheels and is manu-
factured primarily for use on public streets,
roads, and highways. It does not include a
vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails.
Nonqualifying property. This is property
used in the following ways.
1) Predominantly outside the United States.
2) Predominantly to furnish lodging or in
connection with the furnishing of lodging.
3) By certain tax-exempt organizations.
4) By governmental units or foreign per-
sons or entities.
Deductions for
Clean-Fuel Vehicle
and Refueling
Property
You are allowed a limited deduction for the
cost of clean-fuel vehicle property. You are
also allowed a limited deduction for the cost
of clean-fuel vehicle refueling property. These
deductions are allowed only in the tax year
you place the property in service.
You cannot claim these deductions for the
part of the property's cost you claim as a
section 179 deduction. For information on the
section 179 deduction, see Publication 946.
Deduction for Clean-Fuel
Vehicle Property
The deduction for this property may be
claimed regardless of whether the property is
used in a trade or business.
Clean-fuel vehicle property.Clean-fuel ve-
hicle property is either of the following kinds
of property.
1) A motor vehicle (defined earlier)
produced by an original equipment
manufacturer and designed to be pro-
pelled by a clean-burning fuel. The only
part of a vehicle's basis that qualifies for
the deduction is the part attributable to:
a) A clean-fuel engine that can use a
clean-burning fuel,
b) The property used to store or de-
liver the fuel to the engine, or
c) The property used to exhaust gases
from the combustion of the fuel.
2) Any property installed on a motor vehicle
(including installation costs) to enable it
to be propelled by a clean-burning fuel
if:
a) The property is an engine (or mod-
ification of an engine) that can use
a clean-burning fuel, or
b) The property is used to store or
deliver that fuel to the engine or to
exhaust gases from the combustion
of that fuel.
For vehicles that may be propelled by both
a clean-burning fuel and any other fuel, your
deduction is generally the additional cost of
permitting the use of the clean-burning fuel.
CAUTION
!
Clean-fuel vehicle property does not
include an electric vehicle that quali-
fies for the electric vehicle credit, dis-
cussed later.
Qualified property. Your property must
meet the following requirements to qualify for
the deduction.
1) It must be acquired for your own use and
not for resale.
2) Its original use must begin with you.
 3) Either—
a) The motor vehicle of which it is a
part must satisfy any federal or
state emissions standards that ap-
ply to each fuel by which the vehicle
is designed to be propelled, or
b) It must satisfy any federal and state
emissions certification, testing, and
warranty requirements that apply.
4) It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-
fined earlier.
Deduction limit.The maximum deduction
you can claim for qualified clean-fuel vehicle
property with respect to any motor vehicle is
one of the following.
1) $50,000 for a truck or van with a gross
vehicle weight rating over 26,000 pounds
or for a bus with a seating capacity of
at least 20 adults (excluding the driver).
2) $5,000 for a truck or van with a gross
vehicle weight rating over 10,000 pounds
but not more than 26,000 pounds.
3) $2,000 for a vehicle not included in (1)
or (2).
Deduction for Clean-Fuel
Vehicle Refueling Property
Your property must meet the following re-
quirements to qualify for this deduction.
1) It must be depreciable property.
2) Its original use must begin with you.
If you are a: Then deduct your
bad debt on:
Sole Proprietor Line 9 of Schedule C
(Form 1040)
Farmer Line 34 of Schedule F
(Form 1040)
Corporation Line 15 of Form 1120
or
Line 15 of Form 1120–A
or
Line 10 of Form 1120S
Partnership Line 12 of Form 1065
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel VehiclesPage 43

3) It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-
fined earlier.
Clean-fuel vehicle refueling property.
Clean-fuel vehicle refueling property is any
property (other than a building or its structural
components) used to do either of the follow-
ing.
1) Store or dispense a clean-burning fuel
(defined earlier) into the fuel tank of a
motor vehicle propelled by the fuel, but
only if the storage or dispensing is at the
point where the fuel is delivered into the
tank.
2) Recharge motor vehicles propelled by
electricity, but only if the property is lo-
cated at the point where the vehicles are
recharged.
Recharging property.This property in-
cludes any equipment used to provide elec-
tricity to the battery of a motor vehicle pro-
pelled by electricity. It includes low-voltage
recharging equipment, high-voltage (quick)
charging equipment, and ancillary connection
equipment such as inductive charging equip-
ment. It does not include property used to
generate electricity, such as solar panels or
windmills, and does not include the battery
used in the vehicle.
Deduction limit.The maximum deduction
you can claim for clean-fuel vehicle refueling
property placed in service at one location is
$100,000. To figure your maximum deduction
for any tax year, subtract from $100,000 the
total you (or any related person or prede-
cessor) claimed for clean-fuel vehicle refuel-
ing property placed in service at that location
for all earlier years.
CAUTION
!
If the deduction limit applies, you must
specify on your tax return the property
(and the portion of the property's cost)
you are using as a basis for the deduction.
Related persons. For this purpose, the
following are considered related persons.
1) An individual and his or her brothers and
sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters,
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend-
ants.
2) An individual and a corporation if the in-
dividual owns, directly or indirectly, more
than 50% in value of the outstanding
stock of the corporation.
3) Two corporations that are members of
the same controlled group as defined in
section 267(f) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
4) A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.
5) Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if the
same person is a grantor of both trusts.
6) A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the same
trust.
7) A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two
separate trusts if the same person is a
grantor of both trusts.
8) A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation
if the trust or a grantor of the trust owns,
directly or indirectly, more than 50% in
value of the outstanding stock of the
corporation.
9) A person and a tax-exempt educational
or charitable organization that is con-
trolled directly or indirectly by that person
or by members of the family of that per-
son.
10) A corporation and a partnership if the
same persons own more than 50% in
value of the outstanding stock of the
corporation and more than 50% of the
capital or profits interest in the partner-
ship.
11) Two S corporations or an S corporation
and a regular corporation if the same
persons own more than 50% in value of
the outstanding stock of each corpo-
ration.
12) A partnership and a person owning, di-
rectly or indirectly, more than 50% of the
capital or profits interests in the partner-
ship.
13) Two partnerships if the same persons
own, directly or indirectly, more than
50% of the capital or profits interest in
both partnerships.
14) An executor of an estate and a benefi-
ciary of the estate.
To determine whether an individual di-
rectly or indirectly owns any of the outstand-
ing stock of a corporation, see Ownership of
stock under Related Persons in Publication
538.
How To Claim
the Deductions
How you claim the deductions for clean-fuel
vehicle property and clean-fuel vehicle refu-
eling property depends on the use of the
property and the kind of income tax return you
file.
Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel ve-
hicle property by individuals. Individuals
can claim the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle
property used for nonbusiness purposes by
including the deduction in the total on line 32
of Form 1040. Also, enter the amount of your
deduction and “Clean-Fuel” on the dotted line
next to line 32. If you use the vehicle partly
for business, see the next two discussions.
Deduction for business clean-fuel vehicle
property by employees. Employees who
use clean-fuel vehicle property for business,
or partly for business and partly for nonbusi-
ness purposes, should include the entire de-
duction in the total on line 32 of Form 1040.
Also, enter the amount of your deduction and
“Clean-Fuel” on the dotted line next to line 32.
Sole proprietors. Sole proprietors must
claim deductions for clean-fuel vehicle prop-
erty and clean-fuel vehicle refueling property
used for business on the Other expenses line
of either Schedule C (Form 1040) or Sched-
ule F (Form 1040). If clean-fuel vehicle prop-
erty is used partly for nonbusiness purposes,
claim the nonbusiness part of the deduction
as explained earlier under Deduction for
nonbusiness clean-fuel vehicle property by
individuals. 
Partnerships. Partnerships claim the de-
ductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and
clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line
20 of Form 1065.
S corporations. S corporations claim the
deductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and
clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line
19 of Form 1120S.
C corporations. C corporations claim the
deductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and
clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line
26 of Form 1120 (line 22 of Form 1120–A).
Recapture of
the Deductions
If the property ceases to qualify, you may
have to recapture the deduction. You recap-
ture the deduction by including it, or part of it,
in your income.
Clean-Fuel Vehicle Property
You must recapture the deduction for clean-
fuel vehicle property if the property ceases to
qualify within 3 years after the date you
placed it in service. The property will cease
to qualify if it is changed in any of the follow-
ing ways.
1) It is modified so that it can no longer be
propelled by a clean-burning fuel.
2) It ceases to be a qualified clean-fuel ve-
hicle property (for example, by failing to
meet emissions standards).
3) It becomes nonqualifying property, de-
fined earlier.
Sales or other dispositions.If you sell or
otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3
years after the date you placed it in service
and know or have reason to know that it will
be changed in any of the ways described
above, you are subject to the recapture rules.
In other dispositions (including a disposition
by reason of an accident or other casualty),
the recapture rules do not apply.
If the vehicle was subject to depreciation,
the deduction (minus any recapture) is con-
sidered depreciation when figuring the part
of any gain from the disposition that is ordi-
nary income. See Publication 544 for more
information on dispositions of depreciable
property.
Recapture amount. Figure your recapture
amount by multiplying the deduction by the
following percentage.
 100% if the recapture date is within the
first full year after the date the vehicle
was placed in service.
 662 / 3% if the recapture date is within the
second full year after the date the vehicle
was placed in service.
 331 / 3% if the recapture date is within the
third full year after the date the vehicle
was placed in service.
Recapture date. The recapture date is
generally the date of the event that causes
the recapture. However, the recapture date
for an event described in item (3), earlier, is
the first day of the recapture year in which the
event occurs.
How to report.How you report the recapture
amount for clean-fuel vehicle property as in-
come depends on how you claimed the de-
duction for that property.
Deducted by individuals as
nonbusiness-use property. Include the
amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
Page 44 Chapter 12  Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Deducted by employees as business-
use property.Include the amount on line 21
of Form 1040.
Deducted by sole proprietors as
business-use property.Include the amount
on the Other income line of either Schedule
C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).
Partnerships and corporations (includ-
ing S corporations).Include the amount on
the Other income line of the form you file.
Clean-Fuel Vehicle
Refueling Property
You must recapture the deduction for clean-
fuel vehicle refueling property if the property
ceases to qualify at any time before the end
of its depreciation recovery period. The
property will cease to qualify if it is changed
in any of the following ways.
1) It ceases to be a clean-fuel vehicle refu-
eling property (for example, by being
converted to store and dispense gaso-
line).
2) It is no longer used 50% or more in your
trade or business.
3) It becomes nonqualifying property, de-
fined earlier.
Sales or other dispositions.If you sell or
otherwise dispose of the property before the
end of its recovery period and know or have
reason to know that it will be changed in any
of the ways described above, you are subject
to the recapture rules. In other dispositions
(including a disposition by reason of an acci-
dent or other casualty), the recapture rules
do not apply.
The deduction (minus any recapture
amount) is considered depreciation when fig-
uring the part of any gain from the disposition
that is ordinary income. See Publication 544
for more information on dispositions of
depreciable property.
Recapture amount. Figure your recapture
amount by multiplying the deduction you
claimed by the following fraction.
How to report.How you report the recapture
amount for clean-fuel vehicle refueling prop-
erty depends on how you claimed the de-
duction for that property.
Sole proprietors.Include the amount on
the Other income line of either Schedule C
(Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).
Partnerships and corporations (includ-
ing S corporations).Include the amount on
the Other income line of the form you file.
Basis Adjustments
You must reduce the basis of your clean-fuel
vehicle property or clean-fuel vehicle refueling
property by the deduction claimed. If, in a
later year, you must recapture part or all of
the deduction, increase the basis of the
property by the amount recaptured. If the
property is depreciable property, you can re-
cover this additional basis over the property's
remaining recovery period beginning with the
tax year of recapture.
CAUTION
!
If you were using the percentage ta-
bles to figure your depreciation on the
property, you will not be able to con-
tinue to do so. See Publication 946 for infor-
mation on figuring your depreciation without
the tables.
Electric Vehicle Credit
You can choose to claim a tax credit for a
qualified electric vehicle you place in service
during the year. You can make this choice
regardless of whether the property is used in
a trade or business.
Qualified Electric Vehicle
A vehicle is a qualified electric vehicle if it
meets all the following requirements.
1) It is a motor vehicle (defined earlier)
powered primarily by an electric motor
drawing current from rechargeable bat-
teries, fuel cells, or other portable
sources of electrical current.
2) You were the first person to use it.
3) You acquired it for your own use and not
for resale.
4) It has never been used as a nonelectric
vehicle.
5) It is not nonqualifying property, defined
earlier.
Amount of the Credit
The credit is generally 10% of the cost of
each qualified electric vehicle you place in
service during the year. If your vehicle is a
depreciable business asset, you must reduce
the cost of the vehicle by any section 179
deduction before figuring the 10% credit. If
you need information on the section 179 de-
duction, see Publication 946.
Credit limits.The credit is limited to $4,000
for each vehicle. The total credit is limited to
the excess of your regular tax liability, re-
duced by certain credits, over your tentative
minimum tax. To figure the credit limit, com-
plete Form 8834 and attach it to your tax re-
turn.
How To
Claim the Credit
You must complete and attach Form 8834 to
your tax return to claim the electric vehicle
credit. Enter your credit on your tax return
as discussed next.
Individuals.Individuals claim the credit by
entering the amount from line 19 of Form
8834 on line 49 of Form 1040. Check box
“d” and specify Form 8834.
Partnerships. Partnerships enter the
amount from line 19 of Form 8834 on line 13
of Schedule K (Form 1065). The partnership
then allocates the credit to the partners on
line 13 of Schedule K–1 (Form 1065). See the
instructions for Form 1065.
S corporations. S corporations enter the
amount from line 19 of Form 8834 on line 13
of Schedule K (Form 1120S). The S corpo-
ration then allocates the credit to the share-
holders on line 13 of Schedule K–1 (Form
1120S). See the instructions for Form 1120S.
C corporations. C corporations claim the
credit by entering the amount from line 19 of
Form 8834 in the total for line 6c of Schedule
J (Form 1120) and checking the Form 8834
box to the left of the entry. See the in-
structions for Form 1120.
Recapture of the Credit
The electric vehicle credit is subject to re-
capture if, within 3 years after the date you
place the vehicle in service, it ceases to
qualify for the electric vehicle credit. You re-
capture the credit by adding it, or part of it, to
your income tax.
The vehicle will cease to qualify if it is
changed in either of the following ways.
1) It is modified so that it is no longer pri-
marily powered by electricity.
2) It becomes nonqualifying property, de-
fined earlier.
Sales or other dispositions.If you sell or
otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3
years after the date you placed it in service
and know or have reason to know that it will
be changed in either of the ways described
above, you are subject to the recapture rules.
In other dispositions (including a disposition
by reason of an accident or other casualty),
the recapture rules do not apply.
If the vehicle was subject to depreciation,
the credit (minus any recapture amount) is
considered depreciation when figuring the
part of any gain from the disposition that is
ordinary income. See Publication 544 for
more information on dispositions of deprecia-
ble property.
Recapture amount. Figure your recapture
amount by multiplying the credit by the fol-
lowing percentage.
 100% if the recapture date is within the
first full year after the date the vehicle
was placed in service.
 662 / 3% if the recapture date is within the
second full year after the date the vehicle
was placed in service.
 331 / 3% if the recapture date is within the
third full year after the date the vehicle
was placed in service.
Recapture date. The recapture date is
generally the date of the event that causes
the recapture. However, the recapture date
for an event described in item (2), earlier, is
the first day of the recapture year in which the
event occurs.
How to report.Report the recapture amount
as follows.
Individuals.Include the amount on line
57 of Form 1040. Write “QEVCR” on the dot-
ted line next to line 57.
Partnerships. Include on line 25 of
Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) the information a
partner needs to figure the recapture of the
credit.
S corporations. Include on line 23 of
Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S) the information
a shareholder needs to figure the recapture
of the credit.
C corporations.Include the amount on
line 10 of Schedule J (Form 1120), or line 7
of Part I (Form 1120–A). Write “QEV recap-
Total recovery period for _ Recovery years before
the property the recapture year
Total recovery period for the property
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel VehiclesPage 45

ture” on the dotted line next to that entry
space.
Basis Adjustments
If you claim a tax credit for a qualified electric
vehicle you place in service during the year,
you must reduce your basis in that vehicle by
the lesser of:
1) $4,000, or 
2) 10% of the cost of the vehicle. 
This basis reduction rule applies even if the
credit allowed is less than that amount.
If you must recapture part or all of the
credit, increase the basis of your vehicle by
the amount recaptured. If the qualified electric
vehicle is depreciable property, you can re-
cover the additional basis over the vehicle's
remaining recovery period beginning with the
tax year of recapture.
CAUTION
!
If you were using the percentage ta-
bles to figure your depreciation on the
vehicle, you will not be able to con-
tinue to do so. See Publication 946 for infor-
mation on figuring your depreciation without
the tables.
13.
Other Expenses
Important Changes
for 2000
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile-
age rate for the cost of operating your car,
van, pickup, or panel truck in 2000 is 32
1/2
cents a mile for all business miles. See Car
allowance, later.
Meal expense deduction subject to “hours
of service” limits.You can deduct 60% of
the reimbursed meals your employees con-
sume while they are subject to the Depart-
ment of Transportation's “hours of service”
limits. For more information, see Meal ex-
penses when subject to “hours of service”
limits, later.
Introduction
This chapter covers expenses you as a busi-
ness owner may have that are not explained
in earlier chapters of this publication.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Travel, meals, and entertainment
 Bribes and kickbacks
 Charitable contributions
 Education expenses
 Franchises, trademarks, and trade
names
 Lobbying expenses
 Penalties and fines
 Repayments (claim of right)
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H1855415–B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits 
/H18554463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and
Car Expenses 
/H18554529 Miscellaneous Deductions 
/H18554 54 2 Corporations
/H18554946 How To Depreciate Property 
/H185541542 Per Diem Rates 
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
/H185541099–MISC  Miscellaneous Income 
/H185546069 Return of Excise Tax on Excess
Contributions to Black Lung Ben-
efit Trust Under Section 4953 and
Computation of Section 192 De-
duction 
See chapter 14 for information about get-
ting forms and publications.
Travel, Meals,
and Entertainment
To be deductible, expenses incurred for
travel, meals, and entertainment must be or-
dinary and necessary expenses of carrying
on your trade or business. Generally, you also
must show that entertainment expenses (in-
cluding meals) are directly related to, or as-
sociated with, the conduct of your trade or
business.
The following discussion explains how you
deduct any reimbursements or allowances
you make for these expenses incurred by
your employees. If you are self-employed and
incur these expenses yourself, see Publica-
tion 463 for information on how you can de-
duct them.
Reimbursements
How you deduct a reimbursement or allow-
ance arrangement (including per diem allow-
ances, discussed later) for travel, meals, and
entertainment expenses incurred by your
employees depends on whether you have an
accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan.
A reimbursement or allowance arrange-
ment is a system by which you pay advances,
reimbursements, and charges for your em-
ployees' business expenses and they sub-
stantiate their expenses to you so you can
substantiate your deduction of the advance,
reimbursement, or charge. If you make a
single payment to your employees and it in-
cludes both wages and an expense re-
imbursement, you must specify the amount
of the reimbursement.
If you reimburse these expenses under
an accountable plan, deduct them as travel,
meal, and entertainment expenses. If you
reimburse these expenses under a nonac-
countable plan, you must report the re-
imbursements as wages on Form W–2, Wage
and Tax Statement, and deduct them as
wages. See Table 13–1.
Accountable Plans
To be an accountable plan, your reimburse-
ment or allowance arrangement must require
your employees to meet all the following
rules.
1) They must have paid or incurred
deductible expenses while performing
services as your employees. 
2) They must adequately account to you for
these expenses within a reasonable pe-
riod of time. 
3) They must return any excess re-
imbursement or allowance within a rea-
sonable period of time. 
An arrangement under which you advance
money to employees is treated as meeting (3)
above only if the following requirements are
also met.
 The advance is reasonably calculated not
to exceed the amount of anticipated ex-
penses.
 You make the advance within a reason-
able period of time.
If any expenses reimbursed under this
arrangement are not substantiated, or are an
excess reimbursement that is not returned
within a reasonable period of time by an em-
ployee, you cannot treat these expenses as
reimbursed under an accountable plan. In-
stead, treat the reimbursed expenses as paid
under a nonaccountable plan, discussed
later.
Adequate accounting. Your employees
must adequately account to you for their ex-
penses. They must give you documentary
evidence of their travel, mileage, and other
employee business expenses. This evidence
should include items such as receipts, along
with either a statement of expenses, an ac-
count book, a diary, or a similar record in
which the employee entered each expense
at or near the time the expense was incurred.
Excess reimbursement or allowance.An
excess reimbursement or allowance is any
amount you pay to an employee that is more
than the business-related expenses for which
the employee adequately accounted. The
employee must return any excess re-
imbursement or other expense allowance to
you within a reasonable period of time.
Reasonable period of time.A reasonable
period of time depends on the facts and cir-
cumstances. Generally, actions that take
place within the times specified in the follow-
ing list will be treated as taking place within
a reasonable period of time.
1) You give an advance within 30 days of
the time the employee has the expense.
2) Your employees adequately account for
their expenses within 60 days after the
expenses were paid or incurred.
3) Your employees return any excess re-
imbursement within 120 days after the
expense was paid or incurred.
Page 46 Chapter 13  Other Expenses

4) You give a periodic statement (at least
quarterly) to your employees that asks
them to either return or adequately ac-
count for outstanding advances and they
comply within 120 days of the statement.
How to deduct. You can take a deduction
for travel, meals, and entertainment expenses
if you reimburse your employees for these
expenses under an accountable plan. The
amount you deduct for meals and enter-
tainment, however, may be subject to a 50%
limit, discussed later. If you are a sole pro-
prietor, deduct the reimbursement on line 24
of Schedule C (Form 1040). If you file a cor-
poration income tax return, include the re-
imbursement in the amount claimed on the
“Other deductions” line of Form 1120, U.S.
Corporation Income Tax Return, or Form
1120–A, U.S. Corporation Short-Form Income
Tax Return. If you file any other income tax
return, such as a partnership or S corporation
return, deduct the reimbursement on the ap-
propriate line of the return as provided in the
instructions for that return.
Per Diem and Car Allowances
You may reimburse your employees under
an accountable plan based on travel days,
miles, or some other fixed allowance. In
these cases, your employee is considered to
have accounted to you for the amount of the
expense that does not exceed the rates es-
tablished by the federal government. Your
employee must actually substantiate to you
the other elements of the expense, such as
time, place, and business purpose.
Federal rate.The federal rate can be figured
using any one of the following methods.
1) For per diem amounts:
a) The regular federal per diem rate.
b) The standard meal allowance.
c) The high-low rate.
2) For car expenses:
a) The standard mileage rate.
b) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
Car allowance. Your employee is consid-
ered to have accounted to you for car ex-
penses that do not exceed the standard
mileage rate. For 2000, the standard mileage
rate is 32.5 cents per mile for each business
mile. 
You can choose to reimburse your em-
ployees using a fixed and variable rate
(FAVR) allowance. This is an allowance that
includes a combination of payments covering
fixed and variable costs, such as a cents-
per-mile rate to cover your employees' vari-
able operating costs (such as gas, oil, etc.)
plus a flat amount to cover your employees'
fixed costs (such as depreciation, insurance,
etc.). For information on using a FAVR al-
lowance, see Revenue Procedure 99–38 in
Cumulative Bulletin 1999–2. You can read
Revenue Procedure 99–38 at many public li-
braries.
Per diem allowance. If your employee ac-
tually substantiates to you the other elements
(discussed earlier) of the expenses reim-
bursed using the per diem allowance, how
you report and deduct the allowance depends
on whether the allowance is for lodging and
meal expenses or for meal expenses only and
Table 16-1. Reporting Reimbursements
If the type of reimbursement (or other
expense allowance) arrangement is
under: Then the employer reports on Form W-2:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting made and excess
returned
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of excess
both required but excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the
federal rate:
Adequate accounting and excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the
federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the federal rate
only and excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1. The
amount up to the federal rate is reported
only in box 13 — it is not reported in box 1.
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of
excess, or both, not required by plan
The entire amount as wages in box 1.
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the
federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of excess
both required but excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1. The
amount up to the federal rate is reported
only in box 13 — it is not reported in box 1.
whether the allowance is more than the fed-
eral rate.
Regular federal per diem rate. The
regular federal per diem rate is the highest
amount the federal government will pay to its
employees for lodging, meal, and incidental
expenses (or meal and incidental expenses
only) while they are traveling away from home
in a particular area. The rates are different for
different locations. Publication 1542 lists the
rates in the continental U.S.
CAUTION
!
New rates went into effect on October
1, 2000. You must have chosen to
use either the old rates or the new
rates for the period October 1, 2000, through
December 31, 2000.
Internet access. Per diem rates are
available on the Internet. If you have
a computer and a modem, you can
access domestic per diem rates at:
www.policyworks.gov/perdiem
You can access foreign per diem rates at:
www.state.gov/www/perdiems
Standard meal allowance.The federal
rate for meal and incidental expense (M & IE)
is the standard meal allowance. You may pay
an allowance for meal and incidental ex-
penses only if, for example, you reimburse
actual lodging expenses or do not reimburse
lodging expenses because there are none.
High-low method. This is a simplified
method of computing the federal per diem
rate for lodging and meal expenses for trav-
eling within the continental United States. It
eliminates the need to keep a current list of
the per diem rate in effect for each city in the
continental United States.
Under the high-low method, the per diem
amount for travel during 2000 is $201 ($42 for
M & IE) for certain locations. All other areas
have a per diem amount of $124 ($34 for M
& IE). The areas eligible for the $201 per diem
amount under the high-low method are listed
in Publication 1542.
CAUTION
!
The areas listed in Publication 1542
were changed for the period October
1, 2000, through December 31, 2000.
You could use the areas listed in Publication
1542 for that period only if you used them
consistently for all employees who were re-
imbursed under the high-low method. Other-
wise, see Revenue Procedure 2000–39 for
the list of areas eligible for the $201 per diem
amount.
Reporting per diem and car allowances.
The following paragraphs explain how to re-
port per diem and car allowances. The man-
ner in which you report them depends on how
the allowance compares to the federal rate.
Allowance LESS than or EQUAL to the
federal rate.If your allowance for the em-
ployee is less than or equal to the appropriate
federal rate, that allowance is not included as
part of the employee's pay in box 1 of the
employee's Form W–2. Deduct the allowance
as travel expenses (including meals that may
be subject to the 50% limit, discussed later).
See How to deduct under Accountable Plans,
earlier.
Allowance MORE than the federal rate.
If your employee's allowance is more than the
appropriate federal rate, you must report the
allowance as two separate items.
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 47

You include the allowance amount up to
the federal rate in box 13 (code L) of the
employee's Form W–2. Deduct it as travel
expenses (as explained above). This part of
the allowance is treated as reimbursed under
an accountable plan.
You include the amount that is more than
the federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and
5 if they apply) of the employee's Form W–2.
Deduct it as wages subject to income tax
withholding, social security, Medicare, and
federal unemployment taxes. This part of the
allowance is treated as reimbursed under a
nonaccountable plan as explained later under
Nonaccountable Plans.
Meals and Entertainment
Under an accountable plan, you can generally
deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible
business-related meal and entertainment ex-
penses you reimburse your employees. The
deduction limit applies even if you reimburse
them for 100% of the expenses.
Application of the 50% limit.The 50% de-
duction limit applies to reimbursements you
make to your employees for expenses they
incur for meals while traveling away from
home on business and for entertaining busi-
ness customers at your place of business, a
restaurant, or another location. It applies to
expenses incurred at a business convention
or reception, business meeting, or business
luncheon at a club. The deduction limit may
also apply to meals you furnish on your
premises to your employees (discussed in
chapter 2).
Related expenses.Taxes and tips relat-
ing to a meal or entertainment activity you
reimburse to your employee under an ac-
countable plan are included in the amount
subject to the 50% limit. Reimbursements you
make for expenses, such as cover charges
for admission to a nightclub, rent paid for a
room to hold a dinner or cocktail party, or the
amount you pay for parking at a sports arena,
are all subject to the 50% limit. However, the
cost of transportation to and from an other-
wise allowable business meal or a business-
related entertainment activity is not subject to
the 50% limit.
Amount subject to 50% limit.If you provide
your employees with a per diem allowance
(discussed earlier) only for meal and inci-
dental expenses, the amount treated as an
expense for food and beverages is the lesser
of the following.
 The per diem allowance.
 The federal rate for M & IE.
If you provide your employee with a per
diem allowance that covers lodging, meals,
and incidental expenses, you must treat an
amount equal to the federal M & IE rate for
the area of travel as an expense for food and
beverages. If the per diem allowance you
provide is less than the federal per diem rate
for the area of travel, you can treat 40% of the
per diem allowance as the amount for food
and beverages.
Drilling rigs.The 50% limit does not apply
to the food or beverages an employer pro-
vides on an oil or gas platform or drilling rig
located offshore or in Alaska. This exception
also applies to food and beverages provided
by an employer at a support camp that is near
and integral to an oil or gas drilling rig located
in Alaska.
Meal expenses when subject to “hours of
service” limits.You can deduct 60% of the
reimbursed meals your employees consume
while away from their tax home on business
during or incident to any period subject to the
Department of Transportation's hours of ser-
vice limits.
Individuals subject to the Department of
Transportation's hours of service limits in-
clude the following.
 Certain air transportation workers (such
as pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics,
and control tower operators) who are
under Federal Aviation Administration
regulations.
 Interstate truck operators and bus drivers
who are under Department of Transpor-
tation regulations.
 Certain railroad employees (such as en-
gineers, conductors, train crews, dis-
patchers, and control operations person-
nel) who are under Federal Railroad
Administration regulations.
 Certain merchant mariners who are under
Coast Guard regulations.
De minimis (minimal) fringe benefit.The
50% limit does not apply to an expense for
food or beverage that is excluded from the
gross income of an employee because it is a
de minimis fringe benefit. See Publication
15–B for additional information on de minimis
fringe benefits.
Company cafeteria or executive dining
room. You can deduct the cost of food and
beverages you provide primarily to your em-
ployees on your business premises. This in-
cludes the cost of maintaining the facilities for
providing the food and beverages. These ex-
penses are subject to the 50% limit unless
they qualify as de minimis fringe benefits,
discussed in Publication 15–B, or unless they
are compensation to your employees and you
treat them as provided under a nonaccount-
able plan, as discussed later.
Employee activities.You can deduct the
expense of providing recreational, social, or
similar activities (including the use of a facil-
ity) for your employees. The benefit must be
primarily for your employees who are not
highly compensated employees. 
For this purpose, a highly compensated
employee is an employee who meets either
of the following requirements.
1) Owned a 10% or more interest in the
business during the year or the preced-
ing year. An employee is treated as
owning any interest owned by his or her
brother, sister, spouse, ancestors, and
lineal descendants.
2) Received more than $85,000 in pay for
the preceding year. You may choose to
include only employees who were also
in the top 20% of employees when
ranked by pay for the preceding year.
These expenses are not subject to the
50% limit. For example, the expenses for
food, beverages, and entertainment for a
company-wide picnic are not subject to the
50% limit.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement
that does not meet the requirements for an
accountable plan. All amounts paid, or treated
as paid, under a nonaccountable plan are
reported as wages on Form W–2. The pay-
ments are subject to income tax withholding,
social security, Medicare, and federal unem-
ployment taxes. You can deduct the re-
imbursement as compensation or wages only
to the extent it meets the deductibility tests for
employees' pay in chapter 2. Deduct the al-
lowable amount as compensation or wages
on the appropriate line of your income tax
return, as provided in its instructions.
Other Reimbursed Expenses
You may provide meals and entertainment to
individuals who are not your employees.
These expenses may or may not be subject
to the 50% limit, depending on the circum-
stances.
Nonemployee. If you provide a person who
is not your employee with meals, goods, ser-
vices, or the use of a facility and the item you
provide is considered entertainment, you can
deduct the expense only to the extent it is
included in the gross income of the recipient
as compensation for services or as a prize
or award. If you are required to include these
expenses on an information return (Form
1099–MISC), you cannot claim a deduction
for them unless you file the necessary infor-
mation return. For more information about
when to file Form 1099–MISC, see the sepa-
rate Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498,
and W –2G. These expenses are not subject
to the 50% limit.
Director, stockholder, or employee
meetings. You can deduct entertainment
expenses directly related to business
meetings of your employees, partners, stock-
holders, agents, or directors. You can provide
some minor social activities, but the main
purpose of the meeting must be your com-
pany's business. These expenses are subject
to the 50% limit.
Trade association meetings.You can de-
duct expenses directly related to and neces-
sary for attending business meetings or con-
ventions of certain exempt organizations.
These organizations include business
leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate
boards, and trade and professional associ-
ations. Meal and entertainment expenses are
subject to the 50% limit.
Sale of meals or entertainment.You can
deduct the cost of providing meals, enter-
tainment, goods and services, or use of facil-
ities that you sell to the public. For example,
if you run a nightclub, your expense for the
entertainment you furnish to your customers,
such as a floor show, is a business expense.
These expenses are not subject to the 50%
limit.
Advertising to promote goodwill.You can
deduct the cost of providing meals, enter-
tainment, or recreational facilities to the gen-
eral public as a means of advertising or pro-
moting goodwill in the community. For
example, the expense of sponsoring a tele-
vision or radio show is deductible. You can
also deduct the expense of distributing free
food and beverages to the general public.
Page 48 Chapter 13  Other Expenses

These expenses are not subject to the 50%
limit.
Charitable sports event.The 50% limit
does not apply to the expenses covered by
a package deal that includes a ticket to a
charitable sports event if the event meets
certain conditions. See Entertainment tickets
in chapter 2 of Publication 463 for a list of the
conditions a charitable sports event must
meet.
Miscellaneous
Expenses
In addition to travel, meal, and entertainment
expenses, there are other expenses you can
deduct. This section briefly covers some of
these expenses (listed in alphabetical order).
Advertising expenses. You generally can
deduct reasonable advertising expenses if
they relate to your business activities. Gen-
erally, you cannot deduct the cost of adver-
tising to influence legislation. See Lobbying
expenses, later.
You can usually deduct as a business
expense the cost of institutional or “good
will” advertising to keep your name before the
public if it relates to business you reasonably
expect to gain in the future. For example, the
cost of advertising that encourages people to
contribute to the Red Cross, to buy U.S.
Saving Bonds, or to participate in similar
causes is usually deductible.
Foreign expenses. You cannot deduct
the costs of advertising on foreign radio and
television (including cable) where the adver-
tising is primarily for a market in the United
States. However, this rule only applies to ad-
vertising expenses in countries that deny a
deduction for advertising on a United States
broadcast primarily for that country's market.
Anticipated liabilities.Anticipated liabilities
or reserves for anticipated liabilities are not
deductible. For example, assume you sold
1-year TV service contracts this year totaling
$50,000. From experience, you know you will
have expenses of about $15,000 in the com-
ing year for these contracts. You cannot de-
duct any of the $15,000 this year by charging
expenses to a reserve or liability account. You
can deduct your expenses only when you
actually pay or accrue them, depending on
your accounting method.
Black lung benefit trust contributions.If
you, as a coal mine operator, make a contri-
bution to a qualified black lung benefit trust,
you may be able to deduct your contribution.
To deduct it, you must make your contribution
during the tax year or pay it to the trust by the
due date for filing your federal income tax
return (including extensions). You must make
the contribution in cash or in property the trust
is permitted to hold.
Figure your allowable deduction for con-
tributions to a black lung benefit trust on
Schedule A of Form 6069.
Bribes and kickbacks.You cannot deduct
bribes, kickbacks, or similar payments if they
are either of the following.
1) Payments directly or indirectly to an offi-
cial or employee of any government or
an agency or instrumentality of any gov-
ernment in violation of the law. If the
government is a foreign government, the
payments are not deductible if they are
unlawful under the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act of 1977.
2) Payments directly or indirectly to a per-
son in violation of any federal or state
law (but only if that state law is generally
enforced) that provides for a criminal
penalty or for the loss of a license or
privilege to engage in a trade or busi-
ness.
Meaning of “generally enforced.” A
state law is considered generally enforced
unless it is never enforced or enforced only
for infamous persons or persons whose vio-
lations are extraordinarily flagrant. For exam-
ple, a state law is generally enforced unless
proper reporting of a violation of the law re-
sults in enforcement only under unusual cir-
cumstances.
Kickbacks. A kickback includes a pay-
ment for referring a client, patient, or cus-
tomer. The common kickback situation occurs
when money or property is given to someone
as payment for influencing a third party to
purchase from, use the services of, or other-
wise deal with the person who pays the
kickback. In many cases, the person whose
business is being sought or enjoyed by the
person who pays the kickback does not know
of the payment.
Example 1. Mr. Green, an insurance
broker, pays part of the insurance commis-
sions he earns to car dealers who refer in-
surance customers to him. The car dealers
are not licensed to sell insurance. Mr. Green
cannot deduct these payments if they are in
violation of any federal or state law as ex-
plained previously in (2) under Bribes and
kickbacks.
Example 2. The Yard Corporation is in
the business of repairing ships. It returns
10% of the repair bills as kickbacks to the
captains and chief officers of vessels it re-
pairs. It considers kickbacks necessary to get
business. The owners of the ships do not
know of these payments.
In the state where the corporation oper-
ates, it is unlawful to attempt to influence the
actions of any employee, private agent, or
fiduciary in relation to the principal's or em-
ployer's affairs by giving or offering anything
of value without the knowledge and consent
of the principal or employer. The state gen-
erally enforces the law. The kickbacks paid
by the Yard Corporation are not deductible.
Medicare or Medicaid. Kickbacks,
bribes, and rebates paid in Medicare or
Medicaid programs are not deductible.
Form 1099 –MISC. If you pay kickbacks
during your tax year, whether or not they are
deductible on your income tax return, you
may have to report them on an information
return, Form 1099–MISC. For more informa-
tion about when to file Form 1099–MISC, see
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and
W –2G.
Car and truck expenses. You can deduct
the costs of operating a car, truck, or other
vehicle in your business. These costs include
gas, oil, repairs, license tags, insurance, and
depreciation. Only the expenses for business
use are deductible. Traveling between your
home and your place of business is usually
not business use.
Under certain conditions, you can use the
standard mileage rate instead of deducting
the actual expenses for your vehicle. The
standard mileage rate for the cost of operat-
ing your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
2000 is 32
1/2 cents a mile for all business
miles. For more information on how to figure
your deduction, see Publication 463.
Charitable contributions.Cash payments
to charitable, religious, educational, scientific,
or similar organizations may be deductible as
business expenses if the payments are not
charitable contributions or gifts. If the pay-
ments are charitable contributions or gifts,
you cannot deduct them as business ex-
penses. However, corporations (other than S
corporations) can deduct charitable contribu-
tions on their income tax returns. See Chari-
table Contributions in Publication 542 for
more information. Sole proprietors, partners
in a partnership, or shareholders in an S cor-
poration may be able to deduct charitable
contributions made by their business on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Example. You paid $15 to a local church
for a half-page ad in a program for a concert
it is sponsoring. The purpose of the ad was
to encourage readers to buy your products.
Since your payment is not a contribution, you
cannot deduct it as such. However, you can
deduct it as an advertising expense.
Inventory. If you contribute inventory
(property you sell in the course of your busi-
ness), the amount you can claim as a contri-
bution deduction is the smaller of its fair
market value on the day you contributed it or
its basis. The basis of donated inventory is
any cost incurred for the inventory in an ear-
lier year that you would otherwise include in
your opening inventory for the year of the
contribution. You must remove the amount
of your contribution deduction from your
opening inventory. It is not part of the cost
of goods sold.
If the cost of donated property is not in-
cluded in your opening inventory, the proper-
ty's basis is zero and you cannot claim a
charitable contribution deduction. Treat the
property's cost as you would ordinarily treat
it under your method of accounting. For ex-
ample, include the purchase price of inventory
bought and donated in the same year in the
cost of goods sold for that year.
A corporation (other than an S corpo-
ration) can deduct its basis in the property
plus one-half of the gain that would have been
realized if the property had been sold at its
fair market value on the date of contribution.
But the deduction cannot be more than twice
the property's basis. For more information on
the charitable contribution of property by a
corporation, see section 170(e)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
Example 1. You own an auto repair shop
and in 2000 you donated auto parts to your
local school for its auto repair class. The fair
market value of the parts at the time of the
contribution was $600 and you had included
$400 for the parts in your opening inventory
for 2000. Your charitable contribution is $400.
You reduce your opening inventory by the
$400 for the donated property.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as
Example 1, except you purchased the auto
parts in 2000 for $400 (not part of the opening
inventory). The $400 is included as part of the
cost of goods sold for 2000 but not in figuring
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 49

the basis of the property. Your charitable
contribution is $0.
Club dues and membership fees. Gener-
ally, you cannot deduct amounts you pay or
incur for membership in any club organized
for business, pleasure, recreation, or any
other social purpose. This includes country
clubs, golf and athletic clubs, hotel clubs,
sporting clubs, airline clubs, and clubs oper-
ated to provide meals under circumstances
generally considered to be conducive to
business discussions.
Exception. None of the following organ-
izations will be treated as a club organized for
business, pleasure, recreation, or other social
purpose unless one of the main purposes is
to conduct entertainment activities for mem-
bers or their guests or to provide members
or their guests with access to entertainment
facilities.
 Boards of trade.
 Business leagues.
 Chambers of commerce. 
 Civic or public service organizations. 
 Professional organizations such as bar
associations and medical associations. 
 Real estate boards.
 Trade associations. 
Damages recovered. Special rules apply to
compensation you receive for damages sus-
tained as a result of patent infringement,
breach of contract or fiduciary duty, or anti-
trust violations. You must include this com-
pensation in your income. However, you may
be able to take a special deduction. The
deduction applies only to amounts recovered
for actual injury, not any additional amount.
The deduction is the smaller of the following.
 The amount you received or accrued for
damages in the tax year reduced by the
amount you paid or incurred in the year
to recover that amount.
 Your losses from the injury you have not
deducted.
Demolition expenses or losses.You can-
not deduct any amount paid or incurred to
demolish a structure or any loss for the un-
depreciated basis of a demolished structure.
Add these amounts to the basis of the land
where the demolished structure was located.
Depreciation. If property you buy to use in
your business has a useful life substantially
beyond the year it is placed in service, you
generally cannot deduct the entire cost as a
business expense in the year you buy it. You
must spread the cost over more than one tax
year and deduct part of it each year. This
method of deducting the cost of business
property is called depreciation.
However, you may be able to elect to de-
duct a limited amount of the cost of certain
depreciable property in the year you place it
in service in your business. This deduction is
known as the “section 179 deduction.”
For information on depreciation and the
section 179 deduction, see Publication 946.
Donations to business organizations.You
can deduct donations to business organiza-
tions as business expenses if all the following
conditions are met.
 The donation relates directly to your trade
or business.
 You reasonably expect a financial return
in line with your donation.
 The donation is not a nondeductible lob-
bying expense as discussed later under
Lobbying expenses.
For example, a donation you make to a
committee organized by the Chamber of
Commerce to bring a national convention to
your city may be deductible.
Education expenses. You can deduct the
ordinary and necessary expenses you pay for
the education and training of your employees.
For more information, see Education Ex-
penses in chapter 2.
You can also deduct your own education
expenses (including certain related travel)
related to your trade or business. You must
be able to show the education maintains or
improves skills required in your trade or
business, or it is required by law or regu-
lations for keeping your pay, status, or job.
You cannot deduct education expenses
you incur to meet the minimum requirements
of your present trade or business, or those
that qualify you for a new trade or business.
This is true even if the education maintains
or improves skills presently required in your
business. For more information on education
expenses, see Publication 508.
Example 1. Dr. Carter, who is a psychi-
atrist, begins a program of study at an ac-
credited psychoanalytic institute to qualify as
a psychoanalyst. She can deduct the cost of
the program because the study maintains or
improves skills required in her profession and
does not qualify her for a new one.
Example 2. Herb Jones owns a repair
shop for electronic equipment. The bulk of
the business is television repairs, but occa-
sionally he fixes tape decks and disc players.
To keep up with the latest technical changes,
he takes a special course to learn how to re-
pair disc players. Since the course maintains
and improves skills required in his trade, he
can deduct its cost.
Environmental cleanup costs. You can
deduct certain costs to clean up land and to
treat groundwater you contaminated with
hazardous waste from your business oper-
ations. You can deduct the costs you incur to
restore your land and groundwater to the
same physical condition that existed prior to
contamination. You cannot deduct costs for
the construction of groundwater treatment fa-
cilities. You must capitalize those costs and
you can recover them through depreciation.
Franchise, trademark, trade name.If you
buy a franchise, trademark, or trade name,
you can deduct the amount you pay or incur
as a business expense only if your payments
are part of a series of payments that are:
1) Contingent on productivity, use, or dis-
position of the item,
2) Payable at least annually for the entire
term of the transfer agreement, and 
3) Substantially equal in amount (or pay-
able under a fixed formula).
When determining the term of the transfer
agreement, include all renewal options and
any other period for which you and the
transferor reasonably expect the agreement
to be renewed.
A franchise includes an agreement that
gives one of the parties to the agreement the
right to distribute, sell, or provide goods, ser-
vices, or facilities within a specified area.
Property acquired after August 10,
1993 (or after July 25, 1991, if elected). Any
amounts you pay or incur that are not de-
scribed in (1) through (3) must be charged to
a capital account. These are “section 197 in-
tangibles” and are amortized over 15 years.
See chapter 9 for more information on
amortization.
You can elect to apply this treatment to
any franchise, trademark, or trade name ac-
quired after July 25, 1991. This election is
binding and cannot be revoked without ap-
proval of the IRS.
Property acquired before August 11,
1993. For a transfer not treated as a sale or
exchange of a capital asset, you can deduct
a lump-sum payment of an agreed upon
principal amount ratably over the shorter of
the following.
 10 years.
 The period of the transfer agreement.
For a transfer not treated as a sale or ex-
change of a capital asset, you can deduct, in
the year made, a payment that is one of a
series of approximately equal payments pay-
able over either of the following.
 The period of the transfer agreement.
 A period of more than 10 years, regard-
less of the period of the agreement.
CAUTION
!
The above business deductions do
not apply to transfers after October
2, 1989, and before August 11, 1993,
if the principal sum is over $100,000.
Charge any payment not deductible be-
cause of these rules to a capital account.
However, you can deduct the payments
charged to a capital account over the life of
the asset if you can determine the useful life
of the asset. Otherwise, you can amortize the
payment over a 25-year period beginning with
the tax year the transfer occurs.
Contracts entered into before October
3, 1989. For contracts to buy a franchise,
trademark, or trade name entered into before
October 3, 1989, you can deduct payments
contingent on productivity, use, or disposition.
The rules discussed earlier for annual and
substantially equal payments do not apply.
Disposition of franchise, trademark, or
trade name.If you transfer, sell, or otherwise
dispose of a franchise, trademark, or trade
name, you must recapture as ordinary income
(up to any gain realized) the payments you
deducted as any of the following.
 A lump-sum or serial payment of a prin-
cipal amount not treated as a sale or ex-
change of a capital asset.
 An amortized payment deducted over 25
years.
 The amortization claimed on section 197
intangibles.
For more information about dispositions
of franchises, trademarks, and trade names,
see chapter 2 in Publication 544.
Page 50 Chapter 13  Other Expenses

Impairment-related expenses.If you are
disabled, you can deduct expenses neces-
sary for you to be able to work (impairment-
related expenses) as a business expense,
rather than as a medical expense.
You are disabled if you have either of the
following.
 A physical or mental disability (for exam-
ple, blindness or deafness) that func-
tionally limits your being employed.
 A physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one or more of your
major life activities.
You can deduct the expense as a busi-
ness expense if all the following apply.
 Your work clearly requires the expense
for you to satisfactorily perform the work.
 The goods or services purchased are
clearly not needed or used, other than
incidentally, in your personal activities.
 Their treatment is not specifically pro-
vided for under other tax law provisions.
Example. You are blind. You must use
a reader to do your work, both at and away
from your place of work. The reader's ser-
vices are only for your work. You can deduct
your expenses for the reader as a business
expense.
Interview expense allowances. Re-
imbursements you make to job candidates for
transportation or other expenses related to
interviews for possible employment are not
wages. You can deduct the reimbursements
as a business expense. However, expenses
for food, beverages, and entertainment are
subject to the 50% limit discussed earlier un-
der Meals and Entertainment.
Legal and professional fees.Legal and
professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary
expenses directly related to operating your
business are deductible as business ex-
penses. However, you usually cannot deduct
legal fees you pay to acquire business assets.
Add them to the basis of the property.
If the fees include payments for work of a
personal nature (such as making a will), you
take a business deduction only for the part
of the fee related to your business. The per-
sonal portion of legal fees for producing or
collecting taxable income, doing or keeping
your job, or for tax advice may be deductible
on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize
deductions. See Publication 529.
Tax preparation fees.You can deduct
as a trade or business expense the cost of
preparing that part of your tax return relating
to your business as a sole proprietor. The
remaining cost may be deductible on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deductions.
You can also take a business deduction
for the amount you pay or incur in resolving
asserted tax deficiencies for your business
as a sole proprietor.
Licenses and regulatory fees. Licenses
and regulatory fees for your trade or business
paid each year to state or local governments
generally are deductible. Some licenses and
fees may have to be amortized. See chapter
9 for more information.
Lobbying expenses. Generally, you cannot
deduct lobbying expenses. Lobbying ex-
penses include amounts paid or incurred for
any of the following activities.
 Influencing legislation.
 Participating in or intervening in any poli-
tical campaign for, or against, any candi-
date for public office.
 Attempting to influence the general pub-
lic, or segments of the public, about
elections, legislative matters, or referen-
dums.
 Communicating directly with covered
executive branch officials (defined later)
in any attempt to influence the official
actions or positions of those officials.
 Researching, preparing, planning, or co-
ordinating any of the preceding activities.
Your expenses for influencing legislation
and communicating directly with a covered
executive branch official include a portion of
your labor costs and general and administra-
tive costs of your business. For information
on making this allocation, see section
1.162–28 of the regulations.
You cannot take a charitable deduction
or business expense for amounts paid to an
organization if both the following apply.
 The organization conducts lobbying ac-
tivities on matters of direct financial in-
terest to your business.
 A principal purpose of your contribution
is to avoid the rules discussed earlier that
prohibit a business deduction for lobbying
expenses.
If a tax-exempt organization, other than a
section 501(c)(3) organization, provides you
with a notice on the part of dues that is
allocable to nondeductible lobbying and poli-
tical expenses, you cannot deduct that part
of the dues.
Covered executive branch official.For
purposes of this discussion, a covered exec-
utive branch official includes the following.
 1) The President.
2) The Vice President.
3) Any officer or employee of the White
House Office of the Executive Office of
the President and the two most senior
level officers of each of the other agen-
cies in the Executive Office.
4) Any individual who:
a) Is serving in a position in Level I of
the Executive Schedule under sec-
tion 5312 of title 5, United States
Code,
b) Has been designated by the Presi-
dent as having Cabinet-level status,
or
c) Is an immediate deputy of an indi-
vidual listed in item (a) or (b).
Exceptions to denial of deduction.The
general denial of the deduction does not ap-
ply to the following.
 Expenses of appearing before, or com-
municating with, any local council or
similar governing body concerning its
legislation (local legislation) if the legis-
lation is of direct interest to you or to you
and an organization of which you are a
member. An Indian tribal government is
treated as a local council or similar gov-
erning body.
 Any in-house expenses for influencing
legislation and communicating directly
with a covered executive branch official
if those expenses for the tax year do not
exceed $2,000 (excluding overhead ex-
penses).
 Expenses incurred by taxpayers engaged
in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-
fessional lobbyists) on behalf of another
person (but does apply to payments by
the other person to the lobbyist for lob-
bying activities).
Moving machinery. Generally, the cost of
moving your machinery from one city to an-
other is a deductible expense. So is the cost
of moving machinery from one plant to an-
other, or from one part of your plant to an-
other. You can deduct the cost of installing
the machinery in the new location. However,
you must capitalize the costs of installing or
moving newly purchased machinery.
Outplacement services.You can deduct the
costs of outplacement services you provide
to your employees to help them find new
employment, such as career counseling,
resumé assistance, skills assessment, etc.
The costs of outplacement services may
cover more than one deduction category. For
example, deduct as a utilities expense the
cost of telephone calls made under this ser-
vice and deduct as rental expense the cost
of renting machinery and equipment for this
service.
Penalties and fines.Penalties you pay for
late performance or nonperformance of a
contract are generally deductible. For in-
stance, if you contracted to construct a build-
ing by a certain date and had to pay an
amount for each day the building was not
finished after that date, you can deduct the
amounts paid or incurred.
On the other hand, you cannot deduct
penalties or fines you pay to any government
agency or instrumentality because of a vio-
lation of any law. These fines or penalties in-
clude the following amounts.
 Paid because of a conviction for a crime
or after a plea of guilty or no contest in
a criminal proceeding.
 Paid as a penalty imposed by federal,
state, or local law in a civil action, in-
cluding certain additions to tax and addi-
tional amounts and assessable penalties
imposed by the Internal Revenue Code.
 Paid in settlement of actual or possible
liability for a fine or penalty, whether civil
or criminal.
 Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro-
ceeding that could result in a fine or
penalty.
Examples of nondeductible penalties and
fines include the following.
 Fines for violating city housing codes.
 Fines paid by truckers for violating state
maximum highway weight laws and air
quality laws.
 Civil penalties for violating federal laws
regarding mining safety standards and
discharges into navigable waters.
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 51

A fine or penalty does not include any of
the following.
 Legal fees and related expenses to de-
fend yourself in a prosecution or civil
action for a violation of the law imposing
the fine or civil penalty.
 Court costs or stenographic and printing
charges.
 Compensatory damages paid to a gov-
ernment.
Nonconformance penalty. You can de-
duct a nonconformance penalty assessed by
the Environmental Protection Agency for fail-
ing to meet certain emission standards.
Political contributions.You cannot deduct
contributions or gifts to political parties or
candidates as business expenses. In addi-
tion, you cannot deduct expenses you pay or
incur to take part in any political campaign of
a candidate for public office.
Indirect political contributions.You
cannot deduct indirect political contributions
and costs of taking part in political activities
as business expenses. Examples of non-
deductible expenses include the following.
 Advertising in a convention program of a
political party, or in any other publication
if any of the proceeds from the publication
are for, or intended for, the use of a poli-
tical party or candidate.
 Admission to a dinner or program (in-
cluding, but not limited to, galas, dances,
film presentations, parties, and sporting
events) if any of the proceeds from the
function are for, or intended for, the use
of a political party or candidate.
 Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, pa-
rade, concert, or similar event if identified
with a political party or candidate.
Removal costs.  You can deduct the cost of
retiring and removing a depreciable asset in
connection with the installation or production
of a replacement asset. However, you must
capitalize the cost of removing a component
of a depreciable asset if the replacement is
an improvement rather than a repair. See
Demolition expenses and losses, earlier, for
expenses you cannot deduct.
Repairs. The cost of repairing or improving
property used in your trade or business is ei-
ther a deductible or capital expense. You can
deduct repairs that keep your property in a
normal efficient operating condition, but that
do not add to its value or usefulness or
appreciably lengthen its life. If the repairs add
to the value or usefulness of your property
or significantly increase its life, you must
capitalize them. Although you cannot deduct
capital expenses as current expenses, you
can usually deduct them over a period of time
as depreciation.
The cost of repairs includes the costs of
labor, supplies, and certain other items. You
cannot deduct the value of your own labor.
Examples of repairs include the following.
 Patching and repairing floors.
 Repainting the inside and outside of a
building.
 Repairing roofs and gutters. 
 Mending leaks.
You cannot deduct the cost of repairs you
added to the cost of goods sold as a sepa-
rate business expense.
Repayments. If you had to repay an amount
you included in your income in an earlier year,
you may be able to deduct the amount repaid
for the year in which you repaid it.
Type of deduction. The type of de-
duction you are allowed in the year of repay-
ment depends on the type of income you in-
cluded in the earlier year. For instance, if you
repay an amount you previously reported as
a capital gain, deduct the repayment as a
capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). If
you reported it as self-employment income,
deduct it as a business deduction on Sched-
ule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).
If you reported the amount as wages, un-
employment compensation, or other non-
business ordinary income, enter it on line 22
of Schedule A (Form 1040). However, if the
repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1
(discussed later) applies, deduct it on line 27
of Schedule A (Form 1040).
Repayment — $3,000 or less. If the
amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, de-
duct it from your income in the year you re-
paid it.
Repayment — over $3,000.If the amount
you repaid was more than $3,000, you can
deduct the repayment, as described earlier.
However, you can choose to take a tax credit
for the year of repayment if you included the
income under a claim of right. This means
that at the time you included the income, it
appeared that you had an unrestricted right
to it. If you qualify, figure your tax under both
methods and use the method that results in
less tax.
Method 1. Figure your tax for 2000
claiming a deduction for the repaid amount. 
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2000
claiming a credit for the prepaid amount. Fol-
low these steps.
1) Figure your tax for 2000 without de-
ducting the repaid amount.
2) Refigure your tax from the earlier year
without including in income the amount
you repaid in 2000. 
3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown
on your return for the earlier year. This
is the credit.
4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax
for 2000 figured without the deduction
(step 1).
If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct the
amount repaid as discussed earlier under
Type of deduction.
If Method 2 results in less tax, claim the
credit on line 64 of Form 1040, and write
“I.R.C. 1341” next to line 64.
Example. For 1999 you filed a return and
reported your income on the cash method. In
2000 you repaid $5,000 included in your 1999
gross income under a claim of right. Your fil-
ing status in 2000 and 1999 is single. Your
income and tax for both years are as follows:
Your tax under Method 1 is $9,181. Your tax
under Method 2 is $9,831, figured as follows:
Because you pay less tax under Method 1,
you should take a deduction for the repay-
ment in 2000.
Repayment does not apply. This dis-
cussion does not apply to the following.
 Deductions for bad debts.
 Deductions from sales to customers,
such as returns and allowances, and
similar items.
 Deductions for legal and other expenses
of contesting the repayment.
Year payment deducted. If you use the
cash method of accounting, you can take the
deduction for the tax year in which you actu-
ally make the repayment. If you use any other
accounting method, you can deduct the re-
payment only for the tax year in which it is a
proper deduction under your accounting
method. For example, if you use an accrual
method, you are entitled to the deduction in
the tax year in which the obligation for the
repayment accrues.
Subscriptions.You can deduct as a busi-
ness expense subscriptions to professional,
technical, and trade journals that deal with
your business field.
Supplies and materials.Unless you have
deducted the cost in any earlier year, you
generally can deduct the cost of materials and
supplies actually consumed and used during
the tax year.
If you keep incidental materials and sup-
plies on hand, you can deduct the cost of the
incidental materials and supplies you bought
during the tax year if all of the following re-
quirements are met.
 You do not keep a record of when they
are used.
 You do not take an inventory of the
amount on hand at the beginning and end
of the tax year. 
 This method does not distort your in-
come.
You can also deduct the cost of books,
professional instruments, equipment, etc., if
you normally use them up within a year.
However, if the usefulness of these items
extends substantially beyond the year they
are placed in service, you generally must re-
cover their costs through depreciation. See
Depreciation, earlier.
1999
With Income
1999
Without Income
Taxable
Income $15,000 $10,000
Tax $ 2,254 $ 1,504
2000
Without Deduction
2000
With Deduction
Taxable
Income $49,950 $44,950
Tax $10,581 $ 9,181
Tax previously determined for 1999 ........ $ 2,254
Less: Tax as refigured .............................− 1,504
Decrease in 1999 tax $ 750
Regular tax liability for 2000 .................... $10,581
Less: Decrease in 1999 tax .....................− 750
Refigured tax for 2000 $ 9,831
Page 52 Chapter 13  Other Expenses

Utilities. Your business expenses for heat,
lights, power, and telephone service are
deductible. However, any part due to personal
use is not deductible.
Telephone. You cannot deduct the cost
of basic local telephone service (including any
taxes) for the first telephone line you have in
your home, even though you have an office
in your home. However, charges for business
long-distance phone calls on that line, as well
as the cost of a second line into your home
used exclusively for business, are deductible
business expenses.
14.
How To
Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax is-
sues, order free publications and forms, ask
tax questions, and get more information from
the IRS in several ways. By selecting the
method that is best for you, you will have
quick and easy access to tax help.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
payer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your
interests and concerns within the IRS by
protecting your rights and resolving problems
that have not been fixed through normal
channels. While Taxpayer Advocates cannot
change the tax law or make a technical tax
decision, they can clear up problems that re-
sulted from previous contacts and ensure that
your case is given a complete and impartial
review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate
office in your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a
TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see Publication
1546, The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS.
Free tax services.To find out what services
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax
publications and an index of tax topics. It also
describes other free tax information services,
including tax education and assistance pro-
grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
Personal computer. With your per-
sonal computer and modem, you can
access the IRS on the Internet at
www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you
can select:
 Frequently Asked Tax Questions (located
under Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find an-
swers to questions you may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download forms and
publications or search for forms and
publications by topic or keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under Forms &
Pubs) to enter information while the form
is displayed and then print the completed
form.
 Tax Info For You to view Internal Reve-
nue Bulletins published in the last few
years.
 Tax Regs in English to search regulations
and the Internal Revenue Code (under
United States Code (USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS Local News Net
(both located under Tax Info For Busi-
ness) to receive our electronic newslet-
ters on hot tax issues and news.
 Small Business Corner (located under
Tax Info For Business) to get information
on starting and operating a small busi-
ness.
You can also reach us with your computer
using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone
attached to your fax machine, you can
receive forms and instructions by
calling 703–368–9694. Follow the directions
from the prompts. When you order forms,
enter the catalog number for the form you
need. The items you request will be faxed to
you.
Phone. Many services are available
by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order
current and prior year forms, instructions,
and publications.
 Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–
4059 to ask tax questions or to order
forms and publications.
 TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to
listen to pre-recorded messages covering
various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone
services. To ensure that IRS representatives
give accurate, courteous, and professional
answers, we evaluate the quality of our tele-
phone services in several ways.
 A second IRS representative sometimes
monitors live telephone calls. That person
only evaluates the IRS assistor and does
not keep a record of any taxpayer's name
or tax identification number.
 We sometimes record telephone calls to
evaluate IRS assistors objectively. We
hold these recordings no longer than one
week and use them only to measure the
quality of assistance.
 We value our customers' opinions.
Throughout this year, we will be survey-
ing our customers for their opinions on
our service.
Walk-in. You can walk in to many
post offices, libraries, and IRS offices
to pick up certain forms, instructions,
and publications. Also, some libraries and IRS
offices have:
 An extensive collection of products avail-
able to print from a CD-ROM or photo-
copy from reproducible proofs.
 The Internal Revenue Code, regulations,
Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-
tive Bulletins available for research pur-
poses.
Mail. You can send your order for
forms, instructions, and publications
to the Distribution Center nearest to
you and receive a response within 10 work-
days after your request is received. Find the
address that applies to your part of the
country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and foreign ad-
dresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publi-
cation 1796, Federal Tax Products on
CD-ROM, and obtain:
 Current tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications.
 Prior-year tax forms, instructions, and
publications.
 Popular tax forms which may be filled in
electronically, printed out for submission,
and saved for recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
The CD-ROM can be purchased from
National Technical Information Service (NTIS)
by calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet
at www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release
is available in mid-December and the final
release is available in late January.
IRS Publication 3207, The Business Re-
source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that
contains information important to small busi-
nesses. It is available in mid-February. You
can get one free copy by calling
1–800–829–3676 or visiting the IRS web site
at www.irs.gov/prod/bus_info/sm_bus/sm
bus-cd.html.
Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help Page 53

Index
A
 Accountable plan ....................... 46
 Achievement awards ................... 6
 Advertising ........................... 48, 49
 Amortization:
 Anti-abuse rule ..................... 32
 Anti-churning rules ............... 31
 Bond premium ...................... 36
Corporate organization costs 33
Dispositions of section 197 in-
tangibles .......................... 32
 Experimental costs ............... 35
Going into business costs .... 33
How to amortize ................... 34
How to deduct ...................... 29
Incorrect amount deducted .. 32
 Partnership organization
costs ................................ 33
Pollution control facilities ...... 35
 Reforestation costs .............. 34
 Related person ..................... 31
 Research costs .................... 35
Section 197 intangibles
defined ............................ 30
 Start-up costs ....................... 33
 Anticipated liabilities .................. 49
 Assessments, local .................... 21
Assistance (See Tax help)               
 At-risk limits ................................. 4
 Attorney fees ............................. 51
 Awards:
 Achievement ........................... 6
 Length-of-service .................... 6
 Safety achievement ................ 6
B
Bad debts (See Business bad debts)
Black lung payments ................. 49
 Bond premium ........................... 36
 Bonuses:
 Employee ............................... 6
 Royalties ............................... 40
 Bribes ........................................ 49
Business bad debts:
 Defined ................................. 41
How to treat .......................... 42
 Recovery .............................. 42
 Types of ............................... 41
 When worthless .................... 42
Where to deduct ................... 43
 Business:
 Assets ..................................... 3
Books and records ............... 30
 Meal expenses ..................... 48
Use of car ......................... 3, 49
Use of home ........................... 3
C
 Campaign contribution .............. 52
 Capital expenses ..................... 2, 3
Capitalization of interest ............ 18
Car and truck expenses ........ 3, 49
 Carrying charges ....................... 25
 Charitable:
 Contributions ........................ 49
 Sports event ......................... 49
Circulation costs, newspapers and
periodicals ............................ 26
 Clean-fuel property .................... 43
Cleanup costs, environmental ... 50
 Club dues .................................. 50
 Comments ................................... 1
 Commitment fees ...................... 18
 Compensation ........................... 10
 Computer software .................... 31
Constant-yield method, OID ...... 17
 Contested liability ........................ 4
Contribution limits, SIMPLE IRA 10
 Contributions:
 Charitable ............................. 49
 Political ................................. 52
 Copyrights ................................. 30
 Cost depletion ........................... 37
Cost of getting lease ........... 14, 36
Cost of goods sold ...................... 2
Covenant not to compete .......... 30
Credit, electric vehicle ............... 45
D
De minimis OID ......................... 17
 Debt-financed:
 Acquisition ............................ 16
 Distributions .......................... 17
 Definitions:
 Achievement award ................ 6
Business bad debt ............... 41
 Clean-burning fuel ................ 43
Clean-fuel vehicle property .. 43
Clean-fuel vehicle refueling
property ........................... 44
 Motor vehicle ........................ 43
 Necessary expense ................ 2
 Nonqualifying property ......... 43
 Ordinary expense ................... 2
Qualified electric vehicle ...... 45
Section 197 intangibles ........ 30
 Depletion:
 Mineral property ................... 36
Oil and gas wells .................. 37
 Percentage table .................. 39
 Timber .................................. 40
Who can claim ..................... 36
 Depreciation .............................. 50
Development costs, miners ....... 26
Disabled, improvements for ...... 27
Drilling and development costs . 25
 Driveways .................................... 3
 Dues, membership .................... 50
E
 Economic interest ...................... 36
 Economic performance ............... 4
 Education expenses .............. 6, 50
Elderly, improvements for ......... 27
Electric vehicle credit ................ 45
Employee benefit programs:
 Deduction for .......................... 7
 Employees' pay ........................... 5
 Employment taxes ..................... 21
 Entertainment tickets ................. 49
Environmental cleanup costs .... 50
 Excise taxes .............................. 21
 Experimentation costs ......... 25, 35
 Exploration costs ....................... 26
F
 Fees:
 Commitment ......................... 18
Legal and professional ......... 51
 Loan origination .................... 18
 Regulatory ............................ 51
Tax return preparation ......... 51
 Fines .......................................... 51
 Forgone interest ........................ 19
 Form 4562 ................................. 34
 Form:
 1098 ..................................... 17
 3115 ..................................... 21
 4562 ..................................... 29
 4952 ..................................... 16
 5213 ....................................... 5
 5304–SIMPLE ...................... 10
 5305–S ................................. 10
 5305–SA ............................... 10
 5305–SEP .............................. 8
 5305–SIMPLE ...................... 10
 8582 ..................................... 16
 8826 ..................................... 29
 8834 ..................................... 45
 T ........................................... 40
 W–2 ...................................... 11
 Franchise ............................. 30, 50
 Franchise taxes ......................... 22
Free tax services ....................... 53
 Fringe benefits ............................. 7
 Fuel taxes .................................. 22
G
 Gas wells ................................... 39
 Geothermal wells ................. 25, 39
Gifts, nominal value ..................... 6
Going into business ............... 2, 33
 Goodwill ..................................... 30
H
Health insurance, deduction for
self-employed ....................... 22
 Heating equipment ...................... 3
Help (See Tax help)                         
Hobby losses, not for profit ......... 4
Home, business use .................... 3
I
 Impairment-related expenses,
medical expenses ................ 51
 Improvements:
 By lessee .............................. 14
For disabled and elderly ...... 27
To business assets ................ 3
 Income taxes ............................. 21
Incorrect amount of amortization
deducted ............................... 32
Individual retirement arrange-
ments (IRAs) ........................ 13
 Insurance:
 Capitalizing premiums .......... 24
 Deductible premiums ........... 22
 Nondeductible premiums ..... 24
 Self-employed individuals .... 22
Intangible drilling costs .............. 25
 Intangibles, amortization ........... 30
 Interest:
 Allocation of .......................... 15
 Below-market ....................... 19
Business expense for ........... 15
 Capitalized ............................ 18
 Carrying charge .................... 25
 Deductible ............................ 17
 Forgone ................................ 19
Life insurance policies .......... 18
 Not deductible ...................... 18
 Refunds of ............................ 19
When to deduct .................... 19
 Interview expenses .................... 51
 IRAs ........................................... 13
K
Keogh plan (See Qualified plan)     
 Key person ................................ 18
 Kickbacks .................................. 49
L
 Leases:
 Canceling ............................. 13
Cost of getting ................ 14, 36
Improvements by lessee ...... 14
 Leveraged ............................ 13
 Mineral .................................. 40
Oil and gas ........................... 40
 Sales distinguished .............. 13
 Taxes on .............................. 14
Legal and professional fees ...... 51
 Licenses .............................. 30, 51
Line of credit .............................. 16
 Loans:
Below-market interest rate ... 19
 Discounted ........................... 19
 Origination fees .................... 18
 To employees ......................... 7
 Lobbying expenses ................... 51
Lodging and meals ...................... 7
Long-term care insurance ......... 22
 Losses:
 At-risk limits ............................ 4
 Limits ...................................... 4
 Net operating .......................... 4
 Not-for-profit rules .................. 4
 Passive activities .................... 4
M
 Machinery parts ........................... 3
Materials and supplies .............. 52
Meals and entertainment ........... 48
Meals and lodging ....................... 7
Medical expenses, Impairment-
related expenses .................. 51
 Mining:
 Depletion .............................. 39
 Development costs ............... 26
 Exploration costs .................. 26
Money purchase pension plan .. 11
More information (See Tax help)     
 Mortgage:
Cost of acquiring .................. 17
 Interest ................................. 17
Moving expenses, machinery .... 51
N
 Natural gas ................................ 39
 Necessary expense ..................... 2
Net operating loss ....................... 4
 Nonaccountable plan ................. 48
 Nonqualifying intangibles .......... 31
 Not-for-profit activities ................. 4
 Notification requirements ........... 10
O
Office in home ............................. 3
Oil and gas wells:
 Depletion .............................. 37
 Drilling costs ......................... 25
 Partnerships ......................... 38
 S corporations ...................... 38
 Ordinary expense ........................ 2
 Organization costs:
 Corporate ............................. 33
 Partnership ........................... 33
 Outplacement services .............. 51
P
 Passive activities ......................... 4
Payments in kind ......................... 4
 Penalties:
 Deductible ............................ 51
 Nondeductible ...................... 51
 Prepayment .......................... 17
 Percentage depletion ................ 37
 Personal expenses ...................... 3
Personal property tax ................ 22
 Points ......................................... 18
 Political contributions ................. 52
Pollution control facilities ........... 35
 Prepaid expenses:
 General rule ........................... 4
 Insurance .............................. 24
 Interest ................................. 19
 Rent ...................................... 13
 Prepayment penalty .................. 17
 Profit-sharing plans ................... 11
Publications (See Tax help)             
Q
 Qualified plan ............................ 11
R
Real estate taxes ...................... 20
 Recapture:
 Clean-fuel deductions .......... 44
Electric vehicle credit ........... 45
 Exploration expenses ........... 26
 Timber property .................... 35
Recovery of amount deducted .... 4
 Reforestation costs .................... 34
 Regulatory fees ......................... 51
 Reimbursements:
 Accountable plan .................. 46
 Mileage ................................. 47
Page 54

 Nonaccountable plan ........... 48
 Per diem ............................... 47
 Qualifying requirements ....... 46
 Related persons:
 Anti-churning rules ............... 31
Clean-fuel vehicle deduction 44
Coal or iron ore .................... 40
 Payments to ..................... 4, 19
 Refiners ................................ 37
 Unreasonable rent ................ 13
 Removal costs ........................... 52
Removing a retired asset .......... 27
Rent expense, capitalizing ........ 15
 Repairs ...................................... 52
Repayments (claim of right) ...... 52
 Replacements .............................. 3
 Research costs .................... 25, 35
 Retirement plans:
 Defined benefit ..................... 11
 Defined contribution ............. 11
 IRAs ...................................... 13
 Money purchase ................... 11
 Profit-sharing ........................ 11
 Qualified ............................... 11
 Salary reduction ..................... 9
 SEP ........................................ 8
 SIMPLE .................................. 9
 Roads .......................................... 3
S
Salaries and wages ..................... 5
 Sales taxes ................................ 22
Self-employed health insurance
deduction .............................. 22
 Self-employment tax .................. 22
Self-insurance, reserve for ........ 24
 SEP plans .................................... 8
 Sick pay ....................................... 8
SIMPLE IRA plans ................ 9, 10
 SIMPLE plans .............................. 9
Standard meal allowance .......... 47
Standard mileage rate ............... 47
 Standby charges ....................... 18
 Start-up costs ............................ 33
 Subscriptions ............................. 50
 Suggestions ................................. 1
Supplies and materials .............. 52
T
 Tax help ..................................... 53
Tax preparation fees ................. 51
 Taxes:
 Carrying charge .................... 25
 Employment ......................... 21
 Excise ................................... 21
 Franchise .............................. 22
 Fuel ...................................... 22
 Income .................................. 21
 Leased property ................... 14
 Personal property ................. 22
 Real estate ........................... 20
 Sales .................................... 22
 Unemployment fund ............. 21
 Taxpayer Advocate ................... 53
 Telephone .................................. 53
 Timber ................................. 34, 40
 Tools ............................................ 3
Trademark, trade name ....... 30, 50
 Travel ......................................... 46
 TTY/TDD information ................ 53
U
Unemployment fund taxes ........ 21
Unpaid expenses, related per-
son .................................... 4, 19
 Utilities ....................................... 53
V
 Vacation pay ................................ 8
W
Wages and salaries ..................... 5
Welfare benefit funds .................. 7
/H18549
Page 55