Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P527.SGM (12-Nov-2004) (Init. & date)
D:\USERS\xcgcb\documents\Publications 2004\Publication
Filename: 527\04p527_indexed.SGM
Page 1 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 527 ContentsCat. No. 15052W
Reminder ...................... 1Department
of the Introduction..................... 1ResidentialTreasury
Rental Income ................... 2Internal
Revenue Rental Rental Expenses ................. 2Service
Repairs and Improvements........ 3
Other Expenses................ 3Property Condominiums and Cooperatives.... 4
Not Rented for Profit.............. 5
(Including Property Changed to Rental Use...... 5
Rental of Renting Part of Property............ 5
Vacation Homes) Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
(Including Vacation Home)....... 5
Dwelling Unit Used as Home....... 5For use in preparing Figuring Days of Personal Use...... 6
How To Divide Expenses.......... 7
How To Figure Rental Income2004 Returns and Deductions............. 7
Depreciation.................... 7
Special Depreciation Allowance..... 9
MACRS ..................... 9
MACRS Depreciation Under GDS.... 12
Optional Tables................ 13
MACRS Depreciation Under ADS.... 14
Casualties and Thefts.............. 14
Limits on Rental Losses............ 14
At-Risk Rules................. 15
Passive Activity Limits............ 15
How To Report Rental Income and
Expenses ................... 16
Schedule E (Form 1040).......... 16
How To Get Tax Help.............. 19
Index.......................... 21
Reminder
Photographs of missing children.The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
dren. Photographs of missing children selected
by the Center may appear in this publication on
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
help bring these children home by looking at the
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Introduction
Get forms and other information This publication discusses rental income and
expenses, including depreciation, and explains
faster and easier by:
how to report them on your return. It also covers
casualty losses on rental property and the pas-
Internet • www.irs.gov sive activity and at-risk rules.
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine) Sale of rental property.For information on
how to figure and report any gain or loss from

Page 2 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the sale or other disposition of your rental prop- payment made by your tenant as a rental ex-
erty, get Publication 544, Sales and Other Dis- pense.Rental Income
positions of Assets.
Example 2. While you are out of town, theYou generally must include in your gross incomeSale of main home used as rental property. furnace in your rental property stops working.all amounts you receive as rent. Rental incomeFor information on how to figure and report any Your tenant pays for the necessary repairs andis any payment you receive for the use or occu-gain or loss from the sale or other disposition of deducts the repair bill from the rent payment.pation of property. In addition to amounts youyour main home that you also used as rental Include the repair bill paid by the tenant and anyreceive as normal rent payments, there areproperty, get Publication 523, Selling Your amount received as a rent payment in yourother amounts, discussed later, that may beHome. rental income. You can deduct the repair pay-rental income.
ment made by your tenant as a rental expense.Comments and suggestions. We welcome
When to report. When you report rental in-your comments about this publication and your Property or services.If you receive propertycome on your return depends on whether yousuggestions for future editions. or services, instead of money, as rent, includeare a cash basis taxpayer or use an accrualYou can write to us at the following address: the fair market value of the property or servicesmethod. in your rental income.   If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you reportInternal Revenue Service If the services are provided at an agreedrental income on your return for the year youIndividual Forms and Publications Branch upon or specified price, that price is the fairactually or constructively receive it. You are aSE:W:CAR:MP:T:I market value unless there is evidence to thecash basis taxpayer if you report income in the1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406 contrary.year you receive it, regardless of when it wasWashington, DC 20224
earned. You constructively receive income Example. Your tenant is a painter. He offerswhen it is made available to you, for example, byWe respond to many letters by telephone. to paint your rental property instead of paying 2being credited to your bank account.Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in- months’ rent. You accept his offer. If you use an accrual method, you generallyclude your daytime phone number, including the Include in your rental income the amount thereport income when you earn it, rather thanarea code, in your correspondence. tenant would have paid for 2 months’ rent. Youwhen you receive it. You generally deduct yourYou can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The can deduct that same amount as a rental ex-expenses when you incur them, rather thanasterisk must be included in the address.) pense for painting your property.when you pay them.Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
 For more information about when you con-Lease with option to buy.If the rental agree-ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
structively receive income and accrual methodsment gives your tenant the right to buy yourally to each email, we do appreciate your
of accounting, see Publication 538, Accountingrental property, the payments you receive underfeedback and will consider your comments as
Periods and Methods. the agreement are generally rental income. Ifwe revise our tax products.
your tenant exercises the right to buy the prop-Advance rent. Advance rent is any amountTax questions. If you have a tax question, erty, the payments you receive for the periodyou receive before the period that it covers.visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. We after the date of sale are considered part of theInclude advance rent in your rental income in thecannot answer tax questions at either of the selling price.year you receive it regardless of the period cov-addresses listed above.
ered or the method of accounting you use.Rental of property also used as a home.IfOrdering forms and publications. Visit you rent property that you also use as yourwww.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and Example. You sign a 10-year lease to renthome and you rent it fewer than 15 days duringpublications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write toyour property. In the first year, you receivethe tax year, do not include the rent you receiveone of the three addresses shown under How To $5,000 for the first year’s rent and $5,000 as rentin your income and do not deduct rental ex-Get Tax Help in the back of this publication.for the last year of the lease. You must includepenses. However, you can deduct on Schedule
$10,000 in your income in the first year.A (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualty
Useful Items and theft losses that are allowed for nonrentalSecurity deposits.Do not include a securityYou may want to see: property. See Personal Use of Dwelling Unitdeposit in your income when you receive it if you(Including Vacation Home), later.plan to return it to your tenant at the end of thePublication
Part interest.If you own a part interest inlease. But if you keep part or all of the security❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car rental property, you must report your part of thedeposit during any year because your tenantExpenses rental income from the property.does not live up to the terms of the lease, include
the amount you keep in your income in that year.❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed in
If an amount called a security deposit is to beService Before 1987
used as a final payment of rent, it is advance❏ 535 Business Expenses rent. Include it in your income when you receiveRental Expenses
it.❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
This section discusses expenses of rentingPayment for canceling a lease.If your tenant❏ 551 Basis of Assets property that you ordinarily can deduct from yourpays you to cancel a lease, the amount yourental income. It includes information on the❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rulesreceive is rent. Include the payment in yourexpenses you can deduct if you rent a condo-income in the year you receive it regardless of❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property minium or cooperative apartment, if you rentyour method of accounting. part of your property, or if you change yourForm (and Instructions) property to rental use. Depreciation, which youExpenses paid by tenant.If your tenant pays
can also deduct from your rental income, is❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization any of your expenses, the payments are rental
discussed later under Depreciation.income. You must include them in your income.❏ 5213 Election To Postpone You can deduct the expenses if they are deduct-When to deduct. You generally deduct yourDetermination as To Whether the ible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses, rental expenses in the year you pay them.Presumption Applies That an later, for more information.Activity Is Engaged in for Profit Vacant rental property.If you hold property
Example 1. Your tenant pays the water and for rental purposes, you may be able to deduct❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
sewage bill for your rental property and deducts your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-❏ Schedule E (Form 1040)Supplemental it from the normal rent payment. Under the terms ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, orIncome and Loss of the lease, your tenant does not have to pay maintaining the property while the property is
See How To Get Tax Help at the end of this this bill. Include the utility bill paid by the tenant vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss of
publication for information about getting these and any amount received as a rent payment in rental income for the period the property is va-
publications and forms. your rental income. You can deduct the utility cant.
Page 2

Page 3 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Pre-rental expenses.You can deduct your ing, and replacing broken windows are exam- rental purposes, you can deduct an equal part of
ordinary and necessary expenses for managing, ples of repairs. the cost each year over the term of the lease.
conserving, or maintaining rental property from If you make repairs as part of an extensive
Rental of equipment. You can deduct thethe time you make it available for rent. remodeling or restoration of your property, the
rent you pay for equipment that you use forwhole job is an improvement.
Depreciation.You can begin to depreciate rental purposes. However, in some cases, lease
rental property when it is ready and available for contracts are actually purchase contracts. If so,Improvements. An improvement adds to the
rent. See Placed-in-Service Date under Depre- you cannot deduct these payments. You canvalue of property, prolongs its useful life, or
ciation, later. recover the cost of purchased equipmentadapts it to new uses. Table 1 shows examples
through depreciation.of many improvements.Expenses for rental property sold.If you sell  If you make an improvement to property, theproperty you held for rental purposes, you can Insurance premiums paid in advance.If youcost of the improvement must be capitalized.deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses for pay an insurance premium for more than oneThe capitalized cost can generally be depreci-managing, conserving, or maintaining the prop- year in advance, each year you can deduct theated as if the improvement were separate prop-erty until it is sold. part of the premium payment that will apply toerty. that year. You cannot deduct the total premium
Personal use of rental property. If you in the year you pay it.
sometimes use your rental property for personal
Other Expenses
purposes, you must divide your expenses be- Local benefit taxes.Generally, you cannot
In addition to depreciation and the cost of re-tween rental and personal use. Also, your rental deduct charges for local benefits that increase
pairs, you can deduct the following expensesexpense deductions may be limited. See Per- the value of your property, such as charges for
from your rental income.sonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewer
Home), later. systems. These charges are nondepreciable• Advertising. capital expenditures. You must add them to the
Part interest.If you own a part interest in• Cleaning and maintenance. basis of your property. You can deduct local
rental property, you can deduct your part of the benefit taxes if they are for maintaining, repair-• Utilities.expenses that you paid. ing, or paying interest charges for the benefits.
• Insurance.
Interest expense.You can deduct mortgageRepairs and Improvements • Taxes. interest you pay on your rental property. Chapter
5 of Publication 535 explains mortgage interestYou can deduct the cost of repairs to your rental• Interest.
in detail.property. You cannot deduct the cost of im-• Points.provements. You recover the cost of improve- Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.ments by taking depreciation (explained later).• Commissions. Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage
on your rental property cannot be deducted asSeparate the costs of repairs and im-• Tax return preparation fees.
interest. These expenses, which include mort-provements, and keep accurate rec- • Travel expenses. gage commissions, abstract fees, and recordingords. You will need to know the cost ofRECORDS
fees, are capital expenses. However, you canimprovements when you sell or depreciate your• Rental payments.
amortize them over the life of the mortgage.property. • Local transportation expenses.
Form 1098. If you paid $600 or more ofRepairs. A repair keeps your property in goodSome of these expenses are discussed next.mortgage interest on your rental property to anyoperating condition. It does not materially add to one person, you should receive a Form 1098,the value of your property or substantially pro-Rental payments for property.You can de- Mortgage Interest Statement, or similar state-long its life. Repainting your property inside or duct the rent you pay for property that you usement showing the interest you paid for the year.out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster- for rental purposes. If you buy a leasehold forIf you and at least one other person (other than
your spouse if you file a joint return) were liableTable 1. Examples of Improvements for, and paid interest on the mortgage, and the
other person received the Form 1098, reportCaution: Work you do (or have done) on your home that does not add much to eitheryour share of the interest on Schedule E (Formthe value or the life of the property, but rather keeps the property in good condition, is1040), line 13. Attach a statement to your returnconsidered a repair, not an improvement. showing the name and address of the other
person. In the left margin of Schedule E, next toAdditions Heating & Air Conditioning
line 13, enter “See attached.”Bedroom Heating system
Bathroom Central air conditioning Points.   The term “points” is often used toDeck Furnace describe some of the charges paid by a bor-Garage Duct work rower to take out a loan or a mortgage. ThesePorch Central humidifier charges are also called loan origination fees,Patio Filtration system
maximum loan charges, or premium charges. If
any of these charges (points) are solely for theLawn & Grounds Plumbing
use of money, they are interest.Landscaping Septic system
Points paid when you take out a loan orDriveway Water heater
mortgage result in original issue discount (OID).Walkway Soft water system
Fence Filtration system In general, the points (OID) are deductible as
Retaining wall interest unless they must be capitalized. How
Sprinkler system Interior Improvements you figure the amount of points (OID) you can
Swimming pool Built-in appliances deduct each year depends on whether or not
Kitchen modernization your total OID, including the OID resulting from
Miscellaneous Flooring the points, is insignificant or de minimis. If theStorm windows, doors Wall-to-wall carpeting OID is not de minimis, you must use theNew roof constant-yield method to figure how much youCentral vacuum Insulation can deduct.Wiring upgrades Attic
Satellite dish Walls, floor De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it
Security system Pipes, duct work is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the
stated redemption price at maturity multiplied by
Page 3

Page 4 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the number of full years from the date of original computing the present value of all principal andTax return preparation.You can deduct, as a
issue to maturity (the term of the loan). interest payments, produces an amount equal torental expense, the part of tax return preparation
the principal amount of the loan. fees you paid to prepare Schedule E (FormIf the OID is de minimis, you can choose one
of the following ways to figure the amount you 1040), Part I. For example, on your 2004 Sched-Qualified stated interest (QSI) is stated inter-
can deduct each year. ule E you can deduct fees paid in 2004 to pre-est that is unconditionally payable in cash or
pare Part I of your 2003 Schedule E. You canproperty (other than another loan of the issuer)
1. On a constant-yield basis over the term ofat least annually over the term of the loan at aalso deduct, as a rental expense, any expense
the loan. single fixed rate. you paid to resolve a tax underpayment related
to your rental activities.2. On a straight line basis over the term of
Example of constant yield.The facts arethe loan.
the same as in the previous example. The yieldCondominiums3. In proportion to stated interest payments.to maturity on your loan is 10.2467%, com-
and Cooperativespounded annually.4. In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
You figure the amount of points (OID) youIf you rent out a condominium or a cooperativeYou make this choice by deducting the OID in acan deduct in 2004 as follows. apartment, special rules apply. Condominiumsmanner consistent with the method chosen on
are treated differently from cooperatives.your timely filed tax return for the tax year inPrincipal amount of the loan..... $100,000
which the loan is issued. Minus: Points.............. 1,500
Issue price of the loan......... $ 98,500 CondominiumExample of de minimis amount.On Janu- Multiplied by: YTM........... × .102467
ary 1, 2004, you took out a loan for $100,000.Total.................... 10,093 If you own a condominium, you own a dwellingThe loan matures on January 1, 2014 (a 10-yearMinus: QSI................ 10,000 unit in a multi-unit building. You also own aterm), and the stated principal amount of thePoints (OID) deductible in 2004 $ 93 share of the common elements of the structure,loan ($100,000) is payable on that date. AnYou figure the deduction for 2005 as follows.such as land, lobbies, elevators, and serviceinterest payment of $10,000 is payable to the areas. You and the other condominium ownersbank on January 2 of each year, beginning onIssue price................ $98,500 may pay dues or assessments to a special cor-Plus: Points (OID) deducted in 2004 93January 2, 2005. When the loan was made, you
poration that is organized to take care of theAdjusted issue price.......... $98,593paid $1,500 in points to the bank. The points
common elements.Multiplied by: YTM........... × .102467reduced the issue price of the loan from
Total.................... 10,103 If you rent your condominium to others, you$100,000 to $98,500, resulting in $1,500 of OID.
Minus: QSI................ 10,000 can deduct depreciation, repairs, upkeep, dues,You determine that the points (OID) you paid are
Points (OID) deductible in 2005 . . $ 103interest and taxes, and assessments for thede minimis based on the following computation.
care of the common parts of the structure. You
Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan orRedemption price at maturity cannot deduct special assessments you pay to a
mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any(principal amount of the loan)..... $100,000 condominium management corporation for im-remaining points (OID) in the tax year in whichMultiplied by: The term of the loan in provements. But you may be able to recovercomplete years.............. × 10 the loan or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgageyour share of the cost of any improvement byMultiplied by................ × .0025 may end due to a refinancing, prepayment, fore-taking depreciation.De minimis amount $ 2,500 closure, or similar event. However, if the refi-
nancing is with the same lender, the remainingThe points (OID) you paid ($1,500) are less thanpoints (OID) generally are not deductible in theCooperativethe de minimis amount. Therefore, you have de year in which the refinancing occurs, but may beminimis OID and you can choose one of the fourdeductible over the term of the new mortgage orIf you have a cooperative apartment that youways discussed earlier to figure the amount youloan. rent to others, you can usually deduct, as acan deduct each year. Under the straight line
rental expense, all the maintenance fees youmethod, you can deduct $150 each year for 10Travel expenses. You can deduct the ordi-pay to the cooperative housing corporation.years. nary and necessary expenses of traveling awayHowever, you cannot deduct a paymentfrom home if the primary purpose of the trip wasConstant-yield method.If the OID is not de earmarked for a capital asset or improvement,to collect rental income or to manage, conserve,minimis, you must use the constant-yield or otherwise charged to the corporation’s capitalor maintain your rental property. You must prop-method to figure how much you can deduct each account. For example, you cannot deduct a pay-erly allocate your expenses between rental andyear. ment used to pave a community parking lot,nonrental activities. For information on travelYou figure your deduction for the first year in install a new roof, or pay the principal of theexpenses, see chapter 1 of Publication 463.the following manner. corporation’s mortgage. You must add the pay-
ment to the basis of your stock in the corpora- To deduct travel expenses, you must1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen- keep records that follow the rules intion.erally, this equals the proceeds of the loan.chapter 5 of Publication 463. Treat as a capital cost the amount you were
RECORDS
If you paid points on the loan, the issue
assessed for capital items. This cannot be moreprice generally is the difference between
than the amount by which your payments to theLocal transportation expenses.You can de-the proceeds and the points.
corporation exceeded your share of theduct your ordinary and necessary local transpor-2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to corporation’s mortgage interest and real estatetation expenses if you incur them to collect rentalmaturity. taxes.income or to manage, conserve, or maintain
your rental property.  Your share of interest and taxes is the3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-
ments from the result in (2). This is the amount the corporation elected to allocate to Generally, if you use your personal car,
OID you can deduct in the first year. you, if it reasonably reflects those expenses forpickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you
your apartment. Otherwise, figure your share incan deduct the expenses using one of two meth-To figure your deduction in any subsequent the following way. ods: actual expenses or the standard mileageyear, you start with the adjusted issue price. Torate. For 2004, the standard mileage rate for allget the adjusted issue price, add to the issue 1. Divide the number of your shares of stockbusiness miles is 371/2 cents a mile. For moreprice any OID previously deducted. Then follow by the total number of shares outstanding,information, see chapter 4 of Publication 463.steps (2) and (3) above. including any shares held by the corpora-The yield to maturity (YTM) is generally To deduct car expenses under either tion.shown in the literature you receive from your method, you must keep records that
2. Multiply the corporation’s deductible inter-lender. If you do not have this information, con- follow the rules in chapter 5 of Publica-RECORDS
est by the number you figured in (1). Thissult your lender or tax advisor. In general, the tion 463. In addition, you must complete Form
is your share of the interest.YTM is the discount rate that, when used in 4562, Part V, and attach it to your tax return.
Page 4

Page 5 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Multiply the corporation’s deductible taxesExample. Your tax year is the calendar $540, is a personal expense that you cannot
by the number you figured in (1). This is year. You moved from your home in May and deduct.
your share of the taxes. started renting it out on June 1. You can deduct
as rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearly
In addition to the maintenance fees paid toexpenses, such as taxes and insurance.the cooperative housing corporation, you canStarting with June, you can deduct as rentalPersonal Use ofdeduct your direct payments for repairs, upkeep,expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-and other rental expenses, including interestally billed monthly, such as utilities. Dwelling Unitpaid on a loan used to buy your stock in the
When figuring depreciation, treat the prop-corporation. The depreciation deduction allowed (Including Vacationerty as placed in service on June 1.for cooperative apartments is discussed later.
Home)
If you have any personal use of a dwelling unit
Renting Part ofNot Rented for Profit (defined later) (including a vacation home) that
you rent, you must divide your expenses be-PropertyIf you do not rent your property to make a profit, tween rental use and personal use. See Figuring
you can deduct your rental expenses only up to Days of Personal Use and How To Divide Ex-If you rent part of your property, you must dividethe amount of your rental income. You cannot penses, later.certain expenses between the part of the prop-carry forward to the next year any rental ex- If you used a dwelling unit for personal pur-erty used for rental purposes and the part of thepenses that are more than your rental income for poses, it may be considered a “dwelling unitproperty used for personal purposes, as thoughthe year. For more information about the rules used as a home.” If it is, you cannot deductyou actually had two separate pieces of prop-for an activity not engaged in for profit, see rental expenses that are more than your rentalerty.chapter 1 of Publication 535. income for the unit. See Dwelling Unit Used as  You can deduct the expenses related to theHome and How To Figure Rental Income andWhere to report. Report your not-for-profitpart of the property used for rental purposes,Deductions, later. If the dwelling unit is not con-rental income on Form 1040, line 21. You cansuch as home mortgage interest and real estatesidered a dwelling unit used as a home, you caninclude your mortgage interest (if you use thetaxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Formdeduct rental expenses that are more than yourproperty as your main home or second home),1040). You can also deduct as a rental expenserental income for the unit, subject to certainreal estate taxes, and casualty losses on thea part of other expenses that normally are non-limits. See Limits on Rental Losses, later.appropriate lines of Schedule A (Form 1040) ifdeductible personal expenses, such as ex-
you itemize your deductions. penses for electricity, or painting the outside ofException for minimal rental use.If you use
your house.Claim your other rental expenses, subject to the dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer
the rules explained in chapter 1 of PublicationYou can deduct the expenses for the part ofthan 15 days during the year, do not include any
535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions onthe property used for personal purposes, subjectof the rent in your income and do not deduct any
line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). You canto certain limitations, only if you itemize yourof the rental expenses. See Dwelling Unit Used
deduct these expenses only if they, togetherdeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). as Home, later.
with certain other miscellaneous itemized de-You cannot deduct any part of the cost of theductions, total more than 2% of your adjusted Dwelling unit. A dwelling unit includes afirst phone line even if your tenants have unlim-gross income. house, apartment, condominium, mobile home,ited use of it.
boat, vacation home, or similar property. AYou do not have to divide the expenses thatPostponing decision.If your rental income is dwelling unit has basic living accommodations,belong only to the rental part of your property.more than your rental expenses for at least 3 such as sleeping space, a toilet, and cookingFor example, if you paint a room that you rent, oryears out of a period of 5 consecutive years, you facilities. A dwelling unit does not include prop-if you pay premiums for liability insurance inare presumed to be renting your property to erty used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similarconnection with renting a room in your home,make a profit. You may choose to postpone the establishment.your entire cost is a rental expense. If you installdecision of whether the rental is for profit by filing Property is used solely as a hotel, motel, inn,a second phone line strictly for your tenant’sForm 5213. or similar establishment if it is regularly availableuse, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-See Publication 535 for more information. for occupancy by paying customers and is notble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-
used by an owner as a home during the year.ciation, discussed later, on the part of the
property used for rental purposes as well as on
Example. You rent a room in your homethe furniture and equipment you use for rental
Property Changed that is always available for short-term occu-purposes.
pancy by paying customers. You do not use the
to Rental Use room yourself and you allow only paying cus-How to divide expenses.If an expense is for
tomers to use the room. The room is used solelyboth rental use and personal use, such as mort-
If you change your home or other property (or a as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishmentgage interest or heat for the entire house, you
part of it) to rental use at any time other than the and is not a dwelling unit.must divide the expense between rental use and
beginning of your tax year, you must dividepersonal use. You can use any reasonable
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance,method for dividing the expense. It may be rea-Dwelling Unit Used as Homebetween rental use and personal use. sonable to divide the cost of some items (for
You can deduct as rental expenses only the The tax treatment of rental income and ex-example, water) based on the number of people
part of the expense that is for the part of the year penses for a dwelling unit that you also use forusing them. However, the two most common
the property was used or held for rental pur- personal purposes depends on whether you usemethods for dividing an expense are one based
poses. it as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Incomeon the number of rooms in your home and one
For depreciation purposes, treat the property and Deductions, later).based on the square footage of your home.
as being placed in service on the conversion   You use a dwelling unit as a home during
date. Example. You rent a room in your house.the tax year if you use it for personal purposes
   You cannot deduct depreciation or insur- The room is 12 × 15 feet, or 180 square feet.more than the greater of:
ance for the part of the year the property was Your entire house has 1,800 square feet of floor
held for personal use. However, you can include space. You can deduct as a rental expense 10%1. 14 days, or
the home mortgage interest and real estate tax of any expense that must be divided between2. 10% of the total days it is rented to othersexpenses for the part of the year the property rental use and personal use. If your heating billat a fair rental price.was held for personal use as an itemized deduc- for the year for the entire house was $600, $60
tion on Schedule A (Form 1040). ($600 × 10%) is a rental expense. The balance, See Figuring Days of Personal Use, later.
Page 5

Page 6 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur- You figure 10% of the total days rented to others cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.) and
poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price, lineal descendants (children, grandchild-at a fair rental price is 16 days. Your family also
do not count that day as a day of rental use in ren, etc.).used the apartment for 7 other days during the
applying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day ofyear. 3. Anyone under an arrangement that letspersonal use in applying both (1) and (2) above.You used the apartment as a home because you use some other dwelling unit.This rule does not apply when dividing expensesyou used it for personal purposes for 17 days.
4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.between rental and personal use. That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10%
of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).Fair rental price.A fair rental price for your Main home. If the other person or member ofproperty generally is the amount of rent that a the family in (1) or (2) above has more than oneperson who is not related to you would be willingUse as Main Home home, his or her main home is ordinarily the oneto pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rentalBefore or After Renting he or she lived in most of the time.price if it is substantially less than the rents
charged for other properties that are similar toFor purposes of determining whether a dwellingShared equity financing agreement.This isyour property. unit was used as a home, you may not have toan agreement under which two or more persons
Ask yourself the following questions whencount days you used the property as your mainacquire undivided interests for more than 50
comparing another property with yours. home before or after renting it or offering it foryears in an entire dwelling unit, including the
rent as days of personal use. Do not count themland, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-• Is it used for the same purpose? as days of personal use if: tled to occupy the unit as his or her main home
• Is it approximately the same size? upon payment of rent to the other co-owner or• You rented or tried to rent the property forowners.• Is it in approximately the same condition?12 or more consecutive months.
• Does it have similar furnishings? Donation of use of property. You use a• You rented or tried to rent the property for
dwelling unit for personal purposes if:a period of less than 12 consecutive• Is it in a similar location? months and the period ended because • You donate the use of the unit to a charita-If any of the answers are no, the propertiesyou sold or exchanged the property. ble organization,probably are not similar. This special rule does not apply when dividing• The organization sells the use of the unitexpenses between rental and personal use.Examples at a fund-raising event, and
Example 1. On February 28, you moved out • The “purchaser” uses the unit.The following examples show how to determine
of the house you had lived in for 6 years be-whether you used your rental property as a
cause you accepted a job in another town. Youhome. Examplesrent your house at a fair rental price from March
15 of that year to May 14 of the next year (14Example 1. You converted the basement of The following examples show how to determine
months). On the following June 1, you moveyour home into an apartment with a bedroom, a days of personal use.
back into your old house.bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the
basement apartment at a fair rental price toThe days you used the house as your mainExample 1. You and your neighbor are
college students during the regular school year.home from January 1 to February 28 and fromco-owners of a condominium at the beach. You
You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273June 1 to December 31 of the next year are notrent the unit to vacationers whenever possible.
days). You figured 10% of the total days rentedcounted as days of personal use. The unit is not used as a main home by anyone.
to others at a fair rental price is 27 days. Your neighbor uses the unit for 2 weeks every
Example 2. On January 31, you moved outDuring June (30 days), your brothers stayed year.
of the condominium where you had lived for 3with you and lived in the basement apartment Because your neighbor has an interest in the
years. You offered it for rent at a fair rental pricerent free. unit, both of you are considered to have used the
beginning on February 1. You were unable tounit for personal purposes during those 2Your basement apartment was used as a
rent it until April. On September 15, you sold theweeks.home because you used it for personal pur-
condominium.poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your broth-
Example 2. You and your neighbors areers is considered personal use. Your personalThe days you used the condominium as your
co-owners of a house under a shared equityuse (30 days) is more than the greater of 14main home from January 1 to January 31 are not
financing agreement. Your neighbors live in thedays or 10% of the total days it was rented (27counted as days of personal use when deter-
house and pay you a fair rental price.days). mining whether you used it as a home.
Even though your neighbors have an interest
Example 2. You rented the guest bedroom in the house, the days your neighbors live thereFiguring Daysin your home at a fair rental price during the local are not counted as days of personal use by you.
of Personal Usecollege’s homecoming, commencement, and This is because your neighbors rent the house
football weekends (a total of 27 days). Your as their main home under a shared equity fi-A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is anysister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for the nancing agreement.day that the unit is used by any of the followinglast 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10%persons. Example 3. You own a rental property thatof the total days rented to others at a fair rental
you rent to your son. Your son has no interest inprice is 3 days. 1. You or any other person who has an inter-this property. He uses it as his main home. HeThe room was used as a home because you est in it, unless you rent it to another ownerpays you a fair rental price for the property.used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That isas his or her main home under a shared Your son’s use of the property is not personalmore than the greater of 14 days or 10% of theequity financing agreement (defined later).use by you because your son is using it as his27 days it was rented (3 days). However, see Use as Main Home Before main home, he has no interest in the property,or After Renting under Dwelling Unit Used and he is paying you a fair rental price.Example 3. You own a condominium apart- As Home , earlier.ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rental
Example 4. You rent your beach house to2. A member of your family or a member ofprice for a total of 170 days during the year. For
Rosa. Rosa rents her house in the mountains tothe family of any other person who has an12 of these days, the tenant was not able to use
you. You each pay a fair rental price.interest in it, unless the family memberthe apartment and allowed you to use it even
uses the dwelling unit as his or her main You are using your house for personal pur-though you did not refund any of the rent. Your
poses on the days that Rosa uses it becausehome and pays a fair rental price. Familyfamily actually used the apartment for 10 of
your house is used by Rosa under an arrange-includes only brothers and sisters,those days. Therefore, the apartment is treated
ment that allows you to use her house.as having been rented for 160 (170 – 10) days. half-brothers and half-sisters, spouses, an-
Page 6

Page 7 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 5. You rent an apartment to your 2. You used the cottage for personal pur- ject to any limits that apply next year. You can
poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in deduct the expenses carried over to a year onlymother at less than a fair rental price. You are
May). up to the amount of your rental income for thatusing the apartment for personal purposes on
year, even if you do not use the property as yourthe days that your mother rents it because you3. The total use of the cottage was 99 dayshome for that year.rent it for less than a fair rental price. (14 days personal use + 85 days rental To figure your deductible rental expensesuse). and any carryover to next year, use Table 2.
4. Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) ofDays Used for
the cottage expenses.Repairs and Maintenance
When determining whether you used the cot-Any day that you spend working substantially full Depreciationtage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) youtime repairing and maintaining your property isused it is personal use even though you re-not counted as a day of personal use. Do not You recover the cost of income producing prop-ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-count such a day as a day of personal use even erty through yearly tax deductions. You do thisfore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83if family members use the property for recrea- by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-days of rental use for this purpose. Because you
tional purposes on the same day. ing some of the cost on the tax return each year.used the cottage for personal purposes more
Three basic factors determine how much de-than 14 days and more than 10% of the days ofExample. You own a cabin in the mountains preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) yourrental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If you
that you rent during the summer. You spend 3 basis in the property, (2) the recovery period forhave a net loss, you may not be able to deduct
days at the cabin each May, working full time to the property, and (3) the depreciation methodall of the rental expenses. See Property Used as
used. You cannot simply deduct your mortgagerepair anything that was damaged over the win-a Home  in the following discussion.
or principal payments, or the cost of furniture,ter and get the cabin ready for the summer. You
fixtures and equipment, as an expense.also spend 3 days each September, working fullHow To Figure Rental You can deduct depreciation only on the parttime to repair any damage done by renters andIncome and Deductions of your property used for rental purposes. De-getting the cabin ready for the winter.
preciation reduces your basis for figuring gain orThese 6 days do not count as days of per-How you figure your rental income and deduc-loss on a later sale or exchange.sonal use even if your family uses the cabintions depends on whether you used the dwellingYou may have to use Form 4562 to figurewhile you are repairing it. unit as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used as and report your depreciation. See How To Re-Home, earlier) and, if you used it as a home,port Rental Income and Expenses, later. Alsohow many days the property was rented at a fairHow To Divide Expenses see Publication 946.rental price.
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and Claiming the correct amount of depreciation.
personal purposes, divide your expenses be- You should claim the correct amount of depreci-
Property Not Used as a Hometween the rental use and the personal use based ation each tax year. Even if you did not claim
on the number of days used for each purpose. depreciation that you were entitled to deduct,If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,You can deduct expenses for the rental use of you must still reduce your basis in the propertyreport all the rental income and deduct all thethe unit under the rules explained in How To by the full amount of depreciation that you couldrental expenses. See How To Report RentalFigure Rental Income and Deductions, later. have deducted. See Decreases to basis, later,Income and Expenses, later. for more information. If you did not deduct theWhen dividing your expenses, follow theseYour deductible rental expenses can becorrect amount of depreciation for property inrules. more than your gross rental income. However,any year, you may be able to make a correctionsee Limits on Rental Losses, later.1. Any day that the unit is rented at a fair for that year by filing Form 1040X, Amended
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. If you are notrental price is a day of rental use even if
allowed to make the correction on an amendedyou used the unit for personal purposesProperty Used as a Home return, you can change your accounting methodthat day. This rule does not apply when
to claim the correct amount of depreciation. SeeIf you use a dwelling unit as a home during thedetermining whether you used the unit as
Changing your accounting method, later.year, how you figure your rental income anda home.
deductions depends on how many days the unitFiling an amended return.You can file an2. Any day that the unit is available for rentwas rented at a fair rental price. amended return to correct the amount of depre-but not actually rented is not a day of
ciation claimed for any property in any of therental use. Rented fewer than 15 days. If you use a
following situations.dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer
than 15 days during the year, do not include any• You claimed the incorrect amount be-Example. Your beach cottage was avail-rental income in your income. Also, you cannotcause of a mathematical error made inable for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92deduct any expenses as rental expenses. any year.days). Your family uses the cottage during the
last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unableRented 15 days or more.If you use a dwell- • You claimed the incorrect amount be-
to find a renter for the first week in August (7ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or morecause of a posting error made in any year.
days). The person who rented the cottage forduring the year, you include all your rental in-• You have not adopted a method of ac-come in your income. See How To ReportJuly allowed you to use it over a weekend (2 counting for the property.Rental Income and Expenses, later. If you had adays) without any reduction in or refund of rent.
net profit from the rental property for the yearThe cottage was not used at all before May 17 or If an amended return is allowed, you must file(that is, if your rental income is more than theafter August 31. it by the later of the following dates.total of your rental expenses, including depreci-You figure the part of the cottage expenses
ation), deduct all of your rental expenses. How-• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-to treat as rental expenses by using the followingever, if you had a net loss, your deduction fornal return for the year in which you did notsteps. certain rental expenses is limited. deduct the correct amount. (A return filed
early is considered filed on the due date.)1. The cottage was used for rental a total ofLimit on deductions. If your rental ex-
85 days (92 − 7). The days it was availablepenses are more than your rental income, you• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for
for rent but not rented (7 days) are notcannot use the excess expenses to offset in-that year.
days of rental use. The July weekend (2come from other sources. The excess can be
days) you used it is rental use becausecarried forward to the next year and treated asChanging your accounting method. To
you received a fair rental price for therental expenses for the same property. Any ex- change your accounting method, you must file
weekend. penses carried forward to next year will be sub- Form 3115, Application for Change in Account-
Page 7

Page 8 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2. Worksheet for Figuring the Limit on Rental Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
Use this worksheet only if you answer “yes” to all of the following questions.
● Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home. )
● Did you rent the dwelling unit 15 days or more this year?
● Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
1.
2a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
3.
4a.
5.
6a.
7a.
Enter rents received
Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest (see instructions)
Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes
Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions)
Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d
Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter zero
Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining the dwelling unit (such
as repairs, insurance, and utilities)
Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest (see instructions)
Add lines 4a and 4b
Allowable operating expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4c
Subtract line 4d from line 3. If zero or less, enter zero
Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit
Add lines 6a and 6b
Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of line 5 or
line 6c
Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4d from line 4c
Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. Subtract
line 6d from line 6c
Enter the amounts on lines 2e, 4d, and 6d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I.
b.
c.
d.
b.
c.
d.
b.
Worksheet Instructions
Follow these instructions for the worksheet
above. If you were unable to deduct all your
expenses last year, because of the rental
income limit, add these unused amounts to
your expenses for this year.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the
dwelling unit that you could deduct on
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not rented
the unit. Do not include interest on a loan that
did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example,
do not include interest on a home equity loan
used to pay off credit cards or other personal
loans, buy a car, or pay college tuition. Include
interest on a loan used to buy, build, or
improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such
a loan. Enter the rental portion of this interest
on line 2a of the worksheet.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses
related to the dwelling unit that you could
deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had
not rented the dwelling unit. To do this,
complete Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts,
Section A, treating the losses as personal
losses. On Form 4684, line 17, enter 10%
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental
expenses that are directly related only to the
rental activity. These include interest on loans
used for rental activities other than to buy,
build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also
include rental agency fees, advertising, office
supplies, and depreciation on office
equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental
portion of the mortgage interest you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented
the dwelling unit. Enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of the mortgage
interest you could not deduct on Schedule A
because it is more than the limit on home
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess
casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684
you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Enter the amount from Form
4684, line 10
Enter the rental portion of A
Enter the amount from line 2c
of this worksheet
Subtract C from B. Enter the
result here and on line 6a of this
worksheet
Allocating the limited deduction. If you
cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4c or
6c this year, you can allocate the allowable
deduction in any way you wish among the
expenses included on line 4c or 6c. Enter the
amount you allocate to each expense on the
appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
mortgage interest. Do not include interest on
a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit
(as explained in the line 2a instructions).
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to
figure your personal losses on Schedule A.
Instead, figure the personal portion on a
separate Form 4684.
of your adjusted gross income figured without
your rental income and expenses from the
dwelling unit. Enter the rental portion of the
result from Form 4684, line 18, on line 2c of
this worksheet.
Property having a determinable useful life.ing Method, to get the consent of the IRS. In• You use the property in your business or
To be depreciable, your property must have aincome-producing activity (such as rentalsome instances, that consent is automatic. For
determinable useful life. This means that it mustproperty).more information, see Changing Your Account-
be something that wears out, decays, gets useding Method in Publication 946. • The property has a determinable usefulup, becomes obsolete, or loses its value fromlife. natural causes.
• The property is expected to last more thanLand. You can never depreciate the cost ofWhat Property Can be Depreciated one year. land because land does not wear out, become
You can depreciate your property if it meets all• The property is not excepted property obsolete, or get used up. The costs of clearing,
(such as property placed in service and grading, planting, and landscaping are usuallythe following requirements.
disposed of in the same year and section all part of the cost of land and cannot be depreci-
• You own the property. 197 intangibles). ated.
Page 8

Page 9 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Property you own. To claim depreciation, 2001 (after May 5, 2003, to be eligible for the• MACRS (Modified Accelerated Cost Re- 50% special depreciation allowance).you usually must be the owner of the property.covery System) for property placed inYou are considered as owning property even if itservice after 1986. Placed in service date test.Generally, theis subject to a debt. property must be placed in service for use in• ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-Rented property.Generally, if you pay rent your trade or business or for the production oftem) for property placed in service afteron property, you cannot depreciate that prop- income after September 10, 2001 (after May 5,1980 but before 1987.erty. Usually, only the owner can depreciate it. If 2003, to be eligible for the 50% special deprecia-
• Useful lives and either straight line or anyou make permanent improvements to the prop- tion allowance), and before January 1, 2005.
accelerated method of depreciation, sucherty, you may be able to depreciate the improve-
Original use test.The original use of theas the declining balance method, for prop-ments. See Additions or improvements to
property must have begun with you after Sep-erty placed in service before 1981.property, later.
tember 10, 2001 (after May 5, 2003, to be eligi-
Cooperative apartments. If you are a ble for the 50% special depreciation allowance).This publication discusses MACRStenant-stockholder in a cooperative housing cor- “Original use” means the first use to which theonly. If you need information about de-poration and rent your cooperative apartment to property is put, whether or not by you.preciating property placed in serviceCAUTION
!
others, you can deduct depreciation for your
before 1987, see Publication 534.stock in the corporation. Example. Dave bought and placed in serv-
If you placed property in service before 2004,ice a new refrigerator ($700) for one of his resi-Figure your depreciation deduction as fol-
continue to use the same method of figuringdential rental properties in 2004. Dave noteslows.
depreciation that you used in the past. that the refrigerator has a 5-year recovery period
1. Figure the depreciation for all the deprecia- (see Table 3). Dave’s refrigerator is qualifyingSection 179 deduction.You cannot claim theble real property owned by the corporation. property and he claims the 50% special depreci-section 179 deduction for property held to pro-ation allowance.(Depreciation methods are discussed duce rental income. See chapter 2 of PublicationDave determines the total depreciable basislater.) If you bought your cooperative stock946. of the property to be $700. Next, he multipliesafter its first offering, figure the depreciable
Alternative minimum tax.If you use acceler-this amount by 50% to figure his special depreci-basis of this property as follows.
ated depreciation, you may have to file Formation allowance of $350 ($700 × 50%). This
a. Multiply your cost per share by the total6251, Alternative Minimum Tax–Individuals.leaves an adjusted basis of $350 ($700 − $350),
number of outstanding shares. Accelerated depreciation can be determinedwhich he will use to figure his MACRS deduc-
under MACRS, ACRS, and any other method tion.b. Add to the amount figured in (a) anythat allows you to deduct more depreciation thanFor more information, see Claiming the Spe-mortgage debt on the property on theyou could deduct using a straight line method.cial Depreciation Allowance (or Liberty Zone De-date you bought the stock. preciation Allowance) in Publication 946.
c. Subtract from the amount figured in (b)Special Depreciation
any mortgage debt that is not for the MACRSAllowancedepreciable real property, such as the
part for the land. Most business and investment property placedYou can take a special depreciation allowance
in service after 1986 is depreciated using(in addition to your regular MACRS depreciation2. Subtract from the amount figured in (1) any MACRS.deduction) for qualified property you placed in
depreciation for space owned by the cor- MACRS consists of two systems that deter-service in 2004. The allowance is 50% of the
poration that can be rented but cannot be mine how you depreciate your property—theproperty’s depreciable basis. You figure the spe-
lived in by tenant-stockholders. General Depreciation System (GDS) and thecial depreciation allowance before you figure
Alternative Depreciation System (ADS). GDS isyour regular MACRS deduction.3. Divide the number of your shares of stock used to figure your depreciation deduction forby the total number of shares outstanding,Electing to claim a lower or no special allow-property used in most rental activities, unlessincluding any shares held by the corpora-ance. You can elect, for any class of property,you elect ADS.tion. to deduct the 30% (instead of 50%) special al-To figure your MACRS deduction, you needlowance for all property in such class placed in4. Multiply the result of (2) by the percentage to know the following information about yourservice during the tax year. Or, you can elect notyou figured in (3). This is your depreciation property:to deduct any special allowance for all propertyon the stock.
in such class placed in service during the tax1. Its recovery period,
Your depreciation deduction for the yearyear. 2. Its placed-in-service date, andcannot be more than the part of your adjustedTo make an election, attach a statement to
basis (defined later) in the stock of the corpora-your return indicating what election you are3. Its depreciable basis.
tion that is allocable to your rental property.making and the class of property for which you
are making the election. See How Can You ElectSee Cooperative apartments under What Personal home changed to rental use.You
Not To Claim an Allowance? in Publication 946Property Can Be Depreciated? in chapter 1 of must use MACRS to figure the depreciation on
for more information.Publication 946 for more information. property used as your home and changed to
rental property in 2004.Qualified property.To qualify for the specialNo deduction greater than basis.The total depreciation allowance, your property mustExcluded property.You cannot use MACRSof all your yearly depreciation deductions cannotmeet the following requirements. for certain personal property placed in service inbe more than the cost or other basis of the
your rental property in 2004 if it had been previ-property. For this purpose, your yearly deprecia-1. It is new property that is depreciated under
ously placed in service before MACRS becametion deductions include any depreciation thatMACRS with a recovery period of 20 years
effective. Generally, personal property is ex-you were allowed to claim, even if you did notor less.
cluded from MACRS if you (or a person relatedclaim it. 2. It meets the following tests. to you) owned or used it in 1986 or if your tenant
is a person (or someone related to the person)a. Acquisition date test. who owned or used it in 1986. However, theDepreciation Methods
b. Placed in service date test. property is not excluded if your 2004 deduction
There are three ways to figure depreciation. The under MACRS (using a half-year convention) isc. Original use test.depreciation method you use depends on the less than the deduction you would have under
type of property and when it was placed in serv- ACRS. See Can You Use MACRS To Depreci-
ice. For property used in rental activities you useAcquisition date test.Generally, you must ate Your Property? in Publication 946 for more
one of the following. have acquired the property after September 10, information.
Page 9

Page 10 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The other property classes do not gen-Table 3. MACRS Recovery Periods for Property Used in Rental Activities
erally apply to property used in rental
MACRS Recovery Period activities. These classes are not dis-CAUTION
!
cussed in this publication. See Publication 946General Alternative for more information.Depreciation Depreciation
Type of Property System System Qualified Indian reservation property.
Computers and their peripheral equipment............. 5  years 5 years Shorter recovery periods are provided under
MACRS for qualified Indian reservation propertyOffice machinery, such as:
Typewriters placed in service on Indian reservations before
Calculators 2006. For more information, see chapter 4 of
Copiers................................. 5  years 6 years Publication 946.
Automobiles................................. 5  years 5 years
Additions or improvements to property.Light trucks.................................. 5  years 5 years
Treat depreciable additions or improvementsAppliances, such as:
you make to any property as separate propertyStoves
items for depreciation purposes. The recoveryRefrigerators............................. 5  years 9 years
period for an addition or improvement to prop-Carpets .................................... 5  years 9 years
erty begins on the later of: Furniture used in rental property.................... 5  years 9 years
Office furniture and equipment, such as: 1. The date the addition or improvement is
Desks placed in service, or
Files................................... 7  years 10 years 2. The date the property to which the additionAny property that does not have a class life and that has not or improvement was made is placed inbeen designated by law as being in any other class . . . 7 years 12 years service.
Roads ..................................... 1 5  years 20 years The property class and recovery period ofShrubbery .................................. 1 5  years 20 years the addition or improvement is the one thatFences ..................................... 1 5  years 20 years would apply to the original property if it were
placed in service at the same time as the addi-Residential rental property (buildings or structures)
tion or improvement.and structural components such as furnaces,
waterpipes, venting, etc...................... 27.5 years 40 years
Example. You own a residential rentalAdditions and improvements, such as a new roof........ The same recovery period as house that you have been renting since 1986that of the property to which and that you are depreciating under ACRS. Youthe addition or improvement isput an addition onto the house and placed it inmade, determined as if the service in 2004. You must use MACRS for theproperty were placed in addition. Under GDS, the addition is depreciatedservice at the same time as
as residential rental property over 27.5 years.the addition or improvement.
Placed-in-Service DateThis class also includes appliances, car-Recovery Periods Under GDS
peting, furniture, etc., used in a residentialYou can begin to depreciate property when youEach item of property that can be depreciated isrental real estate activity. place it in service in your trade or business or forassigned to a property class. The recovery pe-Depreciation on automobiles, certainthe production of income. Property is consideredriod of the property depends on the class thecomputers, and cellular telephones is lim-placed in service in a rental activity when it isproperty is in. Under GDS, the recovery periodited. See chapter 5 of Publication 946. ready and available for a specific use in thatof an asset is generally the same as its property activity.2. 7-year property. This class includes officeclass. The property classes under GDS are:
furniture and equipment (desks, files, etc.).
Example 1. On November 22 of last year,This class also includes any property that• 3-year property,
you purchased a dishwasher for your rentaldoes not have a class life and that has not• 5-year property, property. The appliance was delivered on De-been designated by law as being in any
cember 7, but was not installed and ready forother class.• 7-year property,
use until January 3 of this year. Because the
3. 15-year property. This class includes• 10-year property, dishwasher was not ready for use last year, it is
roads and shrubbery (if depreciable).not considered placed in service until this year.• 15-year property,
If the appliance had been ready for use when4. Residential rental property. This class in-• 20-year property, it was delivered in December of last year, itcludes any real property that is a rental
would have been considered placed in service inbuilding or structure (including a mobile• Nonresidential real property, and
December, even if it was not actually used untilhome) for which 80% or more of the gross• Residential rental property. this year.rental income for the tax year is from
dwelling units. It does not include a unit inThe class to which property is assigned is Example 2. On April 6, you purchased aa hotel, motel, inn, or other establishmentdetermined by its class life. Class lives and re- house to use as residential rental property. Youwhere more than half of the units are usedcovery periods for most assets are listed in Ap- made extensive repairs to the house and had iton a transient basis. If you live in any partpendix B in Publication 946. ready for rent on July 5. You began to advertiseof the building or structure, the gross rental
Under GDS, property that you placed in serv- the house for rent in July and actually rented itincome includes the fair rental value of the
ice during 2004 in your rental activities generally beginning September 1. The house is consid-part you live in. The recovery period for
falls into one of the following classes. Also see ered placed in service in July when it was readyresidential rental property is 27.5 years.
Table 3. and available for rent. You can begin to depreci-
ate the house in July.
1. 5-year property. This class includes com-
puters and peripheral equipment, office ma- Example 3. You moved from your home in
chinery (typewriters, calculators, copiers, July. During August and September you made
etc.), automobiles, and light trucks. several repairs to the house. On October 1, you
Page 10

Page 11 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
listed the property for rent with a real estate the property are part of your basis in the prop- You can allocate 85% ($68,000 ÷ $80,000)
company, which rented it on December 1. Theerty. These include: of the purchase price to the house and 15%
property is considered placed in service on Oc- ($12,000 ÷ $80,000) of the purchase price to the• Abstract fees,tober 1, the date when it was available for rent. land.
• Charges for installing utility services,Your basis in the house is $85,000 (85% of
$100,000) and your basis in the land is $15,000• Legal fees,Depreciable Basis (15% of $100,000).
• Recording fees,The depreciable basis of property used in a
• Surveys,rental activity is generally its adjusted basis
Basis Other Than Costwhen you place it in service in that activity. This• Transfer taxes,is its cost or other basis when you acquired it, There are many times when you cannot use cost• Title insurance, andadjusted for certain items occurring before you as a basis. You cannot use cost as a basis forplace it in service in the rental activity.• Any amounts the seller owes that you property that you received:If you depreciate your property under agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-MACRS, you may also have to reduce your • In return for services you performed,est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesbasis by certain deductions and credits with re-for improvements or repairs, and sales • In an exchange for other property,spect to the property, including any special de-commissions.preciation allowance (discussed earlier). • As a gift,
Basis and adjusted basis are explained inSome settlement fees and closing costs you• From your spouse, or from your formerthe following discussions. cannot include in your basis in the property are:spouse as the result of a divorce, or
If you used the property for personal • As an inheritance.1. Fire insurance premiums,purposes before changing it to rental
use, its depreciable basis is the lesser2. Rent or other charges relating to occu-
CAUTION
!
If you received property in one of these ways,of its adjusted basis or its fair market value whenpancy of the property before closing, andsee Publication 551 for information on how toyou change it to rental use. See Basis of Prop-
figure your basis.3. Charges connected with getting or refi-erty Changed to Rental Use, later.
nancing a loan, such as:
a. Points (discount points, loan originationAdjusted BasisCost Basis fees),
Before you can figure allowable depreciation,The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.b. Mortgage insurance premiums, you may have to make certain adjustments (in-The cost is the amount you pay for it in cash, in creases and decreases) to the basis of the prop-c. Loan assumption fees,debt obligation, in other property, or in services. erty. The result of these adjustments to the basisYour cost also includes amounts you pay for:d. Cost of a credit report, and is the adjusted basis.
e. Fees for an appraisal required by a• Sales tax charged on the purchase (but
lender.see the Exception that follows), Increases to basis.You must increase the
• Freight charges to obtain the property, and basis of any property by the cost of all itemsAlso, do not include amounts placed in es-properly added to a capital account. This in-crow for the future payment of items such as• Installation and testing charges. cludes:taxes and insurance.
Exception. For tax years beginning after • The cost of any additions or improvementsAssumption of a mortgage. If you buy2003, you can elect to deduct state and local having a useful life of more than one year,property and become liable for an existing mort-general sales taxes instead of state and localgage on the property, your basis is the amount• Amounts spent after a casualty to restoreincome taxes as an itemized deduction on you pay for the property plus the amount that stillSchedule A (Form 1040). If you make that the damaged property,must be paid on the mortgage.choice, you cannot include those sales taxes as • The cost of extending utility service linespart of your cost basis. Example. You buy a building for $60,000 to the property, and
cash and assume a mortgage of $240,000 on it.Loans with low or no interest.If you buy • Legal fees, such as the cost of defendingYour basis is $300,000.property on any time-payment plan that charges and perfecting title.
little or no interest, the basis of your property isLand and buildings.If you buy buildings andyour stated purchase price, less the amount Additions or improvements. Add to theyour cost includes the cost of the land on whichconsidered to be unstated interest. See Un- basis of your property the amount an addition orthey stand, you must divide the cost between thestated Interest and Original Issue Discount in improvement actually cost you, including anyland and the buildings to figure the basis forPublication 537, Installment Sales. amount you borrowed to make the addition ordepreciation of the buildings. The part of the costimprovement. This includes all direct costs, suchthat you allocate to each asset is the ratio of theReal property.If you buy real property, such as material and labor, but not your own labor. Itfair market value of that asset to the fair marketas a building and land, certain fees and other also includes all expenses related to the additionvalue of the whole property at the time you buyexpenses you pay are part of your cost basis in or improvement.it.the property. For example, if you had an architect draw upIf you are not certain of the fair market valuesReal estate taxes.If you buy real property plans for remodeling your property, theof the land and the buildings, you can divide theand agree to pay real estate taxes on it that were architect’s fee is a part of the cost of the remod-cost between them based on their assessedowed by the seller and the seller did not reim- eling. Or, if you had your lot surveyed to put up avalues for real estate tax purposes.burse you, the taxes you pay are treated as part fence, the cost of the survey is a part of the cost
of your basis in the property. You cannot deduct of the fence.Example. You buy a house and land forthem as taxes paid. $100,000. The purchase contract does not Keep separate accounts for depreciable ad-
If you reimburse the seller for real estatespecify how much of the purchase price is for theditions or improvements made after you placetaxes the seller paid for you, you can usuallyhouse and how much is for the land. the property in service in your rental activity. Fordeduct that amount. Do not include that amount information on depreciating additions or im-The latest real estate tax assessment on thein your basis in the property. provements, see Additions or improvements toproperty was based on an assessed value of
property, earlier, under Recovery Periods Under$80,000, of which $68,000 is for the house andSettlement fees and other costs.Settle-
GDS .$12,000 is for the land.ment fees and closing costs that are for buying
Page 11

Page 12 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The cost of landscaping improvementspreciation using the lesser of fair market value or method for one item in a class of property ap-
is usually treated as an addition to theadjusted basis. plies to all property in that class that is placed in
basis of the land, which is not deprecia- service during the tax year of the election. YouCAUTION
!
Fair market value.This is the price at whichble. See What property can be depreciated, ear- make this election on Form 4562. In Part III,the property would change hands between alier. column (f), enter “150 DB.”buyer and a seller, neither having to buy or sell,If you use either the 200% or 150% decliningand both having reasonable knowledge of all theAssessments for local improvements. balance method, you figure your deduction us-relevant facts. Sales of similar property, on orAssessments for items which tend to increase ing the straight line method in the first tax yearabout the same date, may be helpful in figuringthe value of property, such as streets and side- that the straight line method gives you an equalthe fair market value of the property.walks, must be added to the basis of the prop- or larger deduction.
erty. For example, if your city installs curbing on You can also choose to use the straight lineFiguring the basis.The basis for deprecia-the street in front of your house, and assesses method with a half-year or mid-quarter conven-tion is the lesser of:you and your neighbors for the cost of curbing, tion for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property. The choice to• The fair market value of the property onyou must add the assessment to the basis of use the straight line method for one item in athe date you changed it to rental use, oryour property. Also add the cost of legal fees class of property applies to all property in that
paid to obtain a decrease in an assessment class that is placed in service during the tax year• Your adjusted basis on the date of thelevied against property to pay for local improve- of the election. You elect the straight line methodchange—that is, your original cost orments. You cannot deduct these items as taxes on Form 4562. In Part III, column (f), enter “S/L.”other basis of the property, plus the cost ofor depreciate them. Once you make this election, you cannotpermanent additions or improvements
 Assessments for maintenance or repair or change to another method.since you acquired it, minus deductions for
meeting interest charges are deductible as any casualty or theft losses claimed on
taxes. Do not add them to your basis in the Residential rental property.You must useearlier years’ income tax returns and other
property. the straight line method and a mid-month con-decreases to basis.
vention for residential rental property.Deducting vs. capitalizing costs.You
cannot add to your basis costs that are deducti-Example. Several years ago you built your
ble as current expenses. However, there arehome for $140,000 on a lot that cost you Declining Balance Methodcertain costs you can choose either to deduct or$14,000. Before changing the property to rental
to capitalize. If you capitalize these costs, in-use last year, you added $28,000 of permanentTo figure your MACRS deduction, first deter-clude them in your basis. If you deduct them, doimprovements to the house and claimed a mine your declining balance rate from the tablenot include them in your basis. $3,500 deduction for a casualty loss to thebelow. However, if you elect to use the 150%
The costs you may be able to choose tohouse. Because land is not depreciable, you candeclining balance method for 5- or 7-year prop-
deduct or to capitalize include carrying charges,only include the cost of the house when figuringerty, figure the declining balance rate by dividing
such as interest and taxes, that you must pay tothe basis for depreciation. 1.5 (150%) by the recovery period for the prop-
own property. The adjusted basis of the house at the timeerty.
For more information about deducting orof the change in use was $164,500 ($140,000 +In the first tax year, multiply the adjusted
capitalizing costs, see chapter 8 in Publication$28,000 − $3,500). basis of the property by the declining balance
535. On the date of the change in use, your prop-rate and apply the appropriate convention to
erty had a fair market value of $168,000, offigure your depreciation. In later years (beforeDecreases to basis.You must decrease the which $21,000 was for the land and $147,000the year you switch to the straight line method),basis of your property by any items that repre-was for the house. use the following steps to figure your deprecia-sent a return of your cost. These include: The basis for depreciation on the house istion.
the fair market value at the date of the change• The amount of any insurance or other pay- 1. Reduce your adjusted basis by the depre-($147,000), because it is less than your adjustedment you receive as the result of a casu- ciation allowable for the earlier years.basis ($164,500).alty or theft loss,
2. Multiply the new adjusted basis in (1) by• Any deductible casualty loss not coveredMACRS Depreciation the same rate used in earlier years.by insurance,
Under GDS See Conventions, later, for information on de-• Any amount you receive for granting an preciation in the year you dispose of property.easement, You can figure your MACRS depreciation de-
duction under GDS in one of two ways. TheDeclining balance rates.The following table• Any residential energy credit you were al-deduction is substantially the same both ways.shows the declining balance rate that applies forlowed before 1986, if you added the cost(The difference, if any, is slight.) You can either:each class of property and the first year forof the energy items to the basis of your
which the straight line method will give an equalhome, and 1. Actually compute the deduction using theor greater deduction. (The rates for 5- anddepreciation method and convention that• The amount of depreciation you could have 7-year property are based on the 200% declin-apply over the recovery period of the prop-deducted on your tax returns under the ing balance method. The rate for 15-year prop-erty, ormethod of depreciation you selected. If you erty is based on the 150% declining balancetook less depreciation than you could have2. Use the percentage from the optional method.)under the method you selected, you must MACRS tables, shown later.decrease the basis by the amount you Class Declining Balance Rate YearIf you actually compute the deduction, the de-could have taken under that method. 5 40% 4thpreciation method you use depends on the classIf you deducted more depreciation than 7 28.57% 5thof the property.you should have, you must decrease your 15 10% 7th
basis by the amount you should have de-5-, 7-, or 15-year property.For property in theducted, plus the part of the excess you5- or 7-year class, use the 200% declining bal-deducted that actually lowered your tax lia-ance method and a half-year convention. How-Straight Line Methodbility for any year. ever, in limited cases you must use the
mid-quarter convention, if it applies. These con- To figure your MACRS deduction under the
ventions are explained later. For property in the straight line method, you must apply a different
Basis of Property
15-year class, use the 150% declining balance depreciation rate to the adjusted basis of yourChanged to Rental Use
method and a half-year convention. property for each tax year in the recovery period.
When you change property you held for per- You can also choose to use the 150% declin- In the first year, multiply the adjusted basis of
sonal use to rental use (for example, you rent ing balance method for property in the 5- or the property by the straight line rate. You must
your former home), you figure the basis for de-7-year class. The choice to use the 150% figure the depreciation for the first year using the
Page 12

Page 13 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
convention that applies. (See Conventions, Example. During the tax year, Tom Martin table. For the year of the adjustment and for the
later.) purchased the following items to use in his rental remaining recovery period, figure depreciation
property. He elects not to claim the special de- using the property’s adjusted basis at the end of
preciation allowance, discussed earlier. the year and the appropriate depreciationStraight line rate.For any tax year, figure the
method, as explained earlier under MACRS De-straight line rate by dividing the number 1 by the
• A dishwasher for $400 that he placed inpreciation Under GDS.years remaining in the recovery period at theservice in January.beginning of the tax year. When figuring the
Tables 4-A, 4-B, and 4-C.The percentages in• Used furniture for $100 that he placed innumber of years remaining, you must take into
these tables take into account the half-year andservice in September.account the convention used in the first year. If
mid-quarter conventions. Use Table 4-A forthe remaining recovery period at the beginning• A refrigerator for $500 that he placed in5-year property, Table 4-B for 7-year property,of the tax year is less than one year, the straightservice in October. and Table 4-C for 15-year property. Use theline rate for that tax year is 100%.
percentage in the second column (half-year con-Tom uses the calendar year as his tax year. The
vention) unless you must use the mid-quartertotal basis of all property placed in service thatExample. You place in service property with
convention (explained earlier). If you must useyear is $1,000. The $500 basis of the refrigeratora basis of $1,000 and a 5-year recovery period.
the mid-quarter convention, use the column thatplaced in service during the last 3 months of hisYou elect not to claim the special depreciation
corresponds to the calendar year quarter intax year exceeds $400 (40% × $1,000). Tomallowance, discussed earlier. The straight line
which you placed the property in service.must use the mid-quarter convention instead ofrate is 20% (1 divided by 5) for the first tax year.
the half-year convention for all three items.After you apply the half-year convention, the first
Example 1. You purchased a stove and re-year rate is 10% (20% divided by 2). Deprecia-
frigerator and placed them in service in June.Half-year convention. The half-year conven-tion for the first year is $100.
Your basis in the stove is $600 and your basis intion is used if neither the mid-quarter conventionAt the beginning of the second year, the
the refrigerator is $1,000. After figuring the 50%nor the mid-month convention applies. Underremaining recovery period is 41/2 years because
special depreciation allowance, your basis in thethis convention, you treat all property placed inof the half-year convention. The straight line rate
stove is $300 and your basis in the refrigerator isservice, or disposed of, during a tax year asfor the second year is 22.22% (1 divided by 4.5).
$500. Both are 5-year property. Using theplaced in service, or disposed of, at the midpointTo figure your depreciation deduction for the half-year convention column in Table 4-A, youof that tax year.second year: find the depreciation percentage for year 1 isIf this convention applies, you deduct a
20%. For that year your depreciation deductionhalf-year of depreciation for the first year and the1. Subtract the depreciation taken in the first
is $60 ($300 × .20) for the stove and $100 ($500last year that you depreciate the property. Youyear ($100) from the basis of the property
× .20) for the refrigerator.deduct a full year of depreciation for any other($1,000), and
year during the recovery period. For year 2, you find your depreciation per-2. Multiply the remaining basis ($900) by centage is 32%. That year’s depreciation deduc-22.22%. The depreciation for the second tion will be $96 ($300 × .32) for the stove andOptional Tablesyear is $200. $160 ($500 × .32) for the refrigerator.
You can use the tables in Table 4 to compute
Example 2. Assume the same facts as inannual depreciation under MACRS. The tablesResidential rental property.In the first year
Example 1, except you buy the refrigerator inshow the percentages for the first 6 years. Seethat you claim depreciation for residential rental
October instead of June. You must use theAppendix A of Publication 946 for complete ta-property, you can only claim depreciation for the
mid-quarter convention to figure depreciation onbles. The percentages in Tables 4-A, 4-B, andnumber of months the property is in use, and
the stove and refrigerator. The refrigerator was4-C make the change from declining balance toyou must use the mid-month convention (ex-
placed in service in the last 3 months of the taxstraight line in the year that straight line will yieldplained under Conventions, next).
year, and its basis ($1,000) is more than 40% ofa larger deduction. See Declining Balance
the total basis of all property placed in serviceMethod, earlier.
during the year ($1,600 × .40 = $640).If you elect to use the straight line method forConventions
5-, 7-, or 15-year property, or the 150% decliningBecause you placed the refrigerator in serv-
Under MACRS, conventions establish when thebalance method for 5- or 7-year property, useice in October, you use the fourth quarter col-
recovery period begins and ends. The conven-the tables in Appendix A of Publication 946. umn of Table 4-A and find that the depreciation
tion you use determines the number of months percentage for year 1 is 5%. Your depreciationFigure any special depreciation allow-for which you can claim depreciation in the year deduction for the refrigerator (after figuring theance on qualified property before usingyou place property in service and in the year you special depreciation allowance) is $25 ($500 ×Table 4-A, 4-B, and 4-C, or the 5-, 7-,CAUTION
!
dispose of the property. .05).or 15-year property tables in Appendix A of Pub-
Because you placed the stove in service inlication 946.Mid-month convention.  A mid-month con- June, you use the second quarter column of
vention is used for all residential rental property Table 4-A and find that the depreciation percent-How to use the tables.The following sectionand nonresidential real property. Under this con- age for year 1 is 25%. For that year, your depre-explains how to use the optional tables.vention, you treat all property placed in service, ciation deduction for the stove (after figuring theFigure the depreciation deduction by multi-or disposed of, during any month as placed in special depreciation allowance) is $75 ($300 ×plying your unadjusted basis in the property byservice, or disposed of, at the midpoint of that .25).the percentage shown in the appropriate table.month. Your unadjusted basis is your depreciable basis
Table 4-D.  Use this table for residential rentalwithout reduction for MACRS depreciation pre-Mid-quarter convention.A mid-quarter con- property. Find the row for the month that youviously claimed.vention must be used if the mid-month conven- placed the property in service. Use the percent-Once you begin using an optional table totion does not apply and the total depreciable ages listed for that month to figure your depreci-figure depreciation, you must continue to use itbasis of MACRS property placed in service in ation deduction. The mid-month convention isfor the entire recovery period unless there is anthe last 3 months of a tax year (excluding non- taken into account in the percentages shown inadjustment to the basis of your property for aresidential real property, residential rental prop- the table.reason other than:erty, and property placed in service and
disposed of in the same year) is more than 40% Example. You purchased a single family1. Depreciation allowed or allowable, or
of the total basis of all such property you place in rental house and placed it in service in February.2. An addition or improvement that is depreci-service during the year. Your basis in the house is $160,000. Using Ta-ated as a separate item of property.Under this convention, you treat all property ble 4-D, you find that the percentage for property
placed in service, or disposed of, during any If there is an adjustment for any reason otherplaced in service in February of year 1 is
quarter of a tax year as placed in service, or than (1) or (2) (for example, because of a de- 3.182%. That year’s depreciation deduction is
disposed of, at the midpoint of the quarter. ductible casualty loss) you can no longer use the $5,091 ($160,000 × .03182).
Page 13

Page 14 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The election of ADS for one item in a class of
property generally applies to all property in that
class that is placed in service during the tax year
of the election. However, the election applies on
a property-by-property basis for residential
rental property and nonresidential real property.
Once you choose to use ADS, you cannot
change your election.
Casualties and Thefts
As a result of a casualty or theft, you may have a
loss related to your property. You may be able to
deduct the loss on your income tax return. For
information on casualty and theft losses (busi-
ness and nonbusiness), see Publication 547.
Casualty. Damage to, destruction of, or loss
of property is a casualty if it results from an
identifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or
unusual.
Theft. The unlawful taking and removing of
your money or property with the intent to deprive
you of it is a theft.
Gain from casualty or theft.When you have
a casualty to, or theft of, your property and you
receive money, including insurance, that is more
than your adjusted basis in the property, you
generally must report the gain. However, under
certain circumstances, you may defer paying tax
by choosing to postpone reporting the gain. To
do this, you must generally buy replacement
property within 2 years after the close of the first
tax year in which any part of your gain is real-
ized. The cost of the replacement property must
be equal to or more than the net insurance or
other payment you received. For more informa-
tion, see Publication 547.
How to report.   If you had a casualty or theft
that involved property used in your rental activ-
ity, you figure the net gain or loss in Section B of
Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. Also, you
may have to report the net gain or loss from
Form 4684 on Form 4797, Sales of Business
Property. (Follow the instructions for Form
4684.)
Limits on
Rental Losses
Rental real estate activities are generally con-
sidered passive activities, and the amount of
loss you can deduct is limited. Generally, you
cannot deduct losses from rental real estate
Table 4. Optional MACRS Tables
Table 4-A. MACRS 5-Year Property
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
20.00%
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
Table 4-B. MACRS 7-Year Property
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
Table 4-C. MACRS 15-Year Property
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
Table 4-D. Residential Rental Property (27.5-year)
14.29%
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
5.00%
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
3.485% 3.636%
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
1.970
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
activities unless you have income from other
passive activities. However, you may be able to
sidered to have no class life. Under ADS, per-deduct rental losses without regard to whetherMACRS Depreciation
sonal property with no class life is depreciatedyou have income from other passive activities ifUnder ADS using a recovery period of 12 years. you “materially” or “actively” participated in your
rental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later.If you choose, you can use the ADS method forUse the mid-month convention for residential
 Losses from passive activities are first sub-most property. Under ADS, you use the straightrental property and nonresidential real property.
ject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit theline method of depreciation. For all other property, use the half-year or
amount of deductible losses from holding mostmid-quarter convention.Table 3 shows the recovery periods for prop- real property placed in service after 1986.erty used in rental activities that you depreciate
under ADS. Election. For property placed in service dur-Exception. If your rental losses are less than
ing 2004 you choose to use ADS by entering theSee Appendix B in Publication 946 for other $25,000, and you actively participated in the
depreciation on Form 4562, Part III, line 20.property. If your property is not listed, it is con- rental activity, the passive activity limits probably
Page 14

Page 15 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
do not apply to you. See Losses From Rental Real estate professional.You qualified as aLosses From Rental
real estate professional for the tax year if youReal Estate Activities, later. Real Estate Activities
met both of the following requirements.
If you or your spouse actively participated in aProperty used as a home. If you used the
passive rental real estate activity, you can de-1. More than half of the personal servicesrental property as a home during the year, the
duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity fromyou performed in all trades or businessespassive activity rules do not apply to that home. your nonpassive income. This special allowanceduring the tax year were performed in realInstead, you must follow the rules explained is an exception to the general rule disallowingproperty trades or businesses in which youunder Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including losses in excess of income from passive activi-materially participated.Vacation Home), earlier. ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from the2. You performed more than 750 hours of activity against the tax on up to $25,000 ofservices during the tax year in real prop-At-Risk Rules nonpassive income after taking into account anyerty trades or businesses in which you ma-losses allowed under this exception.The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount youterially participated. If you are married, filing a separate return,can deduct as losses from activities often de- and lived apart from your spouse for the entireDo not count personal services you per-scribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding real tax year, your special allowance cannot be moreformed as an employee in real property trades orproperty (other than mineral property) placed in than $12,500. If you lived with your spouse atbusinesses unless you were a 5% owner of yourservice before 1987 are not subject to the at-risk any time during the year and are filing a sepa-employer. You were a 5% owner if you ownedrules. rate return, you cannot use the special allow-(or are considered to have owned) more thanGenerally, any loss from an activity subject ance to reduce your nonpassive income or tax5% of your employer’s outstanding stock, orto the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of on nonpassive income.capital or profits interest.the total amount you have at risk in the activity at The maximum amount of the special allow-If you file a joint return, do not count yourthe end of the tax year. You are considered at ance is reduced if your modified adjusted grossspouse’s personal services to determinerisk in an activity to the extent of cash and the income is more than $100,000 ($50,000 if mar-whether you met the preceding requirements.adjusted basis of other property you contributed ried filing separately).However, you can count your spouse’s partici-to the activity and certain amounts borrowed forpation in an activity in determining if you materi-use in the activity. See Publication 925 for more Example. Jane is single and has $40,000 inally participated.information. wages, $2,000 of passive income from a limited
Real property trades or businesses.A partnership, and $3,500 of passive loss from a
real property trade or business is a trade orrental real estate activity in which she activelyPassive Activity Limits
business that does any of the following with realparticipated. $2,000 of Jane’s $3,500 loss off-
property.In general, all rental activities (except those sets her passive income. The remaining $1,500
loss can be deducted from her $40,000 wages.meeting the exception for real estate profession-• Develops or redevelops it.als, below) are passive activities. For this pur-
Active participation.You actively partici-pose, a rental activity is an activity from which• Constructs or reconstructs it.
pated in a rental real estate activity if you (andyou receive income mainly for the use of tangi-• Acquires it. your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rentalble property, rather than for services.
property and you made management decisions• Converts it.
in a significant and bona fide sense. Manage-Limits on passive activity deductions and • Rents or leases it. ment decisions include approving new tenants,credits.Deductions for losses from passive
deciding on rental terms, approving expendi-• Operates or manages it.activities are limited. You generally cannot offset
tures, and similar decisions.income, other than passive income, with losses• Brokers it.
from passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes Example. Mike is single and had the follow-on income, other than passive income, with ing income and losses during the tax year:Material participation.Generally, you materi-credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex-
ally participated in an activity for the tax year ifcess loss or credit is carried forward to the next Salary..................... $42,300you were involved in its operations on a regular,tax year. Dividends................... 3 0 0continuous, and substantial basis during theFor a detailed discussion of these rules, see Interest.................... 1,400year. For more information, see Publication 925.Publication 925. Rental loss.................. (4,000)
Participating spouse.If you are married,You may have to complete Form 8582 to The rental loss resulted from the rental of adetermine whether you materially participated infigure the amount of any passive activity loss for house Mike owned. Mike had advertised andan activity by also counting any participation inthe current tax year for all activities and the rented the house to the current tenant himself.the activity by your spouse during the year. Doamount of the passive activity loss allowed on He also collected the rents, which usually camethis even if your spouse owns no interest in theyour tax return. See Form 8582 not required by mail. All repairs were either done or con-activity or files a separate return for the year.under Losses From Rental Real Estate Activi- tracted out by Mike.ties, later, to determine whether you have to Even though the rental loss is a loss from aChoice to treat all interests as one activity.complete Form 8582. passive activity, because Mike actively partici-If you were a real estate professional and hadpated in the rental property management, hemore than one rental real estate interest duringcan use the entire $4,000 loss to offset his otherthe year, you can choose to treat all the interestsException for Real Estate income.as one activity. You can make this choice for anyProfessionals
year that you qualify as a real estate profes-Maximum special allowance. If your modi-Rental activities in which you materially partici-sional. If you forgo making the choice for onefied adjusted gross income is $100,000 or lesspated during the year are not passive activities ifyear, you can still make it for a later year.($50,000 or less if married filing separately), youfor that year you were a real estate professional.If you make the choice, it is binding for thecan deduct your loss up to $25,000 ($12,500 ifLosses from these activities are not limited bytax year you make it and for any later year thatmarried filing separately). If your modified ad-the passive activity rules. you are a real estate professional. This is truejusted gross income is more than $100,000
For this purpose, each interest you have in aeven if you are not a real estate professional in(more than $50,000 if married filing separately),
rental real estate activity is a separate activity,any intervening year. (For that year, the excep-this special allowance is limited to 50% of the
unless you choose to treat all interests in rentaltion for real estate professionals will not apply indifference between $150,000 ($75,000 if mar-
real estate activities as one activity. determining whether your activity is subject toried filing separately) and your modified ad-
the passive activity rules.)If you were a real estate professional for justed gross income.
2004, complete line 43 of Schedule E (Form See the instructions for Schedule E (FormGenerally, there is no relief from the passive
1040). 1040) for information about making this choice. activity loss limits if your modified adjusted gross
Page 15

Page 16 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income is $150,000 or more ($75,000 or more if ary 1. Eileen charges $750 a month for rent and
collects it herself. Eileen received a $750 secur-married filing separately). How To Report
ity deposit from her tenant. Because she plansModified adjusted gross income.This is to return it to her tenant at the end of the lease,Rental Incomeyour adjusted gross income from Form 1040, she does not include it in her income. Her houseline 37, figured without taking into account:and Expenses expenses for the year are as follows:
1. Taxable social security or equivalent tier 1If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, andMortgage interest.............. $1,800railroad retirement benefits, provide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,Fire insurance (1-year policy)...... 1 0 0
you normally report your rental income and ex-Miscellaneous repairs (after renting) 2972. Deductible contributions to an IRA or cer-
Real estate taxes imposed and paid 1,200penses on Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I. How-tain other qualified retirement plans,
ever, do not use that schedule to report a Eileen must divide the real estate taxes,3. The exclusion allowed for qualified U.S.not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented For Profit,
mortgage interest, and fire insurance betweensavings bond interest used to pay higherearlier.
the personal use of the property and the rentaleducational expenses, If you provide significant services that are
use of the property. She can deductprimarily for your tenant’s convenience, such as4. The exclusion allowed for employer-pro- eleven-twelfths of these expenses as rental ex-regular cleaning, changing linen, or maid serv-vided adoption benefits, penses. She can include the balance of theice, you report your rental income and expenses
allowable taxes and mortgage interest on5. Any passive activity income or loss in-on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From
Schedule A (Form 1040) if she itemizes. SheBusiness or Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit Fromcluded on Form 8582,
Business. Significant services do not include the cannot deduct the balance of the fire insurance6. Any passive income or loss or any lossfurnishing of heat and light, cleaning of publicbecause it is a personal expense.allowable by reason of the exception forareas, trash collection, etc. For information, seeEileen bought this house in 1979 forreal estate professionals discussed earlier,Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business$35,000. Her property tax was based on as-
(For Individuals Who Use Schedule C or C-EZ).7. Any overall loss from a publicly traded sessed values of $10,000 for the land and
You also may have to pay self-employment taxpartnership (see Publicly Traded Partner- $25,000 for the house. Before changing it toon your rental income. See Publication 533,ships (PTPs) in the instructions for Form rental property, Eileen added several improve-Self-Employment Tax.8582, ments to the house. She figures her adjusted
basis as follows:8. The deduction for one-half of self-employ-Schedule E (Form 1040)ment tax, Improvements Cost
Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I, to reportHouse ..................... $25,0009. The deduction allowed for interest on stu-
your rental income and expenses. List your totalRemodeled kitchen............ 4,200dent loans, or income, expenses, and depreciation for eachRecreation room.............. 5,80010. The deduction for qualified tuition and re-rental property. Be sure to answer the questionNew roof ................... 1,600
lated expenses. on line 2. Patio and deck............... 2,400
If you have more than three rental or royaltyAdjusted basis............... $39,000
properties, complete and attach as many On February 1, when Eileen changed herForm 8582 not required. Do not complete Schedules E as are needed to list the properties.
house to rental property, the property had a fairForm 8582 if you meet all of the following condi-Complete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How-
market value of $152,000. Of this amount,tions. ever, fill in the “Totals” column on only one
$35,000 was for the land and $117,000 was forSchedule E. The figures in the “Totals” column
the house.on that Schedule E should be the combined1. Your only passive activities were rental
totals of all Schedules E. Because Eileen’s adjusted basis is less thanreal estate activities in which you actively
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in-the fair market value on the date of the change,participated.
come or loss from partnerships, S corporations,Eileen uses $39,000 as her basis for deprecia-2. Your overall net loss from these activitiesestates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-tion.is $25,000 or less ($12,500 or less if mar-ment conduits. If you need to use page 2 ofBecause the house is residential rental prop-ried filing separately). Schedule E, use page 2 of the same Schedule Eerty, she must use the straight line method of
you used to enter the combined totals in Part I.3. You do not have any prior year unallowed depreciation using either the GDS recovery pe-On Schedule E, page 1, line 20, enter thelosses from any passive activities. riod or the ADS recovery period. She choosesdepreciation you are claiming. You must com-the GDS recovery period of 27.5 years.4. If married filing separately, you lived apartplete and attach Form 4562 for rental activitiesShe uses Table 4-D to find her depreciationfrom your spouse all year. only if you are claiming: percentage. Because she placed the property in
5. You have no current or prior year unal-• Depreciation on property placed in serviceservice in February, she finds the percentage to
lowed credits from passive activities. during 2004, be 3.182%.
6. Your modified adjusted gross income is On April 1, Eileen bought a new dishwasher• Depreciation on listed property (such as a
$100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if mar- for the rental property at a cost of $425. Thecar), regardless of when it was placed in
ried filing separately). dishwasher is personal property used in a rentalservice, or
real estate activity, which has a 5-year recovery7. You do not hold any interest in a rental real• Any car expenses reported on a form period. The dishwasher qualifies for the 50%estate activity as a limited partner or as aother than Schedule C or C-EZ (Form special depreciation allowance which she1040) or Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ.beneficiary of an estate or a trust. figures first. Next, she uses the percentage
Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your ownIf you meet all of the conditions listed above, under “Half-year convention” in Table 4-A to
worksheet. You do not have to attach theseyour rental real estate activities are not limited figure her MACRS depreciation deduction for
computations to your return.by the passive activity rules and you do not have the dishwasher.
to complete Form 8582. Enter each rental real On May 1, Eileen paid $4,000 to have aIllustrated Exampleestate loss from line 22 of Schedule E (Form furnace installed in the house. The furnace is
1040) on line 23 of Schedule E. residential rental property. Because she placedIn January, Eileen Johnson bought a condomin-
the property in service in May, she finds theIf you do not meet all of the conditions listedium apartment to live in. Instead of selling the
percentage from Table 4-D to be 2.273%.above, see the instructions for Form 8582 to findhouse she had been living in, she decided to
out if you must complete and attach that form to Eileen figures her net rental income or losschange it to rental property. Eileen selected a
your tax return. for the house as follows:tenant and started renting the house on Febru-
Page 16

Page 17 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Total rental income received Eileen uses Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I,ation. Eileen’s Schedule E (Form 1040) is
($750 × 1 1 )............. $8,250 to report her rental income and expenses. She shown next. Her Form 4562 is not shown. See
Minus: Expenses enters her income, expenses, and depreciation Publication 946 for information on how to pre-
Mortgage interest ($1,800 × for the house in the column for Property A. She pare Form 4562.
11/12) ................ $1,650 uses Form 4562 to figure and report her depreci-
Fire insurance ($100 × 11/12)9 2
Miscellaneous repairs.... 2 9 7
Real estate taxes ($1,200 ×
11/12) ................ 1,100
Total expenses......... 3,139
Balance ............... $5,111
Minus: Depreciation
House ($39,000 × 3.182%) $1,241
Dishwasher–special
allowance ($425 × 50%) . . . 213
Dishwasher ($425 – $213
special allowance) × 20% . . 42
Furnace ($4,000 × 2.273%) 91
Total depreciation....... 1,587
Net rental income for house $3,524
Page 17

Page 18 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Eileen Johnson 123 00 4567
Brick House
123 Main Street, Hometown, MN 56200 /H12011
8,250
92
1,650
297
1,100
3,139
1,587
4,726
3,524
8,250
1,650
3,139
1,587
3,524
3,524
SCHEDULE E OMB No. 1545-0074
Supplemental Income and Loss
(Form 1040) (From rental real estate, royalties, partnerships,
S corporations, estates, trusts, REMICs, etc.)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1041. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule E (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 13
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Income or Loss From Rental Real Estate and Royalties Note. If you are in the business of renting personal property, use
Schedule C or C-EZ (see page E-3). Report farm rental income or loss from Form 4835 on page 2, line 40.
List the type and location of each rental real estate property:1
A
B
C
NoYes2
A
B
C
Properties Totals
(Add columns A, B, and C.)Income: CBA
333 Rents received
4 Royalties received 44
Expenses:
5Advertising5
6Auto and travel (see page E-4)6
7Cleaning and maintenance7
8Commissions8
9Insurance9
1010 Legal and other professional fees
11
Mortgage interest paid to banks,
etc. (see page E-4) 12
11
12
Other interest
12
13
Repairs
13
14
Supplies
14
15
Taxes
15
16
Utilities
16
1717
Other (list) /H1707518
18
1919Add lines 5 through 1819
Depreciation expense or depletion
(see page E-4)
20
20 20
21Total expenses. Add lines 19 and 2021
Income or (loss) from rental real
estate or royalty properties.
Subtract line 21 from line 3 (rents)
or line 4 (royalties). If the result is a
(loss), see page E-4 to find out if
you must file Form 6198
22
22
Deductible rental real estate loss.
Caution. Your rental real estate
loss on line 22 may be limited. See
page E-4 to find out if you must
file  Form 8582. Real estate
professionals must complete line
43 on page 2
23
)() ()(23
2424 Income.  Add positive amounts shown on line 22. Do not include any losses
)(25Losses. Add royalty losses from line 22 and rental real estate losses from line 23. Enter total losses here25
26 Total rental real estate and royalty income or (loss). Combine lines 24 and 25. Enter the result here.
If Parts II, III, IV, and line 40 on page 2 do not apply to you, also enter this amount on Form 1040, 
line 17. Otherwise, include this amount in the total on line 41 on page 2
26
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Cat. No. 11344L Schedule E (Form 1040) 2004
Part I
Management fees
(99)
For each rental real estate property
listed on line 1, did you or your family
use it during the tax year for personal
purposes for more than the greater of:
● 14 days or
● 10% of the total days rented at
fair rental value?
(See page E-3.)
2004
Page 18

Page 19 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved you filed your return (3 weeks the number, go to • Services. You can walk in to
tax issues, order free publications if you filed electronically).www.irs.gov/localcontacts or your local Taxpayer Assis-
and forms, ask tax questions, and Have your 2004 tax return look in the phone book under tance Center every business
get more information from the IRS available because you will United States Government, day to ask tax questions or
in several ways. By selecting the need to know your filing sta- Internal Revenue Service. get help with a tax problem.
method that is best for you, you will tus and the exact whole dollar An employee can explain IRS• TTY/TDD equipment. If youhave quick and easy access to tax amount of your refund. letters, request adjustmentshave access to TTY/TDDhelp. to your account, or help you• Download forms, instructions, equipment, call
set up a payment plan. Youand publications. 1-800-829-4059 to ask taxContacting your Taxpayer
can set up an appointment byquestions or to order formsAdvocate. If you have attempted • Order IRS products online. calling your local Center and,and publications.to deal with an IRS problem unsuc-
at the prompt, leaving a mes-• Research your tax questionscessfully, you should contact your • TeleTax topics. Callonline. sage requesting EverydayTaxpayer Advocate. 1-800-829-4477 and press 2 Tax Solutions help. A repre-The Taxpayer Advocate inde- • Search publications online by to listen to pre-recorded sentative will call you backpendently represents your inter- topic or keyword. messages covering variousests and concerns within the IRS within 2 business days totax topics.• View Internal Revenue Bulle-by protecting your rights and schedule an in-person ap-
tins (IRBs) published in the • Refund information. If youresolving problems that have not pointment at your conve-
last few years. would like to check the statusbeen fixed through normal chan- nience. To find the number,
of your 2004 refund, callnels. While Taxpayer Advocates go to www.irs.gov/localcon-• Figure your withholding al- 1-800-829-4477 and press 1cannot change the tax law or make tacts or look in the phonelowances using our Form W-4 for automated refund informa-a technical tax decision, they can book under United Statescalculator. tion or call 1-800-829-1954.clear up problems that resulted Government, Internal Reve-• Sign up to receive local and Be sure to wait at least 6from previous contacts and ensure nue Service.national tax news by email. weeks from the date you filedthat your case is given a complete
your return (3 weeks if youand impartial review. • Get information on starting Mail. You can send yourfiled electronically). HaveTo contact your Taxpayer Ad- and operating a small busi- order for forms, instruc-your 2004 tax return availablevocate: ness. tions, and publications tobecause you will need to• Call the Taxpayer Advocate the Distribution Center nearest toknow your filing status andtoll free at Fax. You can get over you and receive a response withinthe exact whole dollar amount1-877-777-4778. 100 of the most requested 10 business days after your re-of your refund.
forms and instructions 24 quest is received. Use the address• Call, write, or fax the Tax-hours a day, 7 days a week, by fax. that applies to your part of thepayer Advocate office in your Evaluating the quality of ourJust call 703-368-9694 from the country.area. telephone services. To ensuretelephone connected to your fax • Western part of U.S.:that IRS representatives give accu-• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you machine. When you call, you will
Western Area Distributionrate, courteous, and professionalare a hear instructions on how to use the
Centeranswers, we use several methodsTTY/TDD user. service. The items you request will
Rancho Cordova, CAto evaluate the quality of our tele-be faxed to you.• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. phone services. One method is for 95743-0001For help with transmission a second IRS representative toproblems, call 703-487-4608. • Central part of U.S.:For more information, see Publi- sometimes listen in on or recordLong-distance charges may ap- Central Area Distributioncation 1546, The Taxpayer Advo- telephone calls. Another is to askply. Centercate Service of the IRS—How To some callers to complete a shortGet Help With Unresolved Tax P.O. Box 8903survey at the end of the call.Phone. Many servicesProblems. Bloomington, IL 61702-8903are available by phone.
• Eastern part of U.S. and for-Walk-in. Many productsFree tax services.To find out
eign addresses:and services are availablewhat services are available, get• Ordering forms, instructions, Eastern Area Distributionon a walk-in basis.Publication 910, IRS Guide to Freeand publications. Call CenterTax Services. It contains a list of1-800-829-3676 to orderfree tax publications and an index P.O. Box 85074• Products. You can walk in tocurrent-year forms, instruc-of tax topics. It also describes other Richmond, VA 23261-5074many post offices, libraries,tions, and publications andfree tax information services, in- and IRS offices to pick upprior-year forms and instruc-cluding tax education and assis- CD-ROM for tax prod-certain forms, instructions,tions. You should receivetance programs and a list of ucts. You can order Pub-and publications. Some IRSyour order within 10 days.TeleTax topics. lication 1796, IRS Federaloffices, libraries, grocery• Asking tax questions. Call the Tax Products CD-ROM, and ob-stores, copy centers, city andInternet. You can access IRS with your tax questions at tain:county government offices,the IRS website 24 hours 1-800-829-1040. credit unions, and office sup-a day, 7 days a week, at • Current-year forms, instruc-
• Solving problems. You can ply stores have a collection ofwww.irs.gov to: tions, and publications.get face-to-face help solving products available to print• E-file your return. Find out • Prior-year forms and instruc-tax problems every business from a CD-ROM or photocopyabout commercial tax prepa- tions.day in IRS Taxpayer Assis- from reproducible proofs.ration and e-file services tance Centers. An employee Also, some IRS offices and li- • Frequently requested taxavailable free to eligible tax-can explain IRS letters, re- braries have the Internal Rev- forms that may be filled inpayers. quest adjustments to your ac- enue Code, regulations, electronically, printed out for• Check the status of your 2004 count, or help you set up a Internal Revenue Bulletins, submission, or saved for re-refund. Click on Where’s My payment plan. Call your local and Cumulative Bulletins cordkeeping.Refund. Be sure to wait at Taxpayer Assistance Center available for research pur-
least 6 weeks from the date for an appointment. To find poses. • Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Page 19

Page 20 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Buy the CD-ROM from National CD-ROM for small busi- tions, and publications needed to mats and browsers that can be run
Technical Information Service nesses. Publication successfully manage a business. on virtually any desktop or laptop
(NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for 3207, The Small Busi- In addition, the CD provides other computer.
$22 (no handling fee) or call ness Resource Guide, CD-ROM helpful information, such as how to It is available in early April. You
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the 2004, is a must for every small prepare a business plan, finding fi-can get a free copy by calling
CD-ROM for $22 (plus a $5 han- business owner or any taxpayernancing for your business, and 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting
dling fee). The first release is avail-about to start a business. Thismuch more. The design of the CDwww.irs.gov/smallbiz.
able in early January and the final handy, interactive CD contains allmakes finding information easy
release is available in late Febru- the business tax forms, instruc- and quick and incorporates file for-
ary.
■
Page 20

Page 21 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Basis other than cost....... 1 1Depreciation..............7-14 Form 4684:A
Alternative Depreciation System Casualties and thefts....... 1 4Cost basis................. 1 1Accelerated Cost Recovery
(ADS) (See ModifiedDecreases to............... 1 2 Form 4797:System (ACRS): (See also
Accelerated Cost RecoveryDeductions: Sales of businessModified Accelerated Cost
System (MACRS)) property................. 1 4Capitalization of costsRecovery System
Basis (See Basis)v s . .................... 1 2(MACRS)) .................. 9 Form 8582:
Change of accountingNot greater than basis..... 9Effective date............... 9 Passive activity losses..... 1 5 ,
method ................... 7Fair market value........... 1 2 16Accounting methods:
Change of property to rentalIncreases to................ 1 1Accrual method............. 2 Free tax services............ 1 9u s e.....................5 ,  9MACRS depreciableCash method ............... 2
Claiming correct amountbasis.................... 1 1Change of method........... 7 Go f ........................ 7Constructive receipt of Property changed to rental Gains and losses:Declining balanceincome ................... 2 u s e...................... 1 2 At-risk rules................ 1 5method ................9 ,  1 2Accrual method taxpayers... 2 Casualty and theftDuration of property expected toACRS (Accelerated Cost losses................... 1 4last more than one year . . . 8CRecovery System): Limits on rental losses...... 1 4Eligible property............. 8Capital expenditures:Effective date............... 9 Passive activity losses...... 1 5Excepted property........... 8Deductions vs., effect onActive participation......... 1 5 Rental real estateFirst-year expensing......... 9basis.................... 1 2Activities not for profit....... 5 activities................. 1 5MACRS ( See ModifiedImprovements............... 3Additions to property: (See also Sale of rental property....1 ,  1 4Accelerated Cost RecoveryLocal benefit taxes.......... 3Improvements)............. 1 0 System (MACRS)) General depreciation systemMortgages, payments toBasis...................... 1 1 Methods .................9 ,  1 2(GDS) (See Modifiedobtain.................... 3MACRS recovery period.... 1 0 Ownership of property.....8 ,  9 Accelerated Cost RecoveryCars:Adjusted basis: Placement in service........ 5 System (MACRS))MACRS recoveryMACRS depreciation....... 1 1 Rental expense............. 3periods.................. 1 0Rented property............. 9Adjusted gross income (AGI): HCash method taxpayers...... 2 Section 179 deduction....... 9Modified (See Modified adjusted
Help (See Tax help)Casualty losses............. 1 4 Special depreciationgross income (MAGI))
Home:Change of accounting allowances............... 9Advance rent................. 2
Main home .................. 6method .................... 7 Straight line method......9 ,  1 2Security deposits............ 2
Use as rental property (See UseCharitable contributions: Useful life................... 8Advertising................... 3 of home)Use of property.............. 6 Vacant rental property....... 2Allocation of expenses:
Cleaning and Discount, bonds and notesChange of property to rental
maintenance ............... 3 issued at (See Original issueu s e....................... 5 I
discount (OID))Closing costs............... 1 1How to divide expenses...... 7 Improvements: (See also
Dividing of expenses (SeeComments on publication.... 2Part of property rented....... 5 Repairs).................... 3
Allocation of expenses)Personal use of rental Commissions ................ 3 Assessments for local
Dwelling units:property................3 ,  5 improvements............ 1 2Computers:
Definition................... 5Alternative Depreciation System Basis...................... 1 1MACRS recovery
Fair rental price............. 6(ADS): Depreciation of rentedperiods.................. 1 0
Personal use of...........5 ,  6Election of................. 1 4 property.................. 9Condominiums .............4 ,  5
MACRS .................9 ,  1 3 MACRS recovery period.... 1 0Constructive receipt of
Alternative minimum tax (AMT): Indian reservationincome ..................... 2EAccelerated depreciation property................... 1 0Cooperative housing.... 4 ,  5 ,  9Easements .................. 1 2methods .................. 9 Insurance .................... 3Cost basis................... 1 1Equipment rental expense.... 3Amended returns............. 7 Casualty or theft lossCredit reports............... 1 1Expenses  (See Rental expenses) payments ................ 1 2Apartments: Credits: Change of property to rentalBasement apartments....... 6 Residential energy credit before u s e....................... 5Dwelling units............... 5 F1986 .................... 1 2 Fire insurance premiums, costAppraisal fees............... 1 1 Fair market value (FMV)..... 1 2
basis.................... 1 1Assessments for Fair rental price............6 ,  7Part of property rented....... 5maintenance .............. 1 2D Fees: Premiums paid inAssessments, local (See Local Loan origination fees.....3 ,  1 1Days of personal use.......5 ,  6 advance .................. 3assessments) Points (See Points)Days used for repairs and Title insurance, costSettlement fees and otherAssistance (See Tax help) maintenance ............... 7 basis.................... 1 1costs.................... 1 1Assumption of mortgage.... 1 1 Deductions: (See also Rental Interest payments: (See alsoTax return preparationexpenses) .................. 2At-risk rules................. 1 4 Mortgages)................. 3fees....................3 ,  4Capitalizing costs vs., effect onAttorneys’ fees.............. 1 1 Loan origination fees........ 3First-year expensing......... 9basis.................... 1 2Automobiles: Rental expenses............ 3Form 1040:Depreciation (See Depreciation)MACRS recovery
Not rented for profitHow to figure rentalperiods.................. 1 0
income ................... 5Ldeductions................ 7
Part of property rented....... 5 Land:Limitations on............7 ,  1 4
Rental income andB Cost basis................. 1 1Passive activity losses (See
expenses ................ 1 6 Depreciation................ 8Passive activity)Basis:
Form 1040, Schedule E...... 1 6Property not used asAdjusted basis............. 1 1 Leases:
home ..................... 7Assessments for local Form 1098: Cancellation payments...... 2
Property used as home...... 7improvements............ 1 2 Mortgage interest........... 3 Equipment leasing........... 3
Page 21

Page 22 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limits: Home, property also usedNT
Passive activity losses and as ......................2 ,  7Nonresidential real Tables and figures:
credits...............14, 15 Improvements ............... 3property................... 1 0 Declining balance depreciation
Rental expense Insurance ................... 3 rates.................... 1 2Not-for-profit activities....... 5
deductions................ 7 Interest payments........... 3 Improvements, examples of
Rental losses.............. 1 4 Local transportation (Table 1)................. 3O expenses ...............3 ,  4Loans: MACRS optional tables (TableOriginal issue discount Not used as home........... 7Assumption fees........... 1 1 4–D ) .................... 1 3(OID)..................... 3 - 4Part of property rented....... 5Charges connected with getting MACRS optional tables (Tables
Points...................... 3or refinancing, cost 4–A, 4–B, and 4–C)..... 1 3
Pre-rental expenses......... 3basis.................... 1 1 MACRS recovery periods forP
Rental payments............ 3Low or no interest.......... 1 1 rental activity property (TablePart interest: Repairs..................... 3Origination fees............. 3 3 ) ........................ 9Expenses ................... 3 Sale of property............. 3Local assessments.......... 1 2 Tax credits:Income ..................... 2 Tax return preparation Residential energy creditLosses (See Gains and losses) Passive activity............. 1 4 fees....................3 ,  4allowed before 1986, effectMaximum special Taxes ...................... 3 on basis................. 1 2allowance................ 1 5M Tenant, paid by............. 2Tax help..................... 1 9Personal property:Material participation........ 1 5 Travel expenses..........3 ,  4Tax return preparationRental income from.......... 2Minimal rental use Utilities..................... 3 fees......................3 ,  4Personal use of rental property:exception .................. 5 Vacant rental property....... 2 Taxes:(See also Property changed toMissing children, photographs Rental income: Deduction of................ 3rental use)................ 5 - 7of .......................... 1 Advance rent................ 2 Local benefit taxes.......... 3Placed-in-service date....... 1 0 Cancellation of leaseModified Accelerated Cost Real estate taxes........... 1 1Points.....................3 ,  1 1payments ................. 2Recovery System Transfer taxes............. 1 1Pre-rental expenses.......... 3 Dwelling unit used as(MACRS) ................9-14 Taxpayer Advocate.......... 1 9home ..................... 5Principal residence (See Home)Additions or improvements to Theft losses................. 1 4Figuring.................... 7property................. 1 0Profit, property not rented Title insurance.............. 1 1Lease with option to buy..... 2Adjusted basis............. 1 1 for ......................... 5
Transfer taxes............... 1 1Minimal rental useAlternative Depreciation SystemProperty changed to rental
exception................. 5Travel and transportation(ADS) .................9 ,  1 4use ......................... 5
Not rented for profit.......... 5 expenses:Basis other than cost....... 1 1 Basis...................... 1 2
Not used as home........... 7 Local transportationConventions............... 1 3 MACRS depreciation........ 9
Part interest................. 2 expenses ...............3 ,  4Cost basis................. 1 1Property not used as home: Property received from Recordkeeping.............. 4Declining balance Rental income and tenant.................... 2 Rental expenses..........3 ,  4method .................. 1 2 deductions................ 7 Reporting................2 ,  1 6Standard mileage rate....... 4Depreciable basis.......... 1 1Property used as home (See Security deposit............. 2Determination of TTY/TDD information........ 1 9Use of home) Services received fromdeduction................. 9Publications (See Tax help) tenant.................... 2Effective date............... 9 UUsed as home ............2 ,  7Excluded property........... 9 Use of home:RGeneral Depreciation System Rental losses (See Passive Before or after renting....... 6(GDS) ............. 9 ,  10, 12 Real estate activity) Change to rental use......5 ,  9Nonresidential rental professionals............. 1 5Repairs: (See also Days of personal use......5 ,  6property................. 1 0Passive activity rules, exceptionImprovements).............. 3 Fair rental price............. 6Personal home changed to t o ....................... 1 5Assessments for Minimal rental userental use................. 9Real estate taxes............ 1 1 maintenance............. 1 2 exception................. 5Property used in rental activities Personal use of rental propertyReal property trades or Passive activity rules(Table 3)................. 9 exception for days used forbusinesses................ 1 5 exception................ 1 5Recovery periods.........9 ,  1 2 repairs andRecordkeeping requirements: Personal use as dwellingResidential rental maintenance.............. 7Travel and transportation unit....................... 5property.............10, 12 expenses ................. 4 Rental income andSpecial depreciation Recovery periods........... 1 0S deductions................ 7allowances............... 9Rent ......................... 1 1Sale of property: Utilities....................3 ,  1 1Straight line method........ 1 2 Advance rent................ 2 Expenses ................... 3Modified adjusted gross income Fair price................... 6 Gain or loss..............1 ,  1 4(MAGI) .................... 1 6 VRental expenses............. 2 Main home .................. 2More information (See Tax help) Vacant rental property........ 2Advertising.................. 3Section 179 deductions...... 9Mortgages .................... 3 Vacation homes:Allocation between rental andSecurity deposits............ 2Assumption of, cost Dividing of expenses........ 7personal uses............. 7Settlement fees............. 1 1basis.................... 1 1 Dwelling unit................ 5Change of property to rental Shared equity financingChange of property to rental Fair rental price............. 6u s e....................... 5agreements ................ 6u s e....................... 5 Minimal rental useCleaning and Special depreciationEnd of, OID................. 4 exception................. 5maintenance.............. 3 allowances................. 9Interest...................3 ,  5 Personal use of............. 5Commissions ............... 3Mortgage insurance Spouse: Valuation:Deductions, how to figure.... 7premiums ................ 1 1 Material participation....... 1 5 Fair market value........... 1 2Depreciation................ 3Part of property rented....... 5 Standard mileage rates....... 4Dwelling unit used as ■Suggestions forhome ..................... 5
publication................. 2Equipment rental............ 3
Surveys ..................... 1 1
Page 22

Page 23 of 23 of Publication 527 15:30 - 12-NOV-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2005
Highlights of 2004 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service—How
to Get Help With Unresolved Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465 14842
Page 23