Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 292  17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
TAX GUIDE
2017
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (TiếngViệt) 
Your Federal
Income Tax
For Individuals
Publication 17
Catalog Number 10311G
For use in preparing
2017 Returns
Dec 12, 2017

Page 2 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Federal
Income Tax
For Individuals
Contents
What's New ....................... 1
Reminders ........................ 1
Introduction ....................... 2
Part One. The Income Tax Return ......... 4
1 Filing Information ................ 4
2 Filing Status ................... 20
3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents ... 25
4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ..... 38
Part Two. Income ................... 47
5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings .... 47
6 Tip Income ................... 55
7 Interest Income ................. 57
8 Dividends and Other Distributions ...... 65
9 Rental Income and Expenses ......... 69
10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and 
Annuities .................... 77
11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad 
Retirement Benefits .............. 85
12 Other Income .................. 89
Part Three. Gains and Losses .......... 100
13 Basis of Property ............... 100
14 Sale of Property ............... 104
15 Selling Your Home .............. 111
16 Reporting Gains and Losses ........ 118
Part Four. Adjustments to Income ........ 121
17 Individual Retirement Arrangements 
(IRAs) .................... 122
18 Alimony .................... 134
19 Education-Related Adjustments ...... 137
Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized 
Deductions .................... 141
20 Standard Deduction ............. 141
21 Medical and Dental Expenses ....... 145
22 Taxes ..................... 150
23 Interest Expense ............... 155
24 Contributions ................. 163
25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft 
Losses .................... 171
26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business 
Expenses .................. 177
27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related 
Education .................. 194
28 Miscellaneous Deductions ......... 199
29 Limit on Itemized Deductions ........ 204
Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and Credits ... 206
30 How To Figure Your Tax ........... 206
31 Tax on Unearned Income of Certain 
Children ................... 209
32 Child and Dependent Care Credit ..... 213
33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled .... 220
34 Child Tax Credit ............... 223
35 Education Credits .............. 224
36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) ......... 230
37 Premium Tax Credit (PTC) ......... 245
38 Other Credits ................. 248
2017 Tax Table .................... 253
2017 Tax Computation Worksheet ........ 265
2017 Tax Rate Schedules .............. 266
Your Rights as a Taxpayer ............. 267
How To Get Tax Help ................ 269
Index .......................... 270
Where To File ..................... 289
The explanations and examples in this publication 
reflect the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) of:
Tax laws enacted by Congress,
Treasury regulations, and
Court decisions.
However, the information given does not cover every 
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change 
its meaning.
All material in this 
publication may be 
reprinted freely. A 
citation to Your Federal 
Income Tax (2017) 
would be appropriate.
This publication covers some subjects on which a 
court may have made a decision more favorable to 
taxpayers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until these 
differing interpretations are resolved by higher court 
decisions or in some other way, this publication will 
continue to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with 
the IRS. These rights are described in Your Rights as a 
Taxpayer in the back of this publication.
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service

Page 3 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What's New
This section summarizes important 
tax changes that took effect in 
2017. Most of these changes are 
discussed in more detail 
throughout this publication.
Future developments.  For the 
latest information about the tax law 
topics covered in this publication, 
such as legislation enacted after it 
was published, go to IRS.gov/
Pub17.
At the time this publication 
went to print, Congress 
was considering legisla-
tion that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief 
for those affected by Hurri-
cane Harvey, Irma, or Maria, 
and tax relief for those affec-
ted by other 2017 disasters, 
such as the California wild-
fires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits 
that expired at the end of 
2016 and that currently can't 
be claimed on your 2017 tax 
return, such as: 
a. The credit for nonbusi-
ness energy property, 
b. Parts of the credit for res-
idential energy property, 
c. The deduction for mort-
gage insurance premi-
ums,
d. 7.5% of adjusted gross 
income threshold for de-
ducting medical and den-
tal expenses,
e. The credit for alternative 
fuel vehicle refueling 
property, and 
f. The deduction for tuition 
and fees.
3. Change certain other tax pro-
visions.
CAUTION
!
To learn whether this legislation 
was enacted resulting in changes 
that affect your 2017 tax return, go 
to Recent Developments at 
IRS.gov/Pub17.
Casualty and theft losses.  Dis-
aster relief enacted for those im-
pacted by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, 
or Maria includes a provision that 
modified the calculation of casualty 
and theft losses. See Pub. 976, 
Disaster Relief, for more informa-
tion.
Earned income credit (EIC) and 
additional child tax credit 
(ACTC).  Disaster relief enacted 
for those impacted by Hurricane 
Harvey, Irma, or Maria allows prior 
year earned income to be elected 
as 2017 earned income when fig-
uring both the 2017 EIC and the 
2017 ACTC. See Pub. 976 for 
more information.
Increased standard deduction. 
In addition to the annual increase 
due to inflation adjustments, your 
2017 standard deduction is in-
creased by any net disaster loss 
due to Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or 
Maria. To claim the increased 
standard deduction, you must file 
Form 1040. See Pub. 976 for more 
information.
Due date of return.  File your tax 
return by April 17, 2018. The due 
date is April 17, instead of April 15, 
because of the Emancipation Day 
holiday in the District of Colum-
bia—even if you do not live in the 
District of Columbia. See chap-
ter 1.
Secure access.  To combat iden-
tity fraud, the IRS has upgraded its 
identity verification process for cer-
tain self-help tools on IRS.gov. To 
find out what types of information 
new users will need, go to IRS.gov/
SecureAccess.
Childless EIC.  You may be able 
to qualify for the EIC under the 
rules for taxpayers without a quali-
fying child if you have a qualifying 
child for the EIC who is claimed as 
a qualifying child by another tax-
payer. For more information, see 
chapter 36.
Access your online account. 
You must authenticate your iden-
tity. To securely log in to your fed-
eral tax account, go to IRS.gov/
Account. View the amount you 
owe, review 18 months of payment 
history, access online payment op-
tions, and create or modify an on-
line payment agreement. You can 
also access your tax records on-
line.
Personal exemption amount in-
creased for certain taxpayers. 
Your personal exemption is 
$4,050. But the amount is reduced 
if your adjusted gross income is 
more than:
$156,900 if married filing sep-
arately,
$261,500 if single,
$287,650 if head of house-
hold, or
$313,800 if married filing 
jointly or qualifying widow(er).
See chapter 3.
Limit on itemized deductions. 
You may not be able to deduct all 
of your itemized deductions if your 
adjusted gross income is more 
than:
$156,900 if married filing sep-
arately,
$261,500 if single,
$287,650 if head of house-
hold, or
$313,800 if married filing 
jointly or qualifying widow(er).
See chapter 29.
Standard mileage rates.  The 
2017 rate for business use of your 
vehicle is 53.5 cents a mile. The 
2017 rate for use of your vehicle to 
get medical care or to move is 17 
cents a mile. See Pub. 521, Mov-
ing Expenses.
Adoption credit.  The adoption 
credit and the exclusion for em-
ployer-provided adoption benefits 
have both increased to $13,570 
per eligible child in 2017. The 
amount begins to phase out if you 
have modified adjusted gross in-
come (MAGI) in excess of 
$203,540 and is completely 
phased out if your MAGI is 
$243,540 or more.
Exemption amount for alterna-
tive minimum tax (AMT).  The 
exemption amount for the AMT has 
increased to $54,300 ($84,500 if 
married filing jointly or qualifying 
widow(er); $42,250 if married filing 
separately).
Standard deduction.  For 2017, 
the standard deduction has in-
creased to $6,350 if single; 
$12,700 if married filing jointly or 
qualifying widow(er); $6,350 if mar-
ried filing separate returns; and 
$9,350 if head of household.
Mailing your return.  If you live in 
Connecticut, the District of Colum-
bia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, 
Rhode Island, or West Virginia and 
you are mailing in your return, you 
will need to mail it to a different ad-
dress this year. See Where To File 
near the end of this publication.
Employer identification number 
(EIN) needed to claim the Amer-
ican opportunity credit. To claim 
the American opportunity credit, 
you need to have the EIN of the in-
stitution to which your qualified ex-
penses were paid. See chapter 35.
Reminders
Listed below are important 
reminders and other items that 
may help you file your 2017 tax 
return. Many of these items are 
explained in more detail later in this 
publication.
Enter your social security num-
ber (SSN). Enter your SSN in the 
space provided on your tax form. If 
you filed a joint return for 2016 and 
are filing a joint return for 2017 with 
the same spouse, enter your 
names and SSNs in the same or-
der as on your 2016 return. See 
chapter 1.
Secure your tax records from 
identity theft. Identity theft occurs 
when someone uses your personal 
information, such as your name, 
SSN, or other identifying informa-
tion, without your permission, to 
commit fraud or other crimes. An 
identity thief may use your SSN to 
get a job or may file a tax return us-
ing your SSN to receive a refund. 
For more information about identity 
theft and how to reduce your risk 
from it, see chapter 1.
Taxpayer identification num-
bers. You must provide the 
taxpayer identification number for 
each person for whom you claim 
certain tax benefits. This applies 
even if the person was born in 
2017. Generally, this number is the 
person's SSN. See chapter 1.
Foreign-source income.  If you 
are a U.S. citizen with income from 
sources outside the United States 
(foreign income), you must report 
all such income on your tax return 
unless it is exempt by law or a tax 
treaty. This is true whether you live 
inside or outside the United States 
and whether or not you receive a 
Form W-2 or Form 1099 from the 
foreign payer. This applies to 
earned income (such as wages 
and tips) as well as unearned in-
come (such as interest, dividends, 
capital gains, pensions, rents, and 
royalties).
If you live outside the United 
States, you may be able to exclude 
part or all of your foreign earned in-
come. For details, see Pub. 54, 
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and 
Resident Aliens Abroad.
Foreign financial assets.  If you 
had foreign financial assets in 
2017, you may have to file Form 
8938 with your return. Check Form 
Publication 17 (2017) Page 1

Page 4 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8938 and its instructions or 
IRS.gov/Form8938 for details.
Automatic 6-month extension to 
file tax return. You can get an au-
tomatic 6-month extension of time 
to file your tax return. See chap-
ter 1.
Include your phone number on 
your return.  To promptly resolve 
any questions we have in process-
ing your tax return, we would like to 
be able to call you. Please enter 
your daytime telephone number on 
your tax form next to your signature 
and occupation. If you are filing a 
joint return, you can enter either 
your or your spouse's daytime 
phone number.
Payment of taxes.  You can pay 
your taxes online, by phone, by 
mobile device, in cash, or by check 
or money order. You can make a 
direct transfer from your bank ac-
count or use a credit or debit card. 
See chapter 1.
Faster ways to file your return. 
The IRS offers fast, accurate ways 
to file your tax return information 
without filing a paper tax return. 
You can use IRS e-file (electronic 
filing). See chapter 1.
Free electronic filing.  You may 
be able to file your 2017 taxes on-
line for free. See chapter 1.
Change of address.  If you 
change your address, notify the 
IRS. See chapter 1.
Refund on a late filed return.  If 
you were due a refund but you did 
not file a return, you generally must 
file your return within 3 years from 
the date the return was due (in-
cluding extensions) to get that re-
fund. See chapter 1.
Frivolous tax returns.  The IRS 
has published a list of positions 
that are identified as frivolous. The 
penalty for filing a frivolous tax re-
turn is $5,000. See chapter 1.
Filing erroneous claim for re-
fund or credit.  You may have to 
pay a penalty if you file an errone-
ous claim for refund or credit. See 
chapter 1.
Privacy Act and paperwork re-
duction information.  The IRS 
Restructuring and Reform Act of 
1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, and 
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 
1980 require that when we ask you 
for information we must first tell you 
what our legal right is to ask for the 
information, why we are asking for 
it, how it will be used, what could 
happen if we do not receive it, and 
whether your response is volun-
tary, required to obtain a benefit, or 
mandatory under the law. A 
complete statement on this subject 
can be found in your tax form in-
structions.
Preparer e-file mandate. Most 
paid preparers must e-file returns 
they prepare and file. Your pre-
parer may make you aware of this 
requirement and the options avail-
able to you.
Treasury Inspector General for 
Tax Administration.  If you want 
to confidentially report misconduct, 
waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRS 
employee, you can call 
1-800-366-4484 (call 
1-800-877-8339 if you are deaf, 
hard of hearing, or have a speech 
disability, and are using TTY/TDD 
equipment). You can remain anon-
ymous.
Photographs of missing chil-
dren. The IRS is a proud partner 
with the National Center for 
Missing  & Exploited Children® 
(NCMEC). Photographs of missing 
children selected by the Center 
may appear in this publication on 
pages that would otherwise be 
blank. You can help bring these 
children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 
1-800-THE-LOST 
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize 
a child.
Introduction
This publication covers the general 
rules for filing a federal income tax 
return. It supplements the informa-
tion contained in your tax form in-
structions. It explains the tax law to 
make sure you pay only the tax you 
owe and no more.
How this publication is ar-
ranged. This publication closely 
follows Form 1040, U.S. Individual 
Income Tax Return. It is divided 
into six parts which cover different 
sections of Form 1040. Each part 
is further divided into chapters 
which generally discuss one line of 
the form. Do not worry if you file 
Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. Any-
thing included on a line of either of 
these forms is also included on 
Form 1040.
The table of contents inside the 
front cover and the index in the 
back of the publication are useful 
tools to help you find the informa-
tion you need.
What is in this publication.  The 
publication begins with the rules for 
filing a tax return. It explains:
1. Who must file a return,
2. Which tax form to use,
3. When the return is due,
4. How to e-file your return, and
5. Other general information.
It will help you identify which filing 
status you qualify for, whether you 
can claim any dependents, and 
whether the income you receive is 
taxable. The publication goes on to 
explain the standard deduction, the 
kinds of expenses you may be able 
to deduct, and the various kinds of 
credits you may be able to take to 
reduce your tax.
Throughout the publication are 
examples showing how the tax law 
applies in typical situations. Also 
throughout the publication are flow-
charts and tables that present tax 
information in an easy-to-under-
stand manner.
Many of the subjects discussed 
in this publication are discussed in 
greater detail in other IRS publica-
tions. References to those other 
publications are provided for your 
information.
Icons. Small graphic symbols, 
or icons, are used to draw your at-
tention to special information. See 
Table 1 for an explanation of each 
icon used in this publication.
What is not covered in this pub-
lication. Some material that you 
may find helpful is not included in 
this publication but can be found in 
your tax form instruction booklet. 
This includes lists of:
Where to report certain items 
shown on information docu-
ments, and
Tax Topics you can read at 
IRS.gov/TaxTopics.
If you operate your own busi-
ness or have other self-employ-
ment income, such as from baby-
sitting or selling crafts, see the 
following publications for more in-
formation.
Pub. 334, Tax Guide for Small 
Business (For Individuals 
Who Use Schedule C or 
C-EZ).
Pub. 535, Business Expen-
ses.
Pub. 587, Business Use of 
Your Home (Including Use by 
Daycare Providers).
Help from the IRS.  There are 
many ways you can get help from 
the IRS. These are explained un-
der How To Get Tax Help  at the 
end of this publication.
Comments and suggestions. 
We welcome your comments 
about this publication and your 
suggestions for future editions.
You can send us comments 
through IRS.gov/FormComments.
Or you can write to:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, 
IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
Although we can’t respond indi-
vidually to each comment re-
ceived, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your 
comments as we revise our tax 
forms, instructions, and publica-
tions.
Ordering forms and publica-
tions. Visit IRS.gov/FormsPubs to 
download forms and publications. 
Otherwise, you can go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to order current and 
prior-year forms and instructions. 
Your order should arrive within 10 
business days.
Tax questions.  If you have a 
tax question not answered by this 
publication, check IRS.gov and 
How To Get Tax Help  at the end of 
this publication.
IRS mission.  Provide America's 
taxpayers top-quality service by 
helping them understand and meet 
their tax responsibilities and en-
force the law with integrity and fair-
ness to all.
Page 2 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 5 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1. Legend of Icons
Icon Explanation
CAUTION
!
Items that may cause you particular problems, or an alert about pending legislation that may be enacted after 
this publication goes to print.
An Internet site or an email address.
An address you may need.
RECORDS
Items you should keep in your personal records.
Items you may need to figure or a worksheet you may need to complete and keep for your records.
An important phone number.
TIP
Helpful information you may need.
Publication 17 (2017) Page 3

Part One.
The Income Tax 
Return
The four chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system. 
They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax return — such as 
deciding what your filing status is, how many exemptions you can take, and 
what form to file. They also discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file 
(electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax 
during the year: withholding and estimated tax.
1.
Filing 
Information
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can't be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Due date of return.  The due date to file your 
tax return is April 17, 2018. The due date is 
April 17 because April 15 is a Sunday and the 
Emancipation Day holiday in the District of Co-
lumbia is observed on April 16—even if you do 
not live in the District of Columbia.
Who must file.  Generally, the amount of in-
come you can receive before you must file a re-
turn has been increased. See Table 1-1 , Ta-
ble 1-2, and Table 1-3 for the specific amounts.
Secure access. To combat identity fraud, the 
IRS has upgraded its identity verification proc-
ess for certain self-help tools on IRS.gov. To 
find out what types of information new users will 
need, go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess.
Access your online account.  You must au-
thenticate your identity. To securely log in to 
your federal tax account, go to IRS.gov/
Account. View the amount you owe, review 18 
months of payment history, access online pay-
ment options, and create or modify an online 
payment agreement. You can also access your 
tax records online.
Mailing your return. If you live in Connecticut, 
the District of Columbia, Maryland, Pennsylva-
nia, Rhode Island, or West Virginia and you are 
CAUTION
!
mailing in your return, you will need to mail it to 
a different address this year. See Where To File 
near the end of this publication.
Reminders
File online.  Rather than filing a return on pa-
per, you may be able to file electronically using 
IRS e-file. For more information, see Why 
Should I File Electronically, later.
Change of address.  If you change your ad-
dress, you should notify the IRS. You can use 
Form 8822 to notify the IRS of the change. See 
Change of Address, later, under What Happens 
After I File.
Enter your social security number.  You 
must enter your social security number (SSN) in 
the spaces provided on your tax return. If you 
file a joint return, enter the SSNs in the same or-
der as the names.
Direct deposit of refund.  Instead of getting a 
paper check, you may be able to have your re-
fund deposited directly into your account at a 
bank or other financial institution. See Direct 
Deposit under Refunds, later. If you choose di-
rect deposit of your refund, you may be able to 
split the refund among two or three accounts.
Pay online or by phone. If you owe additional 
tax, you may be able to pay online or by phone. 
See How To Pay, later.
Installment agreement.  If you can’t pay the 
full amount due with your return, you may ask to 
make monthly installment payments. See In-
stallment Agreement , later, under Amount You 
Owe. You may be able to apply online for a pay-
ment agreement if you owe federal tax, interest, 
and penalties.
Automatic 6-month extension.  You can get 
an automatic 6-month extension to file your tax 
return if, no later than the date your return is 
due, you file Form 4868. See Automatic Exten-
sion, later.
Service in combat zone.  You are allowed ex-
tra time to take care of your tax matters if you 
are a member of the Armed Forces who served 
in a combat zone, or if you served in a combat 
zone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi-
viduals Serving in Combat Zone , later, under 
When Do I Have To File.
Adoption taxpayer identification number.  If 
a child has been placed in your home for purpo-
ses of legal adoption and you won't be able to 
get a social security number for the child in time 
to file your return, you may be able to get an 
adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN). 
For more information, see Social Security Num-
ber (SSN), later.
Taxpayer identification number for aliens. 
If you or your dependent is a nonresident or res-
ident alien who doesn't have and isn't eligible to 
get a social security number, file Form W-7, Ap-
plication for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identifica-
tion Number, with the IRS. For more informa-
tion, see Social Security Number (SSN), later.
Individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN) renewal. Some ITINs must be renewed. 
If you haven't used your ITIN on a U.S. tax re-
turn at least once for tax years 2014, 2015 or 
2016, or if your ITIN has the middle digits 70, 
71, 72, or 80 (9NN-70-NNNN), it will expire at 
the end of 2017 and must be renewed if you 
need to file a U.S. federal tax return in 2018. 
You don't need to renew your ITIN if you don't 
need to file a federal tax return. You can find 
more information at IRS.gov/ITIN.
Frivolous tax submissions.  The IRS has 
published a list of positions that are identified as 
frivolous. The penalty for filing a frivolous tax re-
turn is $5,000. Also, the $5,000 penalty will ap-
ply to other specified frivolous submissions. For 
more information, see Civil Penalties, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following topics.
Whether you have to file a return.
Which form to use.
How to file electronically.
How to file for free.
When, how, and where to file your return.
What happens if you pay too little or too 
much tax.
What records you should keep and how 
long you should keep them.
How you can change a return you have al-
ready filed.
Do I Have To
File a Return?
You must file a federal income tax return if you 
are a citizen or resident of the United States or 
a resident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filing 
requirements for any of the following categories 
that apply to you.
1. Individuals in general. (There are special 
rules for surviving spouses, executors, 
administrators, legal representatives, U.S. 
Page 6 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Filing Information

citizens and residents living outside the 
United States, residents of Puerto Rico, 
and individuals with income from U.S. pos-
sessions.)
2. Dependents.
3. Certain children under age 19 or full-time 
students.
4. Self-employed persons.
5. Aliens.
The filing requirements for each category are 
explained in this chapter.
The filing requirements apply even if you 
don't owe tax.
Even if you don't have to file a return, it 
may be to your advantage to do so. 
See Who Should File, later.
File only one federal income tax return 
for the year regardless of how many 
jobs you had, how many Forms W-2 
you received, or how many states you lived in 
during the year. Don't file more than one original 
return for the same year, even if you have not 
gotten your refund or have not heard from the 
IRS since you filed.
Individuals—In General
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you 
must file a return depends on three factors.
1. Your gross income.
2. Your filing status.
3. Your age.
To find out whether you must file, see Ta-
ble 1-1, Table 1-2, and Table 1-3. Even if no ta-
ble shows that you must file, you may need to 
file to get money back. See Who Should File , 
later.
Gross income.  This includes all income you 
receive in the form of money, goods, property, 
and services that isn't exempt from tax. It also 
includes income from sources outside the Uni-
ted States or from the sale of your main home 
(even if you can exclude all or part of it). Include 
part of your social security benefits if:
1. You were married, filing a separate return, 
and you lived with your spouse at any time 
during 2017; or
2. Half of your social security benefits plus 
your other gross income and any tax-ex-
empt interest is more than $25,000 
($32,000 if married filing jointly).
If either (1) or (2) applies, see the instructions 
for Form 1040 or 1040A, or Pub. 915, Social 
Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement 
Benefits, to figure the social security benefits 
you must include in gross income.
Common types of income are discussed in 
Part Two of this publication.
Community income. If you are married and 
your permanent home is in a community prop-
erty state, half of any income described by state 
law as community income may be considered 
yours. This affects your federal taxes, including 
TIP
CAUTION
!
whether you must file if you don't file a joint re-
turn with your spouse. See Pub. 555 for more 
information.
Nevada, Washington, and California do-
mestic partners.  A registered domestic part-
ner in Nevada, Washington, or California gener-
ally must report half the combined community 
income of the individual and his or her domestic 
partner. See Pub. 555.
Self-employed individuals.  If you are 
self-employed, your gross income includes the 
amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040), 
Profit or Loss From Business; line 1 of Sched-
ule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Busi-
ness; and line 9 of Schedule F (Form 1040), 
Profit or Loss From Farming. See Self-Em-
ployed Persons , later, for more information 
about your filing requirements.
If you don't report all of your self-em-
ployment income, your social security 
benefits may be lower when you retire.
Filing status.  Your filing status depends on 
whether you are single or married and on your 
family situation. Your filing status is determined 
on the last day of your tax year, which is De-
cember 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 
for an explanation of each filing status.
Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of the 
year, you generally can have a higher amount 
of gross income than other taxpayers before 
you must file. See Table 1-1 . You are consid-
ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday. 
CAUTION
!
For example, if your 65th birthday is on January 
1, 2018, you are considered 65 for 2017.
Surviving Spouses,
Executors, Administrators,
and Legal Representatives
You must file a final return for a decedent (a 
person who died) if both of the following are 
true.
You are the surviving spouse, executor, 
administrator, or legal representative.
The decedent met the filing requirements 
at the date of death.
For more information on rules for filing a de-
cedent's final return, see Pub. 559.
U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens 
Living Abroad
To determine whether you must file a return, in-
clude in your gross income any income you re-
ceived abroad, including any income you can 
exclude under the foreign earned income exclu-
sion. For information on special tax rules that 
may apply to you, see Pub. 54. It is available 
online and at most U.S. embassies and consu-
lates. See How To Get Tax Help  in the back of 
this publication.
Residents of Puerto Rico
If you are a U.S. citizen and also a bona fide 
resident of Puerto Rico, you generally must file 
Table 1-1. 2017 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayers
IF your filing status is...
AND at the end of 2017 you 
were...*
THEN file a return if 
your gross income 
was at least...**
Single under 65 $10,400
65 or older $11,950
Married filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $20,800
65 or older (one spouse) $22,050
65 or older (both spouses) $23,300
Married filing separately any age $ 4,050
Head of household under 65 $13,400
65 or older $14,950
Qualifying widow(er) under 65 $16,750
 65 or older $18,000
* If you were born on January 1, 1953, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2017. (If your spouse 
died in 2017 or if you are preparing a return for someone who died in 2017, see Pub. 501.)
** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that 
isn't exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States or from the sale of 
your main home (even if you can exclude part or all of it). Don't include any social security benefits unless 
(a) you are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during 2017 or (b) 
one-half of your social security benefits plus your other gross income and any tax-exempt interest is more 
than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) applies, see the instructions for Form 1040 or 
1040A or Pub. 915 to figure the taxable part of social security benefits you must include in gross income. 
Gross income includes gains, but not losses, reported on Form 8949 or Schedule D. Gross income from 
a business means, for example, the amount on Schedule C, line 7, or Schedule F, line 9. But, in figuring 
gross income, don't reduce your income by any losses, including any loss on Schedule C, line 7, or 
Schedule F, line 9.
*** If you didn't live with your spouse at the end of 2017 (or on the date your spouse died) and your gross 
income was at least $4,050, you must file a return regardless of your age.
Page 7 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 5

a U.S. income tax return for any year in which 
you meet the income requirements. This is in 
addition to any legal requirement you may have 
to file an income tax return with Puerto Rico.
If you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico 
for the entire year, your U.S. gross income 
doesn't include income from sources within
Puerto Rico. It does, however, include any in-
come you received for your services as an em-
ployee of the United States or a U.S. agency. If 
you receive income from Puerto Rican sources 
that isn't subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce 
your standard deduction. As a result, the 
amount of income you must have before you 
are required to file a U.S. income tax return is 
lower than the applicable amount in Table 1-1 
or Table 1-2 . For more information, see Pub. 
570.
Individuals With Income From
U.S. Possessions
If you had income from Guam, the Common-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-
can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special 
rules may apply when determining whether you 
must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In ad-
dition, you may have to file a return with the in-
dividual island government. See Pub. 570 for 
more information.
Dependents
If you are a dependent (one who meets the de-
pendency tests in chapter 3), see Table 1-2 to 
find out whether you must file a return. You also 
must file if your situation is described in Ta-
ble 1-3.
Responsibility of parent. Generally, a child is 
responsible for filing his or her own tax return 
and for paying any tax on the return. If a de-
pendent child must file an income tax return but 
can’t file due to age or any other reason, then a 
parent, guardian, or other legally responsible 
person must file it for the child. If the child can’t 
sign the return, the parent or guardian must sign 
the child's name followed by the words “By 
(your signature), parent for minor child.”
Child's earnings. Amounts a child earns by 
performing services are included in his or her 
gross income and not the gross income of the 
parent. This is true even if under local law the 
child's parent has the right to the earnings and 
may actually have received them. But if the 
child doesn't pay the tax due on this income, 
the parent is liable for the tax.
Certain Children Under 
Age 19 or Full-Time 
Students
If a child's only income is interest and dividends 
(including capital gain distributions and Alaska 
Permanent Fund dividends), the child was un-
der age 19 at the end of 2017 or was a full-time 
student under age 24 at the end of 2017, and 
certain other conditions are met, a parent can 
elect to include the child's income on the pa-
rent's return. If this election is made, the child 
doesn't have to file a return. See Parent's Elec-
tion To Report Child's Interest and Dividends  in 
chapter 31.
Self-Employed Persons
You are self-employed if you:
Carry on a trade or business as a sole pro-
prietor,
Are an independent contractor,
Are a member of a partnership, or
Are in business for yourself in any other 
way.
Self-employment can include work in addi-
tion to your regular full-time business activities, 
such as certain part-time work you do at home 
or in addition to your regular job. 
You must file a return if your gross income is 
at least as much as the filing requirement 
amount for your filing status and age (shown in 
Table 1-1 ). Also, you must file Form 1040 and 
Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Employment 
Tax, if:
1. Your net earnings from self-employment 
(excluding church employee income) were 
$400 or more, or
2. You had church employee income of 
$108.28 or more. (See Table 1-3.)
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure your 
self-employment tax. Self-employment tax is 
comparable to the social security and Medicare 
tax withheld from an employee's wages. For 
more information about this tax, see Pub. 334, 
Tax Guide for Small Business.
Employees of foreign governments or in-
ternational organizations.  If you are a U.S. 
citizen who works in the United States for an in-
ternational organization, a foreign government, 
or a wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign 
government, and your employer isn't required to 
withhold social security and Medicare taxes 
from your wages, you must include your earn-
ings from services performed in the United 
States when figuring your net earnings from 
self-employment.
Ministers. You must include income from 
services you performed as a minister when fig-
uring your net earnings from self-employment, 
unless you have an exemption from self-em-
ployment tax. This also applies to Christian Sci-
ence practitioners and members of a religious 
order who have not taken a vow of poverty. For 
more information, see Pub. 517.
Aliens
Your status as an alien (resident, nonresident, 
or dual-status) determines whether and how 
you must file an income tax return.
The rules used to determine your alien sta-
tus are discussed in Pub. 519, U.S. Tax Guide 
for Aliens.
Resident alien.  If you are a resident alien for 
the entire year, you must file a tax return follow-
ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens. 
Use the forms discussed in this publication.
Nonresident alien.  If you are a nonresident 
alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to you 
are different from those that apply to U.S. citi-
zens and resident aliens. See Pub. 519 to find 
out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you and 
which forms you should file.
Dual-status taxpayer.  If you are a resident 
alien for part of the tax year and a nonresident 
alien for the rest of the year, you are a dual-sta-
tus taxpayer. Different rules apply for each part 
of the year. For information on dual-status tax-
payers, see Pub. 519. 
Who Should File
Even if you don't have to file, you should file a 
federal income tax return to get money back if 
any of the following conditions apply.
1. You had federal income tax withheld or 
made estimated tax payments. 
2. You qualify for the earned income credit. 
See chapter 36 for more information. 
3. You qualify for the additional child tax 
credit. See chapter 34 for more informa-
tion.
4. You qualify for the premium tax credit. See 
chapter 37 for more information.
5. You qualify for the health coverage tax 
credit. See chapter 38 for more informa-
tion. 
6. You qualify for the American opportunity 
credit. See chapter 35 for more informa-
tion.
7. You qualify for the credit for federal tax on 
fuels. See chapter 30 for more informa-
tion.
Which Form
Should I Use?
You must use one of three forms to file your re-
turn: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040. 
(But also see Why Should I File Electronically , 
later.)
See the discussion under Form 1040 
for when you must use that form.
Form 1040EZ
Form 1040EZ is the simplest form to use.
You can use Form 1040EZ if all of the fol-
lowing apply. 
1. Your filing status is single or married filing 
jointly. If you were a nonresident alien at 
any time in 2017, your filing status must be 
married filing jointly.
2. You (and your spouse if married filing a 
joint return) were under age 65 and not 
blind at the end of 2017. If you were born 
on January 1, 1953, you are considered to 
be age 65 at the end of 2017.
3. You don't claim any dependents.
4. Your taxable income is less than 
$100,000.
TIP
Page 8 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information

5. Your income is only from wages, salaries, 
tips, unemployment compensation, Alaska 
Permanent Fund dividends, taxable schol-
arship and fellowship grants, and taxable 
interest of $1,500 or less.
6. You don't claim any adjustments to in-
come, such as a deduction for IRA contri-
butions or student loan interest.
7. You don't claim any credits other than the 
earned income credit.
8. You don't owe any household employment 
taxes on wages you paid to a household 
employee.
9. If you earned tips, they are included in 
boxes 5 and 7 of your Form W-2.
10. You are not a debtor in a chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy case filed after October 16, 2005.
You must meet all of these requirements to 
use Form 1040EZ. If you don't, you must use 
Form 1040A or Form 1040.
Figuring tax.  On Form 1040EZ, you can use 
only the tax table to figure your income tax. You 
can find the tax table in the Instructions for 
Form 1040EZ. You can’t use Form 1040EZ to 
report any other tax.
Form 1040A
If you don't qualify to use Form 1040EZ, you 
may be able to use Form 1040A.
You can use Form 1040A if all of the follow-
ing apply. 
1. Your income is only from:
a. Wages, salaries, and tips;
b. Interest;
c. Ordinary dividends (including Alaska 
Permanent Fund dividends);
d. Capital gain distributions;
e. IRA distributions;
f. Pensions and annuities;
g. Unemployment compensation;
h. Taxable social security and railroad 
retirement benefits; and
i. Taxable scholarship and fellowship 
grants.
If you receive a capital gain distribution 
that includes unrecaptured section 1250 
gain, section 1202 gain, or collectibles 
(28%) gain, you can’t use Form 1040A. 
You must use Form 1040.
2. Your taxable income is less than 
$100,000.
3. Your adjustments to income are for only 
the following items.
a. Educator expenses.
b. IRA deduction. 
c. Student loan interest deduction. 
4. You don't itemize your deductions. 
5. You claim only the following tax credits.
a. The credit for child and dependent 
care expenses. (See chapter 32.) 
b. The credit for the elderly or the disa-
bled. (See chapter 33.) 
c. The education credits. (See chap-
ter 35.) 
d. The retirement savings contributions 
credit. (See chapter 38.)
e. The child tax credit. (See chapter 34.) 
f. The earned income credit. (See chap-
ter 36.)
g. The additional child tax credit. (See 
chapter 34.)
h. The premium tax credit. (See chap-
ter 37.)
6. You didn't have an alternative minimum 
tax adjustment on stock you acquired from 
the exercise of an incentive stock option. 
(See Pub. 525.) 
You can also use Form 1040A if you re-
ceived employer-provided dependent care ben-
efits or if you owe tax from the recapture of an 
education credit or the alternative minimum tax.
You must meet all these requirements to 
use Form 1040A. If you don't, you must use 
Form 1040.
Form 1040
If you can’t use Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, 
you must use Form 1040. You can use Form 
1040 to report all types of income, deductions, 
and credits.
You may pay less tax by filing Form 1040 
because you can take itemized deductions, 
some adjustments to income, and credits you 
can’t take on Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
You must use Form 1040 if any of the fol-
lowing apply. 
1. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more.
2. You itemize your deductions on Sched-
ule A.
3. You had income that can’t be reported on 
Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, including 
tax-exempt interest from private activity 
bonds issued after August 7, 1986.
2017 Filing Requirements for Dependents
See chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent.
If your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see if you 
must file a return. (See Table 1-3 for other situations when you must file.)
In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, and capital gain 
distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation, taxable social security benefits, 
pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income from a trust. Earned income includes 
salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See 
Scholarships and fellowships in chapter 12.) Gross income is the total of your earned and 
unearned income.
CAUTION
!
If your gross income was $4,050 or more, you usually can’t be claimed as a 
dependent unless you are a qualifying child. For details, see Exemptions for Dependents in 
chapter 3.
Single dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your unearned income was more than $1,050.
• Your earned income was more than $6,350.
• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
• $1,050, or
• Your earned income (up to $6,000) plus $350.
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your unearned income was more than $2,600 ($4,150 if 65 or older and blind).
• Your earned income was more than $7,900 ($9,450 if 65 or older and blind).
• Your gross income was more than the larger of: 
• $2,600 ($4,150 if 65 or older and blind), or
• Your earned income (up to $6,000) plus $1,900 ($3,450 if 65 or older and blind).
Married dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your unearned income was more than $1,050.
• Your earned income was more than $6,350.
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and 
itemizes deductions.
• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
• $1,050, or
• Your earned income (up to $6,000) plus $350.
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your unearned income was more than $2,300 ($3,550 if 65 or older and blind).
• Your earned income was more than $7,600 ($8,850 if 65 or older and blind).
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and 
itemizes deductions.
• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
• $2,300 ($3,550 if 65 or older and blind), or
• Your earned income (up to $6,000) plus $1,600 ($2,850 if 65 or older and blind).
Table 1-2.
Page 9 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

4. You claim any adjustments to gross in-
come other than the adjustments listed 
earlier under Form 1040A.
5. Your Form W-2, box 12, shows uncollec-
ted employee tax (social security and 
Medicare tax) on tips (see chapter 6) or 
group-term life insurance (see chapter 5).
6. You received $20 or more in tips in any 1 
month and didn't report all of them to your 
employer. (See chapter 6.)
7. You were a bona fide resident of Puerto 
Rico and exclude income from sources in 
Puerto Rico.
8. You claim any credits other than the cred-
its listed earlier under Form 1040A.
9. You owe the excise tax on insider stock 
compensation from an expatriated corpo-
ration.
10. Your Form W-2 shows an amount in 
box 12 with a code Z.
11. You had a qualified health savings ac-
count funding distribution from your IRA.
12. You are an employee and your employer 
didn't withhold social security and Medi-
care tax.
13. You have to file other forms with your re-
turn to report certain exclusions, taxes, or 
transactions, such as Form 8959 or Form 
8960.
14. You are a debtor in a bankruptcy case 
filed after October 16, 2005.
15. You must repay the first-time homebuyer 
credit.
16. You have adjusted gross income of more 
than $156,900 and must reduce the dollar 
amount of your exemptions.
17. You received a Form W-2 that incorrectly 
includes in box 1 amounts that are pay-
ments under a Medicaid waiver program, 
and you can’t get a corrected Form W-2.
18. You received Olympic or Paralympic med-
als or United States Olympic Committee 
prize money on account of your participa-
tion in the Olympic or Paralympic Games.
Why Should I File 
Electronically?
Electronic Filing
If your adjusted gross income (AGI) is less than 
a certain amount, you are eligible for Free File, 
a free tax software service offered by IRS part-
ners, to prepare and e-file your return for free. If 
your income is over the amount, you are still eli-
gible for Free File Fillable Forms, an electronic 
version of IRS paper forms. Table 1-4  lists the 
free ways to electronically file your return.
IRS e-file uses automa-
tion to replace most of the 
manual steps needed to process paper returns. 
As a result, the processing of e-file returns is 
faster and more accurate than the processing of 
paper returns. However, as with a paper return, 
you are responsible for making sure your return 
contains accurate information and is filed on 
time.
If your return is filed with IRS e-file, you will re-
ceive an acknowledgment that your return was 
received and accepted. If you owe tax, you can 
e-file and pay electronically. The IRS has pro-
cessed more than one billion e-filed returns 
safely and securely. Using e-file doesn't affect 
your chances of an IRS examination of your re-
turn.
Electronic return signatures.  To file your re-
turn electronically, you must sign the return 
electronically using a personal identification 
number (PIN). If you are filing online, you must 
use a Self-Select PIN. If you are filing electroni-
cally using a tax practitioner, you can use a 
Self-Select PIN or a Practitioner PIN.
Self-Select PIN.  The Self-Select PIN method 
allows you to create your own PIN. If you are 
married filing jointly, you and your spouse will 
each need to create a PIN and enter these PINs 
as your electronic signatures.
A PIN is any combination of five digits you 
choose except five zeros. If you use a PIN, 
there is nothing to sign and nothing to mail—not 
even your Forms W-2.
To verify your identity, you will be prompted 
to enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from 
your originally filed 2016 federal income tax re-
turn, if applicable. Don't use your AGI from an 
amended return (Form 1040X) or a math error 
correction made by the IRS. AGI is the amount 
shown on your 2016 Form 1040, line 38; Form 
1040A, line 22; or Form 1040EZ, line 4. If you 
don't have your 2016 income tax return, you 
can request a transcript by using our automated 
self-service tool. Go to IRS.gov/Transcript. (If 
you filed electronically last year, you may use 
your prior year PIN to verify your identity instead 
of your prior year AGI. The prior year PIN is the 
five-digit PIN you used to electronically sign 
your 2016 return.) You will also be prompted to 
enter your date of birth.
Table 1-3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2017 Return
You must file a return if any of the six conditions below apply for 2017.
1. You owe any special taxes, including any of the following.
a. Alternative minimum tax.
b. Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA), or other tax-favored account. But if 
you are filing a return only because you owe this tax, you can file Form 5329 by itself.
c. Household employment taxes. But if you are filing a return only because you owe this tax, you can file Schedule H by itself.
d. Social security and Medicare tax on tips you didn't report to your employer or on wages you received from an employer who 
didn't withhold these taxes.
e. Recapture of first-time homebuyer credit. 
f. Write-in taxes, including uncollected social security and Medicare or RRTA tax on tips you reported to your employer or on 
group-term life insurance and additional taxes on health savings accounts. 
g. Recapture taxes. 
2. You (or your spouse, if filing jointly) received health savings account, Archer MSA, or Medicare Advantage MSA distributions.
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400.
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer 
social security and Medicare taxes.
5. Advance payments of the premium tax credit were made for you, your spouse, or a dependent who enrolled in coverage 
through the Marketplace. You or whoever enrolled you should have received Form(s) 1095-A showing the amount of the 
advance payments.
6. Advance payments of the health coverage tax credit were made for you, your spouse, or a dependent. You or whoever 
enrolled you should have received Form(s) 1099-H showing the amount of the advance payments.
Page 10 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information

You can’t use the Self-Select PIN 
method if you are a first-time filer under 
age 16 at the end of 2017.
Practitioner PIN. The Practitioner PIN method 
allows you to authorize your tax practitioner to 
enter or generate your PIN. The practitioner can 
provide you with details.
Form 8453.  You must send in a paper Form 
8453 if you have to attach certain forms or other 
documents that can’t be electronically filed. For 
details, see Form 8453.
For more details, visit IRS.gov/efile. 
Identity Protection PIN.  If the IRS gave you 
an identity protection personal identification 
number (IP PIN) because you were a victim of 
identity theft, enter it in the spaces provided on 
your tax form. If the IRS hasn’t given you this 
type of number, leave these spaces blank. For 
more information, see the instructions for Form 
1040A or Form 1040.
Power of attorney.  If an agent is signing your 
return for you, a power of attorney (POA) must 
be filed. Attach the POA to Form 8453 and file it 
using that form's instructions. See Signatures, 
later, for more information on POAs.
State returns.  In most states, you can file an 
electronic state return simultaneously with your 
federal return. For more information, check with 
your local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro-
fessional, or the IRS website at
IRS.gov/efile.
Refunds. You can have a refund check mailed 
to you, or you can have your refund deposited 
directly to your checking or savings account or 
split among two or three accounts. With e-file, 
your refund will be issued faster than if you filed 
on paper.
As with a paper return, you may not get all of 
your refund if you owe certain past-due 
amounts, such as federal tax, state income tax, 
state unemployment compensation debts, child 
support, spousal support, or certain other fed-
eral nontax debts, such as student loans. See 
Offset against debts under Refunds, later.
Refund inquiries.  Information about your re-
turn will generally be available within 24 hours 
after the IRS receives your e-filed return. See 
Refund Information, later.
Amount you owe. To avoid late-payment pen-
alties and interest, pay your taxes in full by April 
17, 2018. The due date is April 17 because 
April 15 is a Sunday and the Emancipation Day 
holiday in the District of Columbia is observed 
on April 16—even if you don't live in the District 
of Columbia. See How To Pay , later, for infor-
mation on how to pay the amount you owe.
Using Your Personal Computer
You can file your tax return in a fast, 
easy, and convenient way using your 
personal computer. A computer with In-
ternet access and tax preparation software are 
all you need. Best of all, you can e-file from the 
comfort of your home 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week.
CAUTION
!
IRS approved tax preparation software is avail-
able for online use on the Internet, for download 
from the Internet, and in retail stores.
For information, visit IRS.gov/efile.
Through Employers and Financial 
Institutions
Some businesses offer free e-file to their em-
ployees, members, or customers. Others offer it 
for a fee. Ask your employer or financial institu-
tion if they offer IRS e-file as an employee, 
member, or customer benefit.
Free Help With Your Return
Free help in preparing your return is available 
nationwide from IRS-trained volunteers. The 
Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro-
gram is designed to help low-to-moderate in-
come taxpayers, and the Tax Counseling for 
the Elderly (TCE) program is designed to assist 
taxpayers age 60 or older with their tax returns. 
Many VITA sites offer free electronic filing and 
all volunteers will let you know about the credits 
and deductions you may be entitled to claim. To 
find a site near you, call 1-800-906-9887. Or to 
find the nearest AARP TaxAide site, visit 
AARP's website at www.aarp.org/taxaide or call 
1-888-227-7669. For more information on these 
programs, go to IRS.gov/VITA.
Using a Tax Professional
Many tax professionals electronically file tax re-
turns for their clients. You may personally enter 
your PIN or complete Form 8879, IRS e-file Sig-
nature Authorization, to authorize the tax pro-
fessional to enter your PIN on your return.
Note. Tax professionals may charge a fee 
for IRS e-file. Fees can vary depending on the 
professional and the specific services rendered.
When Do I
Have To File?
April 17, 2018, is the due date for filing your 
2017 income tax return if you use the calendar 
year. For a quick view of due dates for filing a 
return with or without an extension of time to file 
(discussed later), see Table 1-5.
If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on the 
last day of any month except December, or a 
52-53-week year), your income tax return is due 
by the 15th day of the 4th month after the close 
of your fiscal year.
When the due date for doing any act for tax 
purposes—filing a return, paying taxes, 
etc.—falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holi-
day, the due date is delayed until the next busi-
ness day.
Filing paper returns on time.  Your paper re-
turn is filed on time if it is mailed in an envelope 
that is properly addressed, has enough post-
age, and is postmarked by the due date. If you 
send your return by registered mail, the date of 
the registration is the postmark date. The regis-
tration is evidence that the return was delivered. 
If you send a return by certified mail and have 
your receipt postmarked by a postal employee, 
the date on the receipt is the postmark date. 
The postmarked certified mail receipt is evi-
dence that the return was delivered.
Private delivery services.  If you use a pri-
vate delivery service designated by the IRS to 
send your return, the postmark date generally is 
the date the private delivery service records in 
its database or marks on the mailing label. The 
private delivery service can tell you how to get 
written proof of this date.
The following are designated private deliv-
ery services.
United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS Next 
Day Air Early AM, UPS Next Day Air, UPS 
Table 1-4. Free Ways To e-file
Use Free File for free tax software and free e-file.
• IRS partners offer name-brand products for free.
• Many taxpayers are eligible for Free File software.
• Everyone is eligible for Free File Fillable Forms, an electronic version of IRS paper forms.
• Free File software and Free File Fillable Forms are available only at IRS.gov/FreeFile.
Use VITA/TCE for free tax help from volunteers and free e-file.
• Volunteers prepare your return and e-file it for free.
• Some sites also offer do-it-yourself software. 
• You are eligible based either on your income or age.
• Sites are located nationwide. Find one near you by visiting IRS.gov/VITA.
When To File Your 2017 Return
For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns on a calendar year.
For Most Taxpayers
For Certain Taxpayers
Outside the U.S.
No extension requested April 17, 2018 June 15, 2018
Automatic extension October 15, 2018 October 15, 2018
Table 1-5.
Page 11 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

Next Day Air Saver, UPS 2nd Day Air, UPS 
2nd Day Air A.M., UPS Worldwide Express 
Plus, and UPS Worldwide Express.
Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx First 
Overnight, FedEx Priority Overnight, Fe-
dEx Standard Overnight, FedEx 2 Day, Fe-
dEx International Next Flight Out, FedEx 
International Priority, FedEx International 
First, and FedEx International Economy.
DHL Express 9:00, DHL Express 10:30, 
DHL Express 12:00, DHL Express World-
wide, DHL Express Envelope, DHL Import 
Express 10:30, DHL Import Express 12:00, 
and DHL Import Express Worldwide.
To check for any updates to the list of desig-
nated private delivery services, go to IRS.gov/
PDS. For the IRS mailing addresses to use if 
you’re using a private delivery service, go to 
IRS.gov/PDSStreetAddresses.
The private delivery service can tell you how 
to get written proof of the mailing date.
Filing electronic returns on time.  If you use 
IRS e-file, your return is considered filed on 
time if the authorized electronic return transmit-
ter postmarks the transmission by the due date. 
An authorized electronic return transmitter is a 
participant in the IRS e-file program that trans-
mits electronic tax return information directly to 
the IRS.
The electronic postmark is a record of when 
the authorized electronic return transmitter re-
ceived the transmission of your electronically 
filed return on its host system. The date and 
time in your time zone controls whether your 
electronically filed return is timely.
Filing late.  If you don't file your return by the 
due date, you may have to pay a failure-to-file 
penalty and interest. For more information, see 
Penalties, later. Also see Interest under Amount 
You Owe.
If you were due a refund but you didn't file a 
return, you generally must file within 3 years 
from the date the return was due (including ex-
tensions) to get that refund.
Nonresident alien.  If you are a nonresident 
alien and earn wages subject to U.S. income 
tax withholding, your 2017 U.S. income tax re-
turn (Form 1040NR or Form 1040NR-EZ) is due 
by:
April 17, 2018, if you use a calendar year; 
or
The 15th day of the 4th month after the 
end of your fiscal year if you use a fiscal 
year.
If you don't earn wages subject to U.S. in-
come tax withholding, your return is due by:
June 15, 2018, if you use a calendar year; 
or
The 15th day of the 6th month after the 
end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal 
year.
See Pub. 519 for more filing information.
Filing for a decedent.  If you must file a final 
income tax return for a taxpayer who died dur-
ing the year (a decedent), the return is due by 
the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of 
the decedent's normal tax year. See Pub. 559.
Extensions of Time To File
You may be able to get an extension of time to 
file your return. There are three types of situa-
tions where you may qualify for an extension:
Automatic extensions,
You are outside the United States, or
You are serving in a combat zone.
Automatic Extension
If you can’t file your 2017 return by the due 
date, you may be able to get an automatic 
6-month extension of time to file.
Example. If your return is due on April 17, 
2018, you will have until October 15, 2018, to 
file.
If you don't pay the tax due by the regu-
lar due date (April 15 for most taxpay-
ers), you will owe interest. You may 
also be charged penalties, discussed later.
How to get the automatic extension.  You 
can get the automatic extension by:
1. Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), or
2. Filing a paper form.
E-file options. There are two ways you can 
use e-file to get an extension of time to file. 
Complete Form 4868 to use as a worksheet. If 
you think you may owe tax when you file your 
return, use Part II  of the form to estimate your 
balance due. If you e-file Form 4868 to the IRS, 
don't also send a paper Form 4868.
E-file using your personal computer or a 
tax professional. You can use a tax software 
package with your personal computer or a tax 
professional to file Form 4868 electronically. 
Free File and Free File Fillable Forms, both 
available at IRS.gov, allow you to prepare and 
e-file Form 4868 for free. You will need to pro-
vide certain information from your 2016 tax re-
turn. If you wish to make a payment by direct 
transfer from your bank account, see Pay online 
under How To Pay, later, in this chapter.
E-file and pay by credit or debit card or 
by direct transfer from your bank account.
You can get an extension by paying part or all of 
your estimate of tax due by using a credit or 
debit card or by direct transfer from your bank 
account. You can do this by phone or over the 
Internet. You don't file Form 4868. See Pay on-
line under How To Pay, later, in this chapter.
Filing a paper Form 4868. You can get an ex-
tension of time to file by filing a paper Form 
4868. Mail it to the address shown in the form 
instructions.
If you want to make a payment with the 
form, make your check or money order payable 
to “United States Treasury.” Write your SSN, 
daytime phone number, and “2017 Form 4868” 
on your check or money order.
When to file.  You must request the automatic 
extension by the due date for your return. You 
can file your return any time before the 6-month 
extension period ends.
When you file your return.  Enter any pay-
ment you made related to the extension of time 
CAUTION
!
to file on Form 1040, line 70. If you file Form 
1040EZ or Form 1040A, include that payment in 
your total payments on Form 1040EZ, line 9, or 
Form 1040A, line 46. Also enter “Form 4868” 
and the amount paid in the space to the left of 
line 9 or line 46.
Individuals Outside the
United States
You are allowed an automatic 2-month exten-
sion, without filing Form 4868 (until June 15, 
2018, if you use the calendar year), to file your 
2017 return and pay any federal income tax due 
if:
1. You are a U.S. citizen or resident; and
2. On the due date of your return:
a. You are living outside the United 
States and Puerto Rico, and your 
main place of business or post of duty 
is outside the United States and Pu-
erto Rico; or
b. You are in military or naval service on 
duty outside the United States and
Puerto Rico.
However, if you pay the tax due after the 
regular due date (April 15 for most taxpayers), 
interest will be charged from that date until the 
date the tax is paid.
If you served in a combat zone or qualified 
hazardous duty area, you may be eligible for a 
longer extension of time to file. See Individuals 
Serving in Combat Zone , later, for special rules 
that apply to you.
Married taxpayers.  If you file a joint return, 
only one spouse has to qualify for this auto-
matic extension. If you and your spouse file 
separate returns, this automatic extension ap-
plies only to the spouse who qualifies.
How to get the extension.  To use this auto-
matic extension, you must attach a statement to 
your return explaining what situation qualified 
you for the extension. (See the situations listed 
under (2), earlier.)
Extensions beyond 2 months. If you can’t file 
your return within the automatic 2-month exten-
sion period, you may be able to get an addi-
tional 4-month extension, for a total of 6 
months. File Form 4868 and check the box on 
line 8.
No further extension.  An extension of more 
than 6 months will generally not be granted. 
However, if you are outside the United States 
and meet certain tests, you may be granted a 
longer extension. For more information, see 
When To File and Pay in Pub. 54.
Individuals Serving in
Combat Zone
The deadline for filing your tax return, paying 
any tax you may owe, and filing a claim for re-
fund is automatically extended if you serve in a 
combat zone. This applies to members of the 
Armed Forces, as well as merchant marines 
serving aboard vessels under the operational 
control of the Department of Defense, Red 
Cross personnel, accredited correspondents, 
Page 12 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information

and civilians under the direction of the Armed 
Forces in support of the Armed Forces.
Combat zone.  For purposes of the automatic 
extension, the term “combat zone” includes the 
following areas.
1. The Arabian peninsula area, effective Jan-
uary 17, 1991.
2. The Kosovo area, effective March 24, 
1999.
3. The Afghanistan area, effective Septem-
ber 19, 2001.
See Pub. 3 for more detailed information on 
the locations comprising each combat zone. 
The publication also has information about 
other tax benefits available to military personnel 
serving in a combat zone.
Extension period. The deadline for filing your 
return, paying any tax due, and filing a claim for 
refund is extended for at least 180 days after 
the later of:
1. The last day you are in a combat zone or 
the last day the area qualifies as a combat 
zone, or
2. The last day of any continuous qualified 
hospitalization for injury from service in the 
combat zone.
In addition to the 180 days, your deadline is 
also extended by the number of days you had 
left to take action with the IRS when you en-
tered the combat zone. For example, you have 
312 months (January 1 – April 15) to file your tax 
return. Any days left in this period when you en-
tered the combat zone (or the entire 3 12 months 
if you entered it before the beginning of the 
year) are added to the 180 days. See Extension 
of Deadlines in Pub. 3 for more information.
The rules on the extension for filing your re-
turn also apply when you are deployed outside 
the United States (away from your permanent 
duty station) while participating in a designated 
contingency operation.
How Do I Prepare
My Return?
This section explains how to get ready to fill in 
your tax return and when to report your income 
and expenses. It also explains how to complete 
certain sections of the form. You may find Ta-
ble 1-6 helpful when you prepare your paper re-
turn.
Six Steps for Preparing 
Your Paper Return
1 — Get your records together for income 
and expenses.
2 — Get the forms, schedules, and 
publications you need.
3 — Fill in your return.
4 — Check your return to make sure it is 
correct.
5 — Sign and date your return.
6 — Attach all required forms and 
schedules.
Electronic returns.  For information you may 
find useful in preparing an electronic return, see 
Why Should I File Electronically, earlier.
Substitute tax forms. You can’t use your own 
version of a tax form unless it meets the re-
quirements explained in Pub. 1167.
Form W-2.  If you were an employee, you 
should receive Form W-2 from your employer. 
You will need the information from this form to 
prepare your return. See Form W-2  under 
Credit for Withholding and Estimated Tax  in 
chapter 4.
Your employer is required to provide or send 
Form W-2 to you no later than January 31, 
2018. If it is mailed, you should allow adequate 
time to receive it before contacting your em-
ployer. If you still don't get the form by February 
15, the IRS can help you by requesting the form 
from your employer. When you request IRS 
help, be prepared to provide the following infor-
mation.
Your name, address (including ZIP code), 
and phone number.
Your SSN.
Your dates of employment.
Your employer's name, address (including 
ZIP code), and phone number.
Form 1099. If you received certain types of in-
come, you may receive a Form 1099. For exam-
ple, if you received taxable interest of $10 or 
more, the payer is required to provide or send 
Form 1099 to you no later than January 31, 
2018 (or by February 15, 2018, if furnished by a 
broker). If it is mailed, you should allow ade-
quate time to receive it before contacting the 
payer. If you still don't get the form by February 
15 (or by March 1, 2018, if furnished by a 
broker), call the IRS for help.
When Do I Report My
Income and Expenses?
You must figure your taxable income on the ba-
sis of a tax year. A “tax year” is an annual ac-
counting period used for keeping records and 
reporting income and expenses. You must ac-
count for your income and expenses in a way 
that clearly shows your taxable income. The 
way you do this is called an accounting method. 
This section explains which accounting periods 
and methods you can use.
Table 1-6.
Accounting Periods
Most individual tax returns cover a calendar 
year—the 12 months from January 1 through 
December 31. If you don't use a calendar year, 
your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regu-
lar fiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on 
the last day of any month except December. A 
52-53-week fiscal year varies from 52 to 53 
weeks and always ends on the same day of the 
week.
You choose your accounting period (tax 
year) when you file your first income tax return. 
It can’t be longer than 12 months.
More information.  For more information on 
accounting periods, including how to change 
your accounting period, see Pub. 538.
Accounting Methods
Your accounting method is the way you account 
for your income and expenses. Most taxpayers 
use either the cash method or an accrual 
method. You choose a method when you file 
your first income tax return. If you want to 
change your accounting method after that, you 
generally must get IRS approval. Use Form 
3115 to request an accounting method change.
Cash method.  If you use this method, report 
all items of income in the year in which you ac-
tually or constructively receive them. Generally, 
you deduct all expenses in the year you actually 
pay them. This is the method most individual 
taxpayers use.
Constructive receipt.  Generally, you con-
structively receive income when it is credited to 
your account or set apart in any way that makes 
it available to you. You don't need to have phys-
ical possession of it. For example, interest 
credited to your bank account on December 31, 
2017, is taxable income to you in 2017 if you 
could have withdrawn it in 2017 (even if the 
amount isn't entered in your records or with-
drawn until 2018).
Garnisheed wages.  If your employer uses 
your wages to pay your debts, or if your wages 
are attached or garnisheed, the full amount is 
constructively received by you. You must in-
clude these wages in income for the year you 
would have received them.
Debts paid for you.  If another person can-
cels or pays your debts (but not as a gift or 
loan), you have constructively received the 
amount and generally must include it in your 
gross income for the year. See Canceled Debts 
in chapter 12 for more information.
Payment to third party.  If a third party is 
paid income from property you own, you have 
constructively received the income. It is the 
same as if you had actually received the income 
and paid it to the third party.
Payment to an agent.  Income an agent re-
ceives for you is income you constructively re-
ceived in the year the agent receives it. If you 
indicate in a contract that your income is to be 
paid to another person, you must include the 
amount in your gross income when the other 
person receives it.
Check received or available. A valid check 
that was made available to you before the end 
Page 13 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

of the tax year is constructively received by you 
in that year. A check that was “made available 
to you” includes a check you have already re-
ceived, but not cashed or deposited. It also in-
cludes, for example, your last paycheck of the 
year that your employer made available for you 
to pick up at the office before the end of the 
year. It is constructively received by you in that 
year whether or not you pick it up before the 
end of the year or wait to receive it by mail after 
the end of the year.
No constructive receipt.  There may be 
facts to show that you didn't constructively re-
ceive income.
Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher, agreed 
to her school board's condition that, in her ab-
sence, she would receive only the difference 
between her regular salary and the salary of a 
substitute teacher hired by the school board. 
Therefore, Alice didn't constructively receive 
the amount by which her salary was reduced to 
pay the substitute teacher.
Accrual method.  If you use an accrual 
method, you generally report income when you 
earn it, rather than when you receive it. You 
generally deduct your expenses when you incur 
them, rather than when you pay them.
Income paid in advance.  An advance pay-
ment of income is generally included in gross 
income in the year you receive it. Your method 
of accounting doesn't matter as long as the in-
come is available to you. An advance payment 
may include rent or interest you receive in ad-
vance and pay for services you will perform 
later.
A limited deferral until the next tax year may 
be allowed for certain advance payments. See 
Pub. 538 for specific information.
Additional information. For more information 
on accounting methods, including how to 
change your accounting method, see Pub. 538.
Social Security Number 
(SSN)
You must enter your SSN on your return. If you 
are married, enter the SSNs for both you and 
your spouse, whether you file jointly or sepa-
rately.
If you are filing a joint return, include the 
SSNs in the same order as the names. Use this 
same order in submitting other forms and docu-
ments to the IRS.
Check that both the name and SSN on your 
Form 1040, W-2, and 1099 agree with your so-
cial security card. If they don't, certain deduc-
tions and credits on your Form 1040 may be re-
duced or disallowed and you may not receive 
credit for your social security earnings. If your 
Form W-2 shows an incorrect SSN or name, 
notify your employer or the form-issuing agent 
as soon as possible to make sure your earnings 
are credited to your social security record. If the 
name or SSN on your social security card is in-
correct, call the SSA at 1-800-772-1213.
Name change. If you changed your name be-
cause of marriage, divorce, etc., be sure to re-
port the change to your local Social Security 
Administration (SSA) office before filing your re-
turn. This prevents delays in processing your 
return and issuing refunds. It also safeguards 
your future social security benefits.
Dependent's SSN. You must provide the SSN 
of each dependent you claim, regardless of the 
dependent's age. This requirement applies to 
all dependents (not just your children) claimed 
on your tax return.
Exception. If your child was born and died 
in 2017 and didn't have an SSN, enter “DIED” in 
column (2) of line 6c (Form 1040 or 1040A) and 
include a copy of the child's birth certificate, 
death certificate, or hospital records. The docu-
ment must show that the child was born alive.
No SSN. File Form SS-5, Application for a So-
cial Security Card, with your local SSA office to 
get an SSN for yourself or your dependent. It 
usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN. If 
you or your dependent isn't eligible for an SSN, 
see Individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN), later.
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, you 
must show proof of age, identity, and citizen-
ship or alien status with your Form SS-5. If you 
are 12 or older and have never been assigned 
an SSN, you must appear in person with this 
proof at an SSA office.
Form SS-5 is available at any SSA office, on 
the Internet at SSA.gov, or by calling 
1-800-772-1213. If you have any questions 
about which documents you can use as proof of 
age, identity, or citizenship, contact your SSA 
office.
If your dependent doesn't have an SSN by 
the time your return is due, you may want to ask 
for an extension of time to file, as explained ear-
lier under When Do I Have To File.
If you don't provide a required SSN or if you 
provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in-
creased and any refund may be reduced.
Adoption taxpayer identification number 
(ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting a 
child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and can’t 
get an SSN for the child until the adoption is fi-
nal, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead of 
an SSN.
File Form W-7A, Application for Taxpayer 
Identification Number for Pending U.S. Adop-
tions, with the IRS to get an ATIN if all of the fol-
lowing are true.
You have a child living with you who was 
placed in your home for legal adoption.
You can’t get the child's existing SSN even 
though you have made a reasonable at-
tempt to get it from the birth parents, the 
placement agency, and other persons.
You can’t get an SSN for the child from the 
SSA because, for example, the adoption 
isn't final.
You are eligible to claim the child as a de-
pendent on your tax return.
After the adoption is final, you must apply for an 
SSN for the child. You can’t continue using the 
ATIN.
See Form W-7A for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse is a 
nonresident alien, your spouse must have either 
an SSN or an ITIN if:
You file a joint return,
You file a separate return and claim an ex-
emption for your spouse, or
Your spouse is filing a separate return.
If your spouse isn't eligible for an SSN, see the 
following discussion on ITINs.
Individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN). The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are 
a nonresident or resident alien and you don't 
have and aren’t eligible to get an SSN. This also 
applies to an alien spouse or dependent. To ap-
ply for an ITIN, file Form W-7 with the IRS. It 
usually takes about 7 weeks to get an ITIN. En-
ter the ITIN on your tax return wherever an SSN 
is requested.
Make sure your ITIN hasn’t expired. If you 
haven't used your ITIN on a U.S. tax return at 
least once for tax years 2014, 2015 or 2016, or 
if your ITIN has the middle digits 70, 71, 72, or 
80 (9NN-70-NNNN), it will expire at the end of 
2017 and must be renewed if you need to file a 
U.S. federal tax return in 2018. You don't need 
to renew your ITIN if you don't need to file a fed-
eral tax return. You can find more information at 
IRS.gov/ITIN.
If you are applying for an ITIN for your-
self, your spouse, or a dependent in or-
der to file your tax return, attach your 
completed tax return to your Form W-7. See the 
Form W-7 instructions for how and where to file.
You can’t e-file a return using an ITIN in 
the calendar year the ITIN is issued; 
however, you can  e-file returns in the 
following years.
ITIN for tax use only.  An ITIN is for federal 
tax use only. It doesn't entitle you to social se-
curity benefits or change your employment or 
immigration status under U.S. law.
Penalty for not providing social security 
number. If you don't include your SSN or the 
SSN of your spouse or dependent as required, 
you may have to pay a penalty. See the discus-
sion on Penalties, later, for more information.
SSN on correspondence.  If you write to the 
IRS about your tax account, be sure to include 
your SSN (and the name and SSN of your 
spouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre-
spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden-
tify your account, this helps the IRS respond to 
your correspondence promptly.
Presidential Election
Campaign Fund
This fund helps pay for Presidential election 
campaigns. The fund also helps pay for pedia-
tric medical research. If you want $3 to go to 
this fund, check the box. If you are filing a joint 
return, your spouse can also have $3 go to the 
fund. If you check a box, your tax or refund 
won't change.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Page 14 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Computations
The following information may be useful in mak-
ing the return easier to complete.
Rounding off dollars. You can round off cents 
to whole dollars on your return and schedules. If 
you do round to whole dollars, you must round 
all amounts. To round, drop amounts under 50 
cents and increase amounts from 50 to 99 
cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39 be-
comes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3.
If you have to add two or more amounts to 
figure the amount to enter on a line, include 
cents when adding the amounts and round off 
only the total.
Equal amounts. If you are asked to enter the 
smaller or larger of two equal amounts, enter 
that amount.
Negative amounts.  If you file a paper return 
and you need to enter a negative amount, put 
the amount in parentheses rather than using a 
minus sign. To combine positive and negative 
amounts, add all the positive amounts together 
and then subtract the negative amounts.
Attachments
Depending on the form you file and the items 
reported on your return, you may have to com-
plete additional schedules and forms and attach 
them to your paper return.
You may be able to file a paperless re-
turn using IRS e-file. There's nothing to 
attach or mail, not even your Forms 
W-2. See Why Should I File Electronically , ear-
lier.
Form W-2. Form W-2 is a statement from your 
employer of wages and other compensation 
paid to you and taxes withheld from your pay. 
You should have a Form W-2 from each em-
ployer. If you file a paper return, be sure to at-
tach a copy of Form W-2 in the place indicated 
on the front page of your return. Attach it to the 
front page of your paper return, not to any at-
tachments. For more information, see Form 
W-2 in chapter 4.
Form 1099-R.  If you received a Form 1099-R 
showing federal income tax withheld, and you 
file a paper return, attach a copy of that form in 
the place indicated on the front page of your re-
turn.
Form 1040EZ. There are no additional sched-
ules to file with Form 1040EZ.
Form 1040A. If you file a paper return, attach 
any forms and schedules behind Form 1040A in 
order of the “Attachment Sequence Number” 
shown in the upper right corner of the form or 
schedule. Then arrange all other statements or 
attachments in the same order as the forms and 
schedules they relate to and attach them last. 
Don't attach items unless required to do so.
Form 1040.  If you file a paper return, attach 
any forms and schedules behind Form 1040 in 
order of the “Attachment Sequence Number” 
shown in the upper right corner of the form or 
schedule. Then arrange all other statements or 
attachments in the same order as the forms and 
TIP
schedules they relate to and attach them last. 
Don't attach items unless required to do so.
Third Party Designee
You can authorize the IRS to discuss your re-
turn with your preparer, a friend, family mem-
ber, or any other person you choose. If you 
check the “Yes” box in the Third party designee 
area of your 2017 tax return and provide the in-
formation required, you are authorizing:
1. The IRS to call the designee to answer 
any questions that arise during the pro-
cessing of your return, and
2. The designee to:
a. Give information that is missing from 
your return to the IRS;
b. Call the IRS for information about the 
processing of your return or the status 
of your refund or payments;
c. Receive copies of notices or tran-
scripts related to your return, upon re-
quest; and
d. Respond to certain IRS notices about 
math errors, offsets (see Refunds, 
later), and return preparation.
The authorization will automatically end no 
later than the due date (without any extensions) 
for filing your 2018 tax return. This is April 15, 
2019, for most people.
See your form instructions for more informa-
tion.
Signatures
You must sign and date your return. If you file a 
joint return, both you and your spouse must 
sign the return, even if only one of you had in-
come.
If you file a joint return, both spouses 
are generally liable for the tax, and the 
entire tax liability may be assessed 
against either spouse. See chapter 2.
If you electronically file your return, you 
can use an electronic signature to sign 
your return. See Why Should I File 
Electronically, earlier.
If you are due a refund, it can’t be issued un-
less you have signed your return.
Enter your occupation. If you file a joint re-
turn, enter both your occupation and your spou-
se's occupation. Entering your daytime phone 
number may help speed the processing of your 
return.
When someone can sign for you.  You can 
appoint an agent to sign your return if you are:
1. Unable to sign the return because of dis-
ease or injury,
2. Absent from the United States for a contin-
uous period of at least 60 days before the 
due date for filing your return, or
3. Given permission to do so by the IRS of-
fice in your area.
Power of attorney.  A return signed by an 
agent in any of these cases must have a power 
CAUTION
!
TIP
of attorney (POA) attached that authorizes the 
agent to sign for you. You can use a POA that 
states that the agent is granted authority to sign 
the return, or you can use Form 2848. Part I of 
Form 2848 must state that the agent is granted 
authority to sign the return.
Court-appointed, conservator, or other fidu-
ciary. If you are a court-appointed conservator, 
guardian, or other fiduciary for a mentally or 
physically incompetent individual who has to file 
a tax return, sign your name for the individual. 
File Form 56.
Unable to sign.  If the taxpayer is mentally 
competent but physically unable to sign the re-
turn or POA, a valid “signature” is defined under 
state law. It can be anything that clearly indi-
cates the taxpayer's intent to sign. For example, 
the taxpayer's “X” with the signatures of two wit-
nesses might be considered a valid signature 
under a state's law.
Spouse unable to sign.  If your spouse is un-
able to sign for any reason, see Signing a joint 
return in chapter 2.
Child's return. If a child has to file a tax return 
but can’t sign the return, the child's parent, 
guardian, or another legally responsible person 
must sign the child's name, followed by the 
words “By (your signature), parent for minor 
child.”
Paid Preparer
Generally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist in 
preparing, or review your tax return must sign it 
and fill in the other blanks, including their Pre-
parer Tax Identification Number (PTIN), in the 
paid preparer's area of your return.
Many preparers are required to e-file the tax 
returns they prepare. They sign these e-filed re-
turns using their tax preparation software. How-
ever, you can choose to have your return com-
pleted on paper if you prefer. In that case, the 
paid preparer can sign the paper return man-
ually or use a rubber stamp or mechanical de-
vice. The preparer is personally responsible for 
affixing his or her signature to the return.
If the preparer is self-employed (that is, not 
employed by any person or business to prepare 
the return), he or she should check the self-em-
ployed box in the Paid Preparer Use Only 
space on the return.
The preparer must give you a copy of your 
return in addition to the copy filed with the IRS.
If you prepare your own return, leave this 
area blank. If another person prepares your re-
turn and doesn't charge you, that person 
shouldn't sign your return.
If you have questions about whether a pre-
parer must sign your return, contact any IRS of-
fice.
Refunds
When you complete your return, you will deter-
mine if you paid more income tax than you 
owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amount 
you overpaid or, if you file Form 1040 or Form 
1040A, you can choose to apply all or part of 
the overpayment to your next year's (2018) esti-
mated tax. You can’t have your overpayment 
Page 15 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

applied to your 2018 estimated tax if you file 
Form 1040EZ.
If you choose to have a 2017 overpay-
ment applied to your 2018 estimated 
tax, you can’t change your mind and 
have any of it refunded to you after the due date 
(without extensions) of your 2017 return.
Follow the form instructions to complete the 
entries to claim your refund and/or to apply your 
overpayment to your 2018 estimated tax.
If your refund for 2017 is large, you 
may want to decrease the amount of 
income tax withheld from your pay in 
2018. See chapter 4 for more information.
Instead of getting a pa-
per check, you may be 
able to have your refund deposited directly into 
your checking or savings account, including an 
individual retirement arrangement. Follow the 
form instructions to request direct deposit. If the 
direct deposit can’t be done, the IRS will send a 
check instead.
Don't request a deposit of any part of your 
refund to an account that isn't in your name. 
Don't allow your tax preparer to deposit any part 
of your refund into his or her account. The num-
ber of direct deposits to a single account or pre-
paid debit card is limited to three refunds a 
year. After this limit is exceeded, paper checks 
will be sent instead. Learn more at IRS.gov/
Individuals/Direct-Deposit-Limits.
IRA.  You can have your refund (or part of it) di-
rectly deposited to a traditional IRA, Roth IRA, 
or SEP-IRA, but not a SIMPLE IRA. You must 
establish the IRA at a bank or financial institu-
tion before you request direct deposit.
TreasuryDirect®. You can request a deposit 
of your refund to a TreasuryDirect® online ac-
count to buy U.S. Treasury marketable securi-
ties and savings bonds. For more information, 
go to www.treasurydirect.gov.
Split refunds.  If you choose direct deposit, 
you may be able to split the refund and have it 
deposited among two or three accounts or buy 
up to $5,000 in paper series I savings bonds. 
Complete Form 8888 and attach it to your re-
turn.
Overpayment less than one dollar.  If your 
overpayment is less than one dollar, you won't 
get a refund unless you ask for it in writing.
Cashing your refund check.  Cash your tax 
refund check soon after you receive it. Checks 
expire the last business day of the 12th month 
of issue.
If your check has expired, you can apply to 
the IRS to have it reissued.
Refund more or less than expected.  If you 
receive a check for a refund you aren’t entitled 
to, or for an overpayment that should have been 
credited to estimated tax, don't cash the check. 
Call the IRS.
If you receive a check for more than the re-
fund you claimed, don't cash the check until you 
receive a notice explaining the difference.
If your refund check is for less than you 
claimed, it should be accompanied by a notice 
explaining the difference. Cashing the check 
CAUTION
!
TIP
Simple. Safe. Secure.
DIRECT DEPOSIT
doesn't stop you from claiming an additional 
amount of refund.
If you didn't receive a notice and you have 
any questions about the amount of your refund, 
you should wait 2 weeks. If you still haven’t re-
ceived a notice, call the IRS.
Offset against debts.  If you are due a refund 
but haven’t paid certain amounts you owe, all or 
part of your refund may be used to pay all or 
part of the past-due amount. This includes 
past-due federal income tax, other federal 
debts (such as student loans), state income tax, 
child and spousal support payments, and state 
unemployment compensation debt. You will be 
notified if the refund you claimed has been off-
set against your debts.
Joint return and injured spouse.  When a 
joint return is filed and only one spouse owes a 
past-due amount, the other spouse can be con-
sidered an injured spouse. An injured spouse 
should file Form 8379, Injured Spouse Alloca-
tion, if both of the following apply and the 
spouse wants a refund of his or her share of the 
overpayment shown on the joint return.
1. You aren’t legally obligated to pay the 
past-due amount.
2. You made and reported tax payments 
(such as federal income tax withheld from 
your wages or estimated tax payments), or 
claimed a refundable tax credit (see the 
credits listed under Who Should File, ear-
lier).
Note. If the injured spouse's residence was 
in a community property state at any time dur-
ing the tax year, special rules may apply. See 
the Instructions for Form 8379.
If you haven’t filed your joint return and you 
know that your joint refund will be offset, file 
Form 8379 with your return. You should receive 
your refund within 14 weeks from the date the 
paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from the 
date the return is filed electronically.
If you filed your joint return and your joint re-
fund was offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When 
filed after offset, it can take up to 8 weeks to re-
ceive your refund. Don't attach the previously 
filed tax return, but do include copies of all 
Forms W-2 and W-2G for both spouses and 
any Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld. 
The processing of Form 8379 may be delayed if 
these forms aren’t attached, or if the form is in-
complete when filed.
A separate Form 8379 must be filed for each 
tax year to be considered.
An injured spouse claim is different 
from an innocent spouse relief request. 
An injured spouse uses Form 8379 to 
request the division of the tax overpayment at-
tributed to each spouse. An innocent spouse 
uses Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse 
Relief, to request relief from joint liability for tax, 
interest, and penalties on a joint return for items 
of the other spouse (or former spouse) that 
were incorrectly reported on the joint return. For 
information on innocent spouses, see Relief 
from joint responsibility  under Filing a Joint Re-
turn in chapter 2.
CAUTION
!
Amount You Owe
When you complete your return, you will deter-
mine if you have paid the full amount of tax that 
you owe. If you owe additional tax, you should 
pay it with your return.
You don't have to pay if the amount 
you owe is under $1.
If the IRS figures your tax for you, you will re-
ceive a bill for any tax that is due. You should 
pay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of 
your return, if later). See Tax Figured by IRS  in 
chapter 30.
If you don't pay your tax when due, you 
may have to pay a failure-to-pay pen-
alty. See Penalties, later. For more in-
formation about your balance due, see Pub. 
594.
If the amount you owe for 2017 is large, 
you may want to increase the amount 
of income tax withheld from your pay or 
make estimated tax payments for 2018. See 
chapter 4 for more information.
How To Pay
You can pay online, by phone, by mobile de-
vice, in cash, or by check or money order. Don't 
include any estimated tax payment for 2018 in 
this payment. Instead, make the estimated tax 
payment separately.
Bad check or payment.  The penalty for writ-
ing a bad check to the IRS is $25 or 2% of the 
check, whichever is more. This penalty also ap-
plies to other forms of payment if the IRS 
doesn't receive the funds.
Pay online.  Paying online is convenient and 
secure and helps make sure we get your pay-
ments on time.
You can pay online with a direct transfer 
from your bank account using IRS Direct Pay or 
the Electronic Federal Tax Payment System, or 
by debit or credit card.
To pay your taxes online or for more infor-
mation, go to IRS.gov/Payments.
Pay by phone.  Paying by phone is another 
safe and secure method of paying electroni-
cally. Use one of the following methods.
Electronic Federal Tax Payment System 
(EFTPS).
Debit or credit card.
To use EFTPS, you must be enrolled either 
online or have an enrollment form mailed to 
you. To make a payment using EFTPS call 
1-800-555-4477 (English) or 1-800-244-4829 
(Español). People who are deaf, hard of hear-
ing, or have a speech disability and have ac-
cess to TTY/TDD equipment can call 
1-800-733-4829. For more information about 
EFTPS, go to IRS.gov/Payments or 
www.EFTPS.gov.
To pay using a debit or credit card, you can 
call one of the following service providers. 
There is a convenience fee charged by these 
providers that varies by provider, card type, and 
payment amount.
TIP
CAUTION
!
TIP
Page 16 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information

WorldPay US, Inc.
1-844-PAY-TAX-8TM (1-844-729-8298)
www.payUSAtax.com
Official Payments
1-888-UPAY-TAXTM (1-888-872-9829)
www.officialpayments.com
Link2Gov Corporation
1-888-PAY-1040TM (1-888-729-1040)
www.PAY1040.com
For the latest details on how to pay by 
phone, go to IRS.gov/Payments.
Pay by mobile device.  To pay through your 
mobile device, download the IRS2Go app.
Pay by cash.  Cash is an in-person payment 
option for individuals provided through retail 
partners with a maximum of $1,000 per day per 
transaction. To make a cash payment, you must 
first be registered online at 
www.officialpayments.com.
Pay by check or money order.  Make your 
check or money order payable to “United States 
Treasury” for the full amount due. Don't send 
cash. Don't attach the payment to your return. 
Show your correct name, address, SSN, day-
time phone number, and the tax year and form 
number on the front of your check or money or-
der. If you are filing a joint return, enter the SSN 
shown first on your tax return.
Estimated tax payments.  Don't include any 
2018 estimated tax payment in the payment for 
your 2017 income tax return. See chapter 4 for 
information on how to pay estimated tax.
Interest
Interest is charged on tax you don't pay by the 
due date of your return. Interest is charged even 
if you get an extension of time for filing.
If the IRS figures your tax for you, to 
avoid interest for late payment, you 
must pay the bill within 30 days of the 
date of the bill or by the due date of your return, 
whichever is later. For information, see Tax Fig-
ured by IRS in chapter 30.
Interest on penalties.  Interest is charged on 
the failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-related 
penalty, and the fraud penalty from the due date 
of the return (including extensions) to the date 
of payment. Interest on other penalties starts on 
the date of notice and demand, but isn't 
charged on penalties paid within 21 calendar 
days from the date of the notice (or within 10 
business days if the notice is for $100,000 or 
more).
Interest due to IRS error or delay.  All or part 
of any interest you were charged can be for-
given if the interest is due to an unreasonable 
error or delay by an officer or employee of the 
IRS in performing a ministerial or managerial 
act.
A ministerial act is a procedural or mechani-
cal act that occurs during the processing of your 
case. A managerial act includes personnel 
transfers and extended personnel training. A 
decision concerning the proper application of 
TIP
federal tax law isn't a ministerial or managerial 
act.
The interest can be forgiven only if you 
aren’t responsible in any important way for the 
error or delay and the IRS has notified you in 
writing of the deficiency or payment. For more 
information, see Pub. 556.
Interest and certain penalties may also be 
suspended for a limited period if you filed your 
return by the due date (including extensions) 
and the IRS doesn't provide you with a notice 
specifically stating your liability and the basis for 
it before the close of the 36-month period be-
ginning on the later of:
The date the return is filed, or
The due date of the return without regard 
to extensions.
For more information, see Pub. 556.
Installment Agreement
If you can’t pay the full amount due with your re-
turn, you can ask to make monthly installment 
payments for the full or a partial amount. How-
ever, you will be charged interest and may be 
charged a late payment penalty on the tax not 
paid by the date your return is due, even if your 
request to pay in installments is granted. If your 
request is granted, you must also pay a fee. To 
limit the interest and penalty charges, pay as 
much of the tax as possible with your return. But 
before requesting an installment agreement, 
you should consider other less costly alterna-
tives, such as a bank loan or credit card pay-
ment. 
To apply for an installment agreement on-
line, go to IRS.gov/OPA. You can also use 
Form 9465.
In addition to paying by check or money or-
der, you can use a credit or debit card or direct 
payment from your bank account to make in-
stallment agreement payments. See How To 
Pay, earlier.
Gift To Reduce Debt
Held by the Public
You can make a contribution (gift) to 
reduce debt held by the public. If you 
wish to do so, make a separate check 
payable to “Bureau of the Fiscal Service.”
Send your check to:
Bureau of the Fiscal Service
ATTN: Department G
P.O. Box 2188
Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188
Or, enclose your separate check in the enve-
lope with your income tax return. Don't add this 
gift to any tax you owe. 
For information on making this type of gift on-
line, go to www.treasurydirect.gov and click on 
“How To Make a Contribution to Reduce the 
Debt.”
You may be able to deduct this gift as a 
charitable contribution on next year's tax return 
if you itemize your deductions on Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
Name and Address
After you have completed your return, fill in your 
name and address in the appropriate area of 
Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ.
You must include your SSN in the cor-
rect place on your tax return.
P.O. box.  If your post office doesn't deliver 
mail to your street address and you have a P.O. 
box, enter your P.O. box number on the line for 
your present home address instead of your 
street address.
Foreign address.  If your address is outside 
the United States or its possessions or territo-
ries, enter the city name on the appropriate line 
of your return. Don't enter any other information 
on that line, but also complete the line listing:
1. Foreign country name,
2. Foreign province/state/county, and
3. Foreign postal code.
Follow the country's practice for entering the 
postal code and the name of the province, 
county, or state.
Where Do I File?
After you complete your return, you must send it 
to the IRS. You can mail it or you may be able to 
file it electronically. See Why Should I File Elec-
tronically, earlier.
Mailing your paper return.  Mail your paper 
return to the address shown in your tax return 
instructions.
What Happens After
I File?
After you send your return to the IRS, you may 
have some questions. This section discusses 
concerns you may have about recordkeeping, 
your refund, and what to do if you move.
What Records Should
I Keep?
This part discusses why you should keep re-
cords, what kinds of records you should keep, 
and how long you should keep them.
You must keep records so that you can 
prepare a complete and accurate in-
come tax return. The law doesn't re-
quire any special form of records. However, you 
should keep all receipts, canceled checks or 
other proof of payment, and any other records 
to support any deductions or credits you claim.
If you file a claim for refund, you must be 
able to prove by your records that you have 
overpaid your tax.
This part doesn't discuss the records you 
should keep when operating a business. For in-
formation on business records, see Pub. 583, 
Starting a Business and Keeping Records.
CAUTION
!
RECORDS
Page 17 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Why Keep Records?
Good records help you:
Identify sources of income. Your re-
cords can identify the sources of your in-
come to help you separate business from 
nonbusiness income and taxable from 
nontaxable income.
Keep track of expenses. You can use 
your records to identify expenses for which 
you can claim a deduction. This helps you 
determine if you can itemize deductions on 
your tax return.
Keep track of the basis of property. 
You need to keep records that show the 
basis of your property. This includes the 
original cost or other basis of the property 
and any improvements you made.
Prepare tax returns. You need records to 
prepare your tax return.
Support items reported on tax returns. 
The IRS may question an item on your re-
turn. Your records will help you explain any 
item and arrive at the correct tax. If you 
can’t produce the correct documents, you 
may have to pay additional tax and be sub-
ject to penalties.
Kinds of Records To Keep
The IRS doesn't require you to keep your re-
cords in a particular way. Keep them in a man-
ner that allows you and the IRS to determine 
your correct tax.
You can use your checkbook to keep a re-
cord of your income and expenses. You also 
need to keep documents, such as receipts and 
sales slips, that can help prove a deduction.
In this section you will find guidance about 
basic records that everyone should keep. The 
section also provides guidance about specific 
records you should keep for certain items.
Electronic records.  All requirements that ap-
ply to hard copy books and records also apply 
to electronic storage systems that maintain tax 
books and records. When you replace hard 
copy books and records, you must maintain the 
electronic storage systems for as long as they 
are material to the administration of tax law.
For details on electronic storage system re-
quirements, see Revenue Procedure 97-22, 
which is on page 9 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 
1997-13 at IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb97-13.pdf.
Copies of tax returns.  You should keep cop-
ies of your tax returns as part of your tax re-
cords. They can help you prepare future tax re-
turns, and you will need them if you file an 
amended return or are audited. Copies of your 
returns and other records can be helpful to your 
survivor or the executor or administrator of your 
estate.
If necessary, you can request a copy of a re-
turn and all attachments (including Form W-2) 
from the IRS by using Form 4506. There is a 
charge for a copy of a return. For information on 
the cost and where to file, see the Instructions 
for Form 4506.
If you just need information from your return, 
you can order a transcript in one of the following 
ways.
Go to IRS.gov/Transcript.
Call 1-800-908-9946.
Use Form 4506-T or Form 4506T-EZ.
There is no fee for a transcript. For more infor-
mation, see Form 4506-T.
Basic Records
Basic records are documents that everybody 
should keep. These are the records that prove 
your income and expenses. If you own a home 
or investments, your basic records should con-
tain documents related to those items.
Income. Your basic records prove the 
amounts you report as income on your tax re-
turn. Your income may include wages, divi-
dends, interest, and partnership or S corpora-
tion distributions. Your records also can prove 
that certain amounts aren’t taxable, such as 
tax-exempt interest.
Note. If you receive a Form W-2, keep 
Copy C until you begin receiving social security 
benefits. This will help protect your benefits in 
case there is a question about your work record 
or earnings in a particular year.
Expenses. Your basic records prove the ex-
penses for which you claim a deduction (or 
credit) on your tax return. Your deductions may 
include alimony, charitable contributions, mort-
gage interest, and real estate taxes. You also 
may have child care expenses for which you 
can claim a credit.
Home. Your basic records should enable you 
to determine the basis or adjusted basis of your 
home. You need this information to determine if 
you have a gain or loss when you sell your 
home or to figure depreciation if you use part of 
your home for business purposes or for rent. 
Your records should show the purchase price, 
settlement or closing costs, and the cost of any 
improvements. They also may show any casu-
alty losses deducted and insurance reimburse-
ments for casualty losses.
For detailed information on basis, including 
which settlement or closing costs are included 
in the basis of your home, see chapter 13.
When you sell your home, your records 
should show the sales price and any selling ex-
penses, such as commissions. For information 
on selling your home, see chapter 15.
Investments. Your basic records should ena-
ble you to determine your basis in an invest-
ment and whether you have a gain or loss when 
you sell it. Investments include stocks, bonds, 
and mutual funds. Your records should show 
the purchase price, sales price, and commis-
sions. They may also show any reinvested divi-
dends, stock splits and dividends, load 
charges, and original issue discount (OID).
For information on stocks, bonds, and mu-
tual funds, see chapters 8, 13, 14, and 16.
Proof of Payment
One of your basic records is proof of payment. 
You should keep these records to support cer-
tain amounts shown on your tax return. Proof of 
payment alone isn't proof that the item claimed 
on your return is allowable. You also should 
keep other documents that will help prove that 
the item is allowable.
Generally, you prove payment with a cash 
receipt, financial account statement, credit card 
statement, canceled check, or substitute check. 
If you make payments in cash, you should get a 
dated and signed receipt showing the amount 
and the reason for the payment.
If you make payments using your bank ac-
count, you may be able to prove payment with 
an account statement.
Account statements.  You may be able to 
prove payment with a legible financial account 
statement prepared by your bank or other finan-
cial institution.
Pay statements. You may have deductible ex-
penses withheld from your paycheck, such as 
union dues or medical insurance premiums. 
You should keep your year-end or final pay 
statements as proof of payment of these expen-
ses.
How Long To Keep 
Records
You must keep your records as long as they 
may be needed for the administration of any 
provision of the Internal Revenue Code. Gener-
ally, this means you must keep records that 
support items shown on your return until the pe-
riod of limitations for that return runs out.
The period of limitations is the period of time 
in which you can amend your return to claim a 
credit or refund or the IRS can assess addi-
tional tax. Table 1-7 contains the periods of limi-
tations that apply to income tax returns. Unless 
otherwise stated, the years refer to the period 
beginning after the return was filed. Returns 
filed before the due date are treated as being 
filed on the due date.
Period of LimitationsTable 1-7.
IF you... THEN the
period is...
1 File a return and (2), 
(3), and (4) don't apply 
to you
3 years
2 Don't report income 
that you should and it is 
more than 25% of the 
gross income shown on 
your return
6 years
3 File a fraudulent return No limit
4 Don't file a return No limit
Page 18 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information

5 File a claim for credit or 
refund after you filed 
your return
The later of 3 
years or 2 
years after tax 
was paid
6 File a claim for a loss 
from worthless 
securities or bad debt 
deduction
7 years
Property. Keep records relating to property 
until the period of limitations expires for the year 
in which you dispose of the property in a taxa-
ble disposition. You must keep these records to 
figure your basis for computing gain or loss 
when you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-
erty.
Generally, if you received property in a non-
taxable exchange, your basis in that property is 
the same as the basis of the property you gave 
up. You must keep the records on the old prop-
erty, as well as the new property, until the pe-
riod of limitations expires for the year in which 
you dispose of the new property in a taxable 
disposition.
Refund Information
You can go online to check the status of your 
2017 refund 24 hours after the IRS receives 
your e-filed return, or 4 weeks after you mail a 
paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with your 
return, allow 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed 
electronically) before checking your refund sta-
tus. Be sure to have a copy of your 2017 tax re-
turn handy because you will need to know the 
filing status, the first SSN shown on the return, 
and the exact whole-dollar amount of the re-
fund. To check on your refund, do one of the 
following.
Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
Download the free IRS2Go app to your 
smart phone and use it to check your re-
fund status.
Call the automated refund hotline at 
1-800-829-1954.
Interest on Refunds
If you are due a refund, you may get interest on 
it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly.
If the refund is made within 45 days after the 
due date of your return, no interest will be paid. 
If you file your return after the due date (includ-
ing extensions), no interest will be paid if the re-
fund is made within 45 days after the date you 
filed. If the refund isn't made within this 45-day 
period, interest will be paid from the due date of 
the return or from the date you filed, whichever 
is later. 
Accepting a refund check doesn't change 
your right to claim an additional refund and in-
terest. File your claim within the period of time 
that applies. See Amended Returns and Claims 
for Refund , later. If you don't accept a refund 
check, no more interest will be paid on the over-
payment included in the check.
Interest on erroneous refund.  All or part of 
any interest you were charged on an erroneous 
refund generally will be forgiven. Any interest 
charged for the period before demand for re-
payment was made will be forgiven unless:
1. You, or a person related to you, caused 
the erroneous refund in any way; or
2. The refund is more than $50,000.
For example, if you claimed a refund of $100 
on your return, but the IRS made an error and 
sent you $1,000, you wouldn't be charged inter-
est for the time you held the $900 difference. 
You must, however, repay the $900 when the 
IRS asks.
Change of Address
If you have moved, file your return using your 
new address.
If you move after you filed your return, you 
should give the IRS clear and concise notifica-
tion of your change of address. The notification 
may be written, electronic, or oral. Send written 
notification to the Internal Revenue Service 
Center serving your old address. You can use 
Form 8822, Change of Address. If you are ex-
pecting a refund, also notify the post office serv-
ing your old address. This will help in forwarding 
your check to your new address (unless you 
chose direct deposit of your refund). For more 
information, see Revenue Procedure 2010-16, 
2010-19 I.R.B. 664, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2010-19_IRB/ar07.html.
Be sure to include your SSN (and the name 
and SSN of your spouse if you filed a joint re-
turn) in any correspondence with the IRS.
What If I Made
a Mistake?
Errors may delay your refund or result in notices 
being sent to you. If you discover an error, you 
can file an amended return or claim for refund.
Amended Returns and
Claims for Refund
You should correct your return if, after you have 
filed it, you find that:
1. You didn't report some income,
2. You claimed deductions or credits you 
shouldn't have claimed,
3. You didn't claim deductions or credits you 
could have claimed, or
4. You should have claimed a different filing 
status. (Once you file a joint return, you 
can’t choose to file separate returns for 
that year after the due date of the return. 
However, an executor may be able to 
make this change for a deceased spouse.)
If you need a copy of your return, see Copies of 
tax returns  under Kinds of Records To Keep , 
earlier, in this chapter.
Form 1040X. Use Form 1040X to correct a re-
turn you have already filed. An amended tax re-
turn can’t be filed electronically.
Completing Form 1040X. On Form 1040X, 
enter your income, deductions, and credits as 
you originally reported them on your return; the 
changes you are making; and the corrected 
amounts. Then figure the tax on the corrected 
amount of taxable income and the amount you 
owe or your refund.
If you owe tax, pay the full amount with Form 
1040X. The tax owed won't be subtracted from 
any amount you had credited to your estimated 
tax.
If you can’t pay the full amount due with your 
return, you can ask to make monthly installment 
payments. See Installment Agreement, earlier.
If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part 
of the overpayment refunded to you, or you can 
apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If you 
choose to get a refund, it will be sent separately 
from any refund shown on your original return.
Filing Form 1040X. When completing Form 
1040X, don't forget to show the year of your 
original return and explain all changes you 
made. Be sure to attach any forms or schedules 
needed to explain your changes. Mail your 
Form 1040X to the Internal Revenue Service 
Center serving the area where you now live (as 
shown in the instructions to the form). However, 
if you are filing Form 1040X in response to a no-
tice you received from the IRS, mail it to the ad-
dress shown on the notice.
File a separate form for each tax year in-
volved.
Time for filing a claim for refund.  Generally, 
you must file your claim for a credit or refund 
within 3 years after the date you filed your origi-
nal return or within 2 years after the date you 
paid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filed 
before the due date (without regard to exten-
sions) are considered filed on the due date 
(even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, 
or legal holiday). These time periods are sus-
pended while you are financially disabled , dis-
cussed later.
If the last day for claiming a credit or refund 
is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you can 
file the claim on the next business day.
If you don't file a claim within this period, you 
may not be entitled to a credit or a refund.
Protective claim for refund. Generally, a pro-
tective claim is a formal claim or amended re-
turn for credit or refund normally based on cur-
rent litigation or expected changes in tax law or 
other legislation. You file a protective claim 
when your right to a refund is contingent on fu-
ture events and may not be determinable until 
after the statute of limitations expires. A valid 
protective claim doesn't have to list a particular 
dollar amount or demand an immediate refund. 
However, a valid protective claim must:
Be in writing and signed;
Include your name, address, SSN or ITIN, 
and other contact information;
Identify and describe the contingencies af-
fecting the claim;
Clearly alert the IRS to the essential nature 
of the claim; and
Identify the specific year(s) for which a re-
fund is sought.
Mail your protective claim for refund to the ad-
dress listed in the instructions for Form 1040X 
under Where To File.
Page 19 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

Generally, the IRS will delay action on the 
protective claim until the contingency is 
resolved.
Limit on amount of refund.  If you file your 
claim within 3 years after the date you filed your 
return, the credit or refund can’t be more than 
the part of the tax paid within the 3-year period 
(plus any extension of time for filing your return) 
immediately before you filed the claim. This 
time period is suspended while you are finan-
cially disabled, discussed later.
Tax paid.  Payments, including estimated 
tax payments, made before the due date (with-
out regard to extensions) of the original return 
are considered paid on the due date. For exam-
ple, income tax withheld during the year is con-
sidered paid on the due date of the return, April 
15 for most taxpayers.
Example 1.  You made estimated tax pay-
ments of $500 and got an automatic extension 
of time to October 15, 2014, to file your 2013 in-
come tax return. When you filed your return on 
that date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On 
October 15, 2017, you filed an amended return 
and claimed a refund of $700. Because you 
filed your claim within 3 years after you filed 
your original return, you can get a refund of up 
to $700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus the 
6-month extension period immediately before 
you filed the claim.
Example 2. The situation is the same as in 
Example 1, except you filed your return on Oc-
tober 30, 2014, 2 weeks after the extension pe-
riod ended. You paid an additional $200 on that 
date. On October 31, 2017, you filed an amen-
ded return and claimed a refund of $700. Al-
though you filed your claim within 3 years from 
the date you filed your original return, the refund 
was limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3 
years plus the 6-month extension period imme-
diately before you filed the claim. The estimated 
tax of $500 paid before that period can’t be re-
funded or credited.
If you file a claim more than 3 years after you 
file your return, the credit or refund can’t be 
more than the tax you paid within the 2 years 
immediately before you file the claim.
Example. You filed your 2013 tax return on 
April 15, 2014. You paid taxes of $500. On No-
vember 5, 2015, after an examination of your 
2013 return, you had to pay an additional tax of 
$200. On May 12, 2017, you file a claim for a re-
fund of $300. However, because you filed your 
claim more than 3 years after you filed your re-
turn, your refund will be limited to the $200 you 
paid during the 2 years immediately before you 
filed your claim.
Financially disabled.  The time periods for 
claiming a refund are suspended for the period 
in which you are financially disabled. For a joint 
income tax return, only one spouse has to be fi-
nancially disabled for the time period to be sus-
pended. You are financially disabled if you are 
unable to manage your financial affairs because 
of a medically determinable physical or mental 
impairment which can be expected to result in 
death or which has lasted or can be expected to 
last for a continuous period of not less than 12 
months. However, you aren’t treated as finan-
cially disabled during any period your spouse or 
any other person is authorized to act on your 
behalf in financial matters.
To claim that you are financially disabled, 
you must send in the following written state-
ments with your claim for refund.
1. A statement from your qualified physician 
that includes:
a. The name and a description of your 
physical or mental impairment;
b. The physician's medical opinion that 
the impairment prevented you from 
managing your financial affairs;
c. The physician's medical opinion that 
the impairment was or can be expec-
ted to result in death, or that its dura-
tion has lasted, or can be expected to 
last, at least 12 months;
d. The specific time period (to the best of 
the physician's knowledge); and
e. The following certification signed by 
the physician: “I hereby certify that, to 
the best of my knowledge and belief, 
the above representations are true, 
correct, and complete.”
2. A statement made by the person signing 
the claim for credit or refund that no per-
son, including your spouse, was author-
ized to act on your behalf in financial mat-
ters during the period of disability (or the 
exact dates that a person was authorized 
to act for you).
Exceptions for special types of refunds.  If 
you file a claim for one of the items in the follow-
ing list, the dates and limits discussed earlier 
may not apply. These items, and where to get 
more information, are as follows.
Bad debt. See Nonbusiness Bad Debts in 
chapter 14. 
Worthless security. See Worthless securi-
ties in chapter 14. 
Foreign tax paid or accrued. See Pub. 514. 
Net operating loss carryback. See Pub. 
536.
Carryback of certain business tax credits. 
See Form 3800. 
Claim based on an agreement with the IRS 
extending the period for assessment of 
tax. 
Processing claims for refund.  Claims are 
usually processed 8–12 weeks after they are 
filed. Your claim may be accepted as filed, dis-
allowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is 
examined, the procedures are the same as in 
the examination of a tax return.
If your claim is disallowed, you will receive 
an explanation of why it was disallowed.
Taking your claim to court. You can sue for a 
refund in court, but you must first file a timely 
claim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your 
claim or doesn't act on your claim within 6 
months after you file it, you can then take your 
claim to court. For information on the burden of 
proof in a court proceeding, see Pub. 556.
The IRS provides a direct method to move 
your claim to court if:
You are filing a claim for a credit or refund 
based solely on contested income tax or 
on estate tax or gift tax issues considered 
in your previously examined returns, and
You want to take your case to court instead 
of appealing it within the IRS.
When you file your claim with the IRS, you 
get the direct method by requesting in writing 
that your claim be immediately rejected. A no-
tice of claim disallowance will be sent to you.
You have 2 years from the date of mailing of 
the notice of claim disallowance to file a refund 
suit in the United States District Court having ju-
risdiction or in the United States Court of Fed-
eral Claims.
Interest on refund. If you receive a refund be-
cause of your amended return, interest will be 
paid on it from the due date of your original re-
turn or the date you filed your original return, 
whichever is later, to the date you filed the 
amended return. However, if the refund isn't 
made within 45 days after you file the amended 
return, interest will be paid up to the date the re-
fund is paid.
Reduced refund. Your refund may be reduced 
by an additional tax liability that has been as-
sessed against you.
Also, your refund may be reduced by 
amounts you owe for past-due federal tax, state 
income tax, state unemployment compensation 
debts, child support, spousal support, or certain 
other federal nontax debts, such as student 
loans. If your spouse owes these debts, see 
Offset against debts  under Refunds, earlier, for 
the correct refund procedures to follow.
Effect on state tax liability.  If your return is 
changed for any reason, it may affect your state 
income tax liability. This includes changes 
made as a result of an examination of your re-
turn by the IRS. Contact your state tax agency 
for more information.
Penalties
The law provides penalties for failure to file re-
turns or pay taxes as required.
Civil Penalties
If you don't file your return and pay your tax by 
the due date, you may have to pay a penalty. 
You may also have to pay a penalty if you sub-
stantially understate your tax, understate a re-
portable transaction, file an erroneous claim for 
refund or credit, file a frivolous tax submission, 
or fail to supply your SSN or individual taxpayer 
identification number. If you provide fraudulent 
information on your return, you may have to pay 
a civil fraud penalty.
Filing late.  If you don't file your return by the 
due date (including extensions), you may have 
to pay a failure-to-file penalty. The penalty is 
usually 5% for each month or part of a month 
that a return is late, but not more than 25%. The 
penalty is based on the tax not paid by the due 
date (without regard to extensions).
Page 20 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Fraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud, 
the penalty is 15% for each month or part of a 
month that your return is late, up to a maximum 
of 75%.
Return over 60 days late.  If you file your 
return more than 60 days after the due date or 
extended due date, the minimum penalty is the 
smaller of $210 or 100% of the unpaid tax.
Exception. You won't have to pay the pen-
alty if you show that you failed to file on time be-
cause of reasonable cause and not because of 
willful neglect.
Paying tax late.  You will have to pay a fail-
ure-to-pay penalty of 12 of 1% (0.50%) of your 
unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month, 
after the due date that the tax isn't paid. This 
penalty doesn't apply during the automatic 
6-month extension of time to file period if you 
paid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on 
or before the due date of your return and pay 
the balance when you file the return.
The monthly rate of the failure-to-pay pen-
alty is half the usual rate (0.25% instead of 
0.50%) if an installment agreement is in effect 
for that month. You must have filed your return 
by the due date (including extensions) to qualify 
for this reduced penalty.
If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rate 
will increase to 1% at the start of the first month 
beginning at least 10 days after the day that the 
notice is issued. If a notice and demand for im-
mediate payment is issued, the rate will in-
crease to 1% at the start of the first month be-
ginning after the day that the notice and 
demand is issued.
This penalty can’t be more than 25% of your 
unpaid tax. You won't have to pay the penalty if 
you can show that you had a good reason for 
not paying your tax on time.
Combined penalties.  If both the failure-to-file 
penalty and the failure-to-pay penalty (dis-
cussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (or 
15%) failure-to-file penalty is reduced by the 
failure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file your 
return more than 60 days after the due date or 
extended due date, the minimum penalty is the 
smaller of $210 or 100% of the unpaid tax.
Accuracy-related penalty.  You may have to 
pay an accuracy-related penalty if you under-
pay your tax because:
1. You show negligence or disregard of the 
rules or regulations,
2. You substantially understate your income 
tax,
3. You claim tax benefits for a transaction 
that lacks economic substance, or
4. You fail to disclose a foreign financial as-
set.
The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay-
ment. The penalty is 40% of any portion of the 
underpayment that is attributable to an undis-
closed noneconomic substance transaction or 
an undisclosed foreign financial asset transac-
tion. The penalty won't be figured on any part of 
an underpayment on which the fraud penalty 
(discussed later) is charged.
Negligence or disregard.  The term “negli-
gence” includes a failure to make a reasonable 
attempt to comply with the tax law or to exercise 
ordinary and reasonable care in preparing a re-
turn. Negligence also includes failure to keep 
adequate books and records. You won't have to 
pay a negligence penalty if you have a reasona-
ble basis for a position you took.
The term “disregard” includes any careless, 
reckless, or intentional disregard.
Adequate disclosure.  You can avoid the 
penalty for disregard of rules or regulations if 
you adequately disclose on your return a posi-
tion that has at least a reasonable basis. See 
Disclosure statement, later.
This exception won't apply to an item that is 
attributable to a tax shelter. In addition, it won't 
apply if you fail to keep adequate books and re-
cords, or substantiate items properly.
Substantial understatement of income 
tax. You understate your tax if the tax shown 
on your return is less than the correct tax. The 
understatement is substantial if it is more than 
the larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. 
However, the amount of the understatement 
may be reduced to the extent the understate-
ment is due to:
1. Substantial authority, or
2. Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba-
sis.
If an item on your return is attributable to a tax 
shelter, there is no reduction for an adequate 
disclosure. However, there is a reduction for a 
position with substantial authority, but only if 
you reasonably believed that your tax treatment 
was more likely than not the proper treatment.
Substantial authority.  Whether there is or 
was substantial authority for the tax treatment of 
an item depends on the facts and circumstan-
ces. Some of the items that may be considered 
are court opinions, Treasury regulations, reve-
nue rulings, revenue procedures, and notices 
and announcements issued by the IRS and 
published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin that 
involve the same or similar circumstances as 
yours.
Disclosure statement.  To adequately dis-
close the relevant facts about your tax treat-
ment of an item, use Form 8275. You must also 
have a reasonable basis for treating the item 
the way you did.
In cases of substantial understatement only, 
items that meet the requirements of Revenue 
Procedure 2016-13 (or later update) are consid-
ered adequately disclosed on your return with-
out filing Form 8275. 
Use Form 8275-R to disclose items or posi-
tions contrary to regulations.
Transaction lacking economic sub-
stance. For more information on economic 
substance, see section 7701(o).
Foreign financial asset.  For more informa-
tion on undisclosed foreign financial assets, see 
section 6662(j).
Reasonable cause. You won't have to pay 
a penalty if you show a good reason (reasona-
ble cause) for the way you treated an item. You 
must also show that you acted in good faith. 
This doesn't apply to a transaction that lacks 
economic substance.
Filing erroneous claim for refund or credit. 
You may have to pay a penalty if you file an er-
roneous claim for refund or credit. The penalty 
is equal to 20% of the disallowed amount of the 
claim, unless you can show a reasonable basis 
for the way you treated an item. However, any 
disallowed amount due to a transaction that 
lacks economic substance won't be treated as 
having a reasonable basis. The penalty won't 
be figured on any part of the disallowed amount 
of the claim that relates to the earned income 
credit or on which the accuracy-related or fraud 
penalties are charged.
Frivolous tax submission.  You may have to 
pay a penalty of $5,000 if you file a frivolous tax 
return or other frivolous submissions. A frivo-
lous tax return is one that doesn't include 
enough information to figure the correct tax or 
that contains information clearly showing that 
the tax you reported is substantially incorrect. 
For more information on frivolous returns, frivo-
lous submissions, and a list of positions that are 
identified as frivolous, see Notice 2010-33, 
2010-17 I.R.B. 609, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2010-17_IRB/ar13.html.
You will have to pay the penalty if you filed 
this kind of return or submission based on a friv-
olous position or a desire to delay or interfere 
with the administration of federal tax laws. This 
includes altering or striking out the preprinted 
language above the space provided for your 
signature.
This penalty is added to any other penalty 
provided by law.
Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on 
your return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the 
underpayment due to fraud will be added to 
your tax.
Joint return. The fraud penalty on a joint re-
turn doesn't apply to a spouse unless some part 
of the underpayment is due to the fraud of that 
spouse.
Failure to supply SSN.  If you don't include 
your SSN or the SSN of another person where 
required on a return, statement, or other docu-
ment, you will be subject to a penalty of $50 for 
each failure. You will also be subject to a pen-
alty of $50 if you don't give your SSN to another 
person when it is required on a return, state-
ment, or other document.
For example, if you have a bank account 
that earns interest, you must give your SSN to 
the bank. The number must be shown on the 
Form 1099-INT or other statement the bank 
sends you. If you don't give the bank your SSN, 
you will be subject to the $50 penalty. (You also 
may be subject to “backup” withholding of in-
come tax. See chapter 4.)
You won't have to pay the penalty if you are 
able to show that the failure was due to reason-
able cause and not willful neglect.
Criminal Penalties
You may be subject to criminal prosecution 
(brought to trial) for actions such as:
1. Tax evasion;
2. Willful failure to file a return, supply infor-
mation, or pay any tax due;
3. Fraud and false statements;
Page 21 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 19

4. Preparing and filing a fraudulent return; or
5. Identity theft.
Identity Theft
Identity theft occurs when someone uses your 
personal information such as your name, SSN, 
or other identifying information, without your 
permission, to commit fraud or other crimes. An 
identity thief may use your SSN to get a job or 
may file a tax return using your SSN to receive 
a refund.
To reduce your risk:
Protect your SSN,
Ensure your employer is protecting your 
SSN, and
Be careful when choosing a tax preparer.
If your tax records are affected by identity 
theft and you receive a notice from the IRS, re-
spond right away to the name and phone num-
ber printed on the IRS notice or letter.
If your SSN has been lost or stolen or you 
suspect you are a victim of tax-related identity 
theft, visit IRS.gov/IdentityTheft to learn what 
steps you should take.
For more information, see Pub. 5027.
Victims of identity theft who are experienc-
ing economic harm or a systemic problem, or 
are seeking help in resolving tax problems that 
have not been resolved through normal chan-
nels, may be eligible for Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) assistance. You can reach TAS 
by calling the National Taxpayer Advocate help-
line at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD at 
1-800-829-4059. Deaf or hard-of-hearing indi-
viduals can also contact the IRS through relay 
services such as the Federal Relay Service 
available at www.gsa.gov/fedrelay.
Protect yourself from suspicious emails 
or phishing schemes.  Phishing is the crea-
tion and use of email and websites designed to 
mimic legitimate business emails and websites. 
The most common form is the act of sending an 
email to a user falsely claiming to be an estab-
lished legitimate enterprise in an attempt to 
scam the user into surrendering private informa-
tion that will be used for identity theft.
The IRS doesn't initiate contacts with tax-
payers via emails. Also, the IRS doesn't request 
detailed personal information through email or 
ask taxpayers for the PIN numbers, passwords, 
or similar secret access information for their 
credit card, bank, or other financial accounts.
If you receive an unsolicited email claiming 
to be from the IRS, forward the message to 
phishing@irs.gov. You may also report misuse 
of the IRS name, logo, forms, or other IRS prop-
erty to the Treasury Inspector General for Tax 
Administration toll-free at 1-800-366-4484. You 
can forward suspicious emails to the Federal 
Trade Commission (FTC) at spam@uce.gov or 
report them at ftc.gov/complaint. You can con-
tact them at www.ftc.gov/idtheft or 1-877-ID-
THEFT (1-877-438-4338). If you have been a 
victim of identity theft, see 
www.IdentityTheft.gov or Pub.5027. People 
who are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech 
disability and who have access to TTY/TDD 
equipment can call 1-866-653-4261.
Go to IRS.gov/IDProtection to learn more 
about identity theft and how to reduce your risk.
2.
Filing Status
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To find out whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
This chapter helps you determine which filing 
status to use. There are five filing statuses.
Single.
Married Filing Jointly.
Married Filing Separately.
Head of Household.
Qualifying Widow(er).
If more than one filing status applies to 
you, choose the one that will give you 
the lowest tax.
You must determine your filing status before 
you can determine whether you must file a tax 
return ( chapter 1 ), your standard deduction 
(chapter 20 ), and your tax ( chapter 30 ). You 
also use your filing status to determine whether 
you are eligible to claim certain deductions and 
credits.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, 
and Filing Information
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Community Property
CAUTION
!
TIP
  501
  519
  555
Marital Status
In general, your filing status depends on 
whether you are considered unmarried or mar-
ried.
Unmarried persons.  You are considered un-
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you are either:
Unmarried, or
Legally separated from your spouse under 
a divorce or separate maintenance decree. 
State law governs whether you are married 
or legally separated under a divorce or 
separate maintenance decree.
Divorced persons.  If you are divorced un-
der a final decree by the last day of the year, 
you are considered unmarried for the whole 
year.
Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a di-
vorce for the sole purpose of filing tax returns as 
unmarried individuals, and at the time of divorce 
you intend to and do, in fact, remarry each other 
in the next tax year, you and your spouse must 
file as married individuals in both years.
Annulled marriages.  If you obtain a court 
decree of annulment, which holds that no valid 
marriage ever existed, you are considered un-
married even if you filed joint returns for earlier 
years. You must file Form 1040X, Amended 
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, claiming 
single or head of household status for all tax 
years that are affected by the annulment and 
not closed by the statute of limitations for filing a 
tax return. Generally, for a credit or refund, you 
must file Form 1040X within 3 years (including 
extensions) after the date you filed your original 
return or within 2 years after the date you paid 
the tax, whichever is later. If you filed your origi-
nal return early (for example, March 1), your re-
turn is considered filed on the due date (gener-
ally April 15). However, if you had an extension 
to file (for example, until October 15) but you 
filed earlier and we received it on July 1, your 
return is considered filed on July 1.
Head of household or qualifying 
widow(er). If you are considered unmarried, 
you may be able to file as a head of household 
or as a qualifying widow(er). See Head of 
Household and Qualifying Widow(er)  to see if 
you qualify.
Married persons.  If you are considered mar-
ried, you and your spouse can file a joint return 
or separate returns.
Considered married.  You are considered 
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you and your spouse meet any 
one of the following tests.
1. You are married and living together.
2. You are living together in a common law 
marriage recognized in the state where 
you now live or in the state where the com-
mon law marriage began.
3. You are married and living apart, but not 
legally separated under a decree of di-
vorce or separate maintenance.
4. You are separated under an interlocutory 
(not final) decree of divorce.
Page 22 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Spouse died during the year.  If your 
spouse died during the year, you are consid-
ered married for the whole year for filing status 
purposes.
If you didn't remarry before the end of the 
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself 
and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 
years, you may be entitled to the special bene-
fits described later under Qualifying Widow(er).
If you remarried before the end of the tax 
year, you can file a joint return with your new 
spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status is 
married filing separately for that year.
Married persons living apart.  If you live 
apart from your spouse and meet certain tests, 
you may be able to file as head of household 
even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. 
If you qualify to file as head of household in-
stead of married filing separately, your standard 
deduction will be higher. Also, your tax may be 
lower, and you may be able to claim the earned 
income credit. See Head of Household, later.
Single
Your filing status is single if you are considered 
unmarried and you don’t qualify for another fil-
ing status. To determine your marital status, 
see Marital Status, earlier.
Widow(er). Your filing status may be single if 
you were widowed before January 1, 2017, and 
didn't remarry before the end of 2017. You may, 
however, be able to use another filing status 
that will give you a lower tax. See Head of 
Household and Qualifying Widow(er) , later, to 
see if you qualify. 
How to file.  You can file Form 1040. If you 
have taxable income of less than $100,000, you 
may be able to file Form 1040A. If, in addition, 
you have no dependents, are under 65 and not 
blind, and meet other requirements, you can file 
Form 1040EZ. If you file Form 1040A or Form 
1040, show your filing status as single by 
checking the box on line 1. Use the Single col-
umn of the Tax Table or Section A of the Tax 
Computation Worksheet to figure your tax.
Married Filing Jointly
You can choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status if you are considered married and 
both you and your spouse agree to file a joint 
return. On a joint return, you and your spouse 
report your combined income and deduct your 
combined allowable expenses. You can file a 
joint return even if one of you had no income or 
deductions.
If you and your spouse decide to file a joint 
return, your tax may be lower than your com-
bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your 
standard deduction (if you don’t itemize deduc-
tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for 
tax benefits that don’t apply to other filing sta-
tuses.
If you and your spouse each have in-
come, you may want to figure your tax 
both on a joint return and on separate 
returns (using the filing status of married filing 
separately). You can choose the method that 
gives the two of you the lower combined tax.
TIP
How to file.  If you file as married filing jointly, 
you can use Form 1040. If you and your spouse 
have taxable income of less than $100,000, you 
may be able to file Form 1040A. If, in addition, 
you and your spouse have no dependents, are 
both under 65 and not blind, and meet other re-
quirements, you can file Form 1040EZ. If you 
file Form 1040 or Form 1040A, show this filing 
status by checking the box on line 2. Use the 
Married filing jointly  column of the Tax Table or 
Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheet to 
figure your tax.
Spouse died.  If your spouse died during the 
year, you are considered married for the whole 
year and can choose married filing jointly as 
your filing status. See Spouse died during the 
year under Marital Status, earlier, for more infor-
mation.
If your spouse died in 2018 before filing a 
2017 return, you can choose married filing 
jointly as your filing status on your 2017 return.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced under a 
final decree by the last day of the year, you are 
considered unmarried for the whole year and 
you can’t choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status.
Filing a Joint Return
Both you and your spouse must include all of 
your income, exemptions, and deductions on 
your joint return.
Accounting period. Both of you must use the 
same accounting period, but you can use differ-
ent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri-
ods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1.
Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held 
responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax 
and any interest or penalty due on your joint re-
turn. This means that if one spouse doesn't pay 
the tax due, the other may have to. Or, if one 
spouse doesn't report the correct tax, both 
spouses may be responsible for any additional 
taxes assessed by the IRS. One spouse may 
be held responsible for all the tax due even if all 
the income was earned by the other spouse.
You may want to file separately if:
You believe your spouse isn't reporting all 
of his or her income, or
You don’t want to be responsible for any 
taxes due if your spouse doesn't have 
enough tax withheld or doesn't pay enough 
estimated tax.
Divorced taxpayer. You may be held jointly 
and individually responsible for any tax, inter-
est, and penalties due on a joint return filed be-
fore your divorce. This responsibility may apply 
even if your divorce decree states that your for-
mer spouse will be responsible for any amounts 
due on previously filed joint returns.
Relief from joint responsibility.  In some 
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint re-
sponsibility for tax, interest, and penalties on a 
joint return for items of the other spouse that 
were incorrectly reported on the joint return. 
You can ask for relief no matter how small the 
liability.
There are three types of relief available.
1. Innocent spouse relief.
2. Separation of liability (available only to 
joint filers who are divorced, widowed, le-
gally separated, or haven't lived together 
for the 12 months ending on the date the 
election for this relief is filed).
3. Equitable relief.
You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-
cent Spouse Relief, to request relief from joint 
responsibility. Pub. 971, Innocent Spouse Re-
lief, explains these kinds of relief and who may 
qualify for them.
Signing a joint return.  For a return to be con-
sidered a joint return, both spouses generally 
must sign the return.
Spouse died before signing.  If your 
spouse died before signing the return, the exec-
utor or administrator must sign the return for 
your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has 
yet been appointed as executor or administra-
tor, you can sign the return for your spouse and 
enter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the area 
where you sign the return.
Spouse away from home. If your spouse is 
away from home, you should prepare the re-
turn, sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign 
so that it can be filed on time.
Injury or disease prevents signing. If your 
spouse can’t sign because of disease or injury 
and tells you to sign for him or her, you can sign 
your spouse's name in the proper space on the 
return followed by the words “By (your name), 
Husband (or Wife).” Be sure to also sign in the 
space provided for your signature. Attach a 
dated statement, signed by you, to the return. 
The statement should include the form number 
of the return you are filing, the tax year, and the 
reason your spouse can’t sign, and should state 
that your spouse has agreed to your signing for 
him or her.
Signing as guardian of spouse.  If you are 
the guardian of your spouse who is mentally in-
competent, you can sign the return for your 
spouse as guardian.
Spouse in combat zone.  You can sign a 
joint return for your spouse if your spouse can’t 
sign because he or she is serving in a combat 
zone (such as the Persian Gulf Area, Serbia, 
Montenegro, Albania, or Afghanistan), even if 
you don’t have a power of attorney or other 
statement. Attach a signed statement to your 
return explaining that your spouse is serving in 
a combat zone. For more information on special 
tax rules for persons who are serving in a com-
bat zone, or who are in missing status as a re-
sult of serving in a combat zone, see Pub. 3, 
Armed Forces' Tax Guide.
Other reasons spouse can’t sign.  If your 
spouse can’t sign the joint return for any other 
reason, you can sign for your spouse only if you 
are given a valid power of attorney (a legal 
document giving you permission to act for your 
spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a 
copy of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 
2848, Power of Attorney and Declaration of 
Representative.
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. Gen-
erally, a married couple can’t file a joint return if 
either one is a nonresident alien at any time 
during the tax year. However, if one spouse 
Page 23 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

was a nonresident alien or dual-status alien 
who was married to a U.S. citizen or resident 
alien at the end of the year, the spouses can 
choose to file a joint return. If you do file a joint 
return, you and your spouse are both treated as 
U.S. residents for the entire tax year. See chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 519.
Married Filing 
Separately
You can choose married filing separately as 
your filing status if you are married. This filing 
status may benefit you if you want to be respon-
sible only for your own tax or if it results in less 
tax than filing a joint return.
If you and your spouse don’t agree to file a 
joint return, you must use this filing status un-
less you qualify for head of household status, 
discussed later.
You may be able to choose head of house-
hold filing status if you are considered unmar-
ried because you live apart from your spouse 
and meet certain tests (explained under Head 
of Household, later). This can apply to you even 
if you aren't divorced or legally separated. If you 
qualify to file as head of household, instead of 
as married filing separately, your tax may be 
lower, you may be able to claim the earned in-
come credit and certain other credits, and your 
standard deduction will be higher. The head of 
household filing status allows you to choose the 
standard deduction even if your spouse choo-
ses to itemize deductions. See Head of House-
hold, later, for more information.
You will generally pay more combined 
tax on separate returns than you would 
on a joint return for the reasons listed 
under Special Rules , later. However, unless 
you are required to file separately, you should 
figure your tax both ways (on a joint return and 
on separate returns). This way you can make 
sure you are using the filing status that results in 
the lowest combined tax. When figuring the 
combined tax of a married couple, you may 
want to consider state taxes as well as federal 
taxes.
How to file.  If you file a separate return, you 
generally report only your own income, exemp-
tions, credits, and deductions. You can claim an 
exemption for your spouse only if your spouse 
had no gross income, isn't filing a return, and 
wasn't the dependent of another person.
You can file Form 1040. If your taxable in-
come is less than $100,000, you may be able to 
file Form 1040A. Select this filing status by 
checking the box on line 3 of either form. Enter 
your spouse's full name and SSN or ITIN in the 
spaces provided. If your spouse doesn't have 
and isn't required to have an SSN or ITIN, enter 
“NRA” in the space for your spouse's SSN. Use 
the Married filing separately  column of the Tax 
Table or Section C of the Tax Computation 
Worksheet to figure your tax.
Special Rules
If you choose married filing separately as your 
filing status, the following special rules apply. 
Because of these special rules, you usually pay 
TIP
more tax on a separate return than if you use 
another filing status you qualify for.
1. Your tax rate generally is higher than on a 
joint return.
2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al-
ternative minimum tax is half that allowed 
on a joint return.
3. You can’t take the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses in most cases, 
and the amount you can exclude from in-
come under an employer's dependent 
care assistance program is limited to 
$2,500 (instead of $5,000). However, if 
you are legally separated or living apart 
from your spouse, you may be able to file 
a separate return and still take the credit. 
For more information about these expen-
ses, the credit, and the exclusion, see 
chapter 32.
4. You can’t take the earned income credit.
5. You can’t take the exclusion or credit for 
adoption expenses in most cases.
6. You can’t take the education credits (the 
American opportunity credit and lifetime 
learning credit), or the deduction for stu-
dent loan interest.
7. You can’t exclude any interest income 
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you 
used for higher education expenses.
8. If you lived with your spouse at any time 
during the tax year:
a. You can’t claim the credit for the eld-
erly or the disabled, and
b. You must include in income a greater 
percentage (up to 85%) of any social 
security or equivalent railroad retire-
ment benefits you received.
9. The following credits and deductions are 
reduced at income levels half of those for 
a joint return.
a. The child tax credit.
b. The retirement savings contributions 
credit.
c. The deduction for personal exemp-
tions.
d. Itemized deductions.
10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 
(instead of $3,000 on a joint return). 
11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you 
can’t claim the standard deduction. If you 
can claim the standard deduction, your 
basic standard deduction is half of the 
amount allowed on a joint return.
At the time this publication was pre-
pared for print, the tuition and fees de-
duction had expired. Even if it is exten-
ded, you can’t take it if your filing status is 
married filing separately. To see if it was exten-
ded, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Adjusted gross income (AGI) limits.  If your 
AGI on a separate return is lower than it would 
have been on a joint return, you may be able to 
deduct a larger amount for certain deductions 
CAUTION
!
that are limited by AGI, such as medical expen-
ses.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
You may not be able to deduct all or part of your 
contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your 
spouse were covered by an employee retire-
ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc-
tion is reduced or eliminated if your income is 
more than a certain amount. This amount is 
much lower for married individuals who file sep-
arately and lived together at any time during the 
year. For more information, see How Much Can 
You Deduct in chapter 17.
Rental activity losses.  If you actively partici-
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that 
produced a loss, you generally can deduct the 
loss from your nonpassive income, up to 
$25,000. This is called a special allowance. 
However, married persons filing separate re-
turns who lived together at any time during the 
year can’t claim this special allowance. Married 
persons filing separate returns who lived apart 
at all times during the year are each allowed a 
$12,500 maximum special allowance for losses 
from passive real estate activities. See Limits 
on Rental Losses in chapter 9.
Community property states.  If you live in a 
community property state and file separately, 
your income may be considered separate in-
come or community income for income tax pur-
poses. Community property states include Ari-
zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, 
New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and Wiscon-
sin. See Pub. 555.
Joint Return After
Separate Returns
You can change your filing status from a sepa-
rate return to a joint return by filing an amended 
return using Form 1040X.
You generally can change to a joint return 
any time within 3 years from the due date of the 
separate return or returns. This doesn't include 
any extensions. A separate return includes a re-
turn filed by you or your spouse claiming mar-
ried filing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
Separate Returns After
Joint Return
Once you file a joint return, you can’t choose to 
file separate returns for that year after the due 
date of the return.
Exception. A personal representative for a de-
cedent can change from a joint return elected 
by the surviving spouse to a separate return for 
the decedent. The personal representative has 
1 year from the due date of the return (including 
extensions) to make the change. See Pub. 559, 
Survivors, Executors, and Administrators, for 
more information on filing a return for a dece-
dent.
Head of Household
You may be able to file as head of household if 
you meet all the following requirements.
Page 24 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status

1. You are unmarried or “considered unmar-
ried” on the last day of the year. See Mari-
tal Status, earlier, and Considered Unmar-
ried, later.
2. You paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home for the year.
3. A qualifying person lived with you in the 
home for more than half the year (except 
for temporary absences, such as school). 
However, if the qualifying person is your 
dependent parent, he or she doesn't have 
to live with you. See Special rule for pa-
rent, later, under Qualifying Person.
If you qualify to file as head of house-
hold, your tax rate usually will be lower 
than the rates for single or married fil-
ing separately. You will also receive a higher 
standard deduction than if you file as single or 
married filing separately.
How to file.  If you file as head of household, 
you can use Form 1040. If your taxable income 
is less than $100,000, you may be able to file 
Form 1040A. Indicate your choice of this filing 
status by checking the box on line 4 of either 
form. Use the Head of a household  column of 
the Tax Table or Section D of the Tax Computa-
tion Worksheet to figure your tax.
Considered Unmarried
To qualify for head of household status, you 
must be either unmarried or considered unmar-
ried on the last day of the year. You are consid-
ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if 
you meet all the following tests.
1. You file a separate return. A separate re-
turn includes a return claiming married fil-
ing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
2. You paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up your home for the tax year.
3. Your spouse didn't live in your home dur-
ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your 
TIP
spouse is considered to live in your home 
even if he or she is temporarily absent due 
to special circumstances. See Temporary 
absences under Qualifying Person, later.
4. Your home was the main home of your 
child, stepchild, or foster child for more 
than half the year. (See Home of qualifying 
person under Qualifying Person, later, for 
rules applying to a child's birth, death, or 
temporary absence during the year.)
5. You must be able to claim an exemption 
for the child. However, you meet this test if 
you can’t claim the exemption only be-
cause the noncustodial parent can claim 
the child using the rules described in Chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents (or 
parents who live apart) under Qualifying 
Child in chapter 3, or referred to in Support 
Test for Children of Divorced or Separated 
Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart) under 
Qualifying Relative in chapter 3. The gen-
eral rules for claiming an exemption for a 
dependent are explained under Exemp-
tions for Dependents in chapter 3.
If you were considered married for part 
of the year and lived in a community 
property state (listed earlier under Mar-
ried Filing Separately ), special rules may apply 
in determining your income and expenses. See 
Pub. 555 for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse.  You are consid-
ered unmarried for head of household purposes 
if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any 
time during the year and you don’t choose to 
treat your nonresident spouse as a resident 
alien. However, your spouse isn't a qualifying 
person for head of household purposes. You 
must have another qualifying person and meet 
the other tests to be eligible to file as a head of 
household. 
Choice to treat spouse as resident.  You 
are considered married if you choose to treat 
your spouse as a resident alien. See Pub. 519.
CAUTION
!
Keeping Up a Home
To qualify for head of household status, you 
must pay more than half of the cost of keeping 
up a home for the year. You can determine 
whether you paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home by using Worksheet 2-1.
Costs you include.  Include in the cost of 
keeping up a home expenses, such as rent, 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, insurance 
on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in 
the home.
Costs you don’t include.  Don’t include the 
costs of clothing, education, medical treatment, 
vacations, life insurance, or transportation. 
Also, don’t include the rental value of a home 
you own or the value of your services or those 
of a member of your household.
Qualifying Person
See Table 2-1 to see who is a qualifying person. 
Any person not described in Table 2-1  isn't a 
qualifying person.
Example 1—Child.  Your unmarried son 
lived with you all year and was 18 years old at 
the end of the year. He didn't provide more than 
half of his own support and doesn't meet the 
tests to be a qualifying child of anyone else. As 
a result, he is your qualifying child (see Qualify-
ing Child in chapter 3) and, because he is sin-
gle, your qualifying person for you to claim head 
of household filing status.
Example 2—Child who isn't qualifying 
person. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 1, except your son was 25 years old at the 
end of the year and his gross income was 
$5,000. Because he doesn't meet the age test 
(explained under Qualifying Child in chapter 3), 
your son isn't your qualifying child. Because he 
doesn't meet the gross income test  (explained 
later under Qualifying Relative in chapter 3), he 
isn't your qualifying relative. As a result, he isn't 
your qualifying person for head of household 
purposes.
Example 3—Girlfriend.  Your girlfriend 
lived with you all year. Even though she may be 
your qualifying relative if the gross income and 
support tests (explained in chapter 3) are met, 
she isn't your qualifying person for head of 
household purposes because she isn't related 
to you in one of the ways listed under Relatives 
who don’t have to live with you  in chapter 3. 
See Table 2-1.
Example 4—Girlfriend's child.  The facts 
are the same as in Example 3, except your girl-
friend's 10-year-old son also lived with you all 
year. He isn't your qualifying child and, because 
he is your girlfriend's qualifying child, he isn't 
your qualifying relative (see Not a Qualifying 
Child Test  in chapter 3). As a result, he isn't 
your qualifying person for head of household 
purposes.
Home of qualifying person.  Generally, the 
qualifying person must live with you for more 
than half the year.
Special rule for parent.  If your qualifying 
person is your father or mother, you may be 
Worksheet 2-1. Cost of Keeping 
Up a Home Keep for Your Records
Amount
You Paid Total Cost
Property taxes $ $ 
Mortgage interest expense 
Rent 
Utility charges 
Repairs/Maintenance 
Property insurance 
Food eaten in the home
Other household expenses 
Totals $ $ 
Minus total amount you paid ( ) 
Amount others paid $ 
If the total amount you paid is more than the amount others paid, you meet the 
requirement of paying more than half of the cost of keeping up the home.
Page 25 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

eligible to file as head of household even if your 
father or mother doesn't live with you. However, 
you must be able to claim an exemption for your 
father or mother. Also, you must pay more than 
half of the cost of keeping up a home that was 
the main home for the entire year for your father 
or mother.
If you pay more than half of the cost of keep-
ing your parent in a rest home or home for the 
elderly, that counts as paying more than half of 
the cost of keeping up your parent's main 
home.
Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as 
head of household even if the individual who 
qualifies you for this filing status is born or dies 
during the year. If the individual is your qualify-
ing child, the child must have lived with you for 
more than half the part of the year he or she 
was alive. If the individual is anyone else, see 
Pub. 501.
Temporary absences. You and your quali-
fying person are considered to live together 
even if one or both of you are temporarily 
absent from your home due to special circum-
stances, such as illness, education, business, 
vacation, military service, or detention in a juve-
nile facility. It must be reasonable to assume the 
absent person will return to the home after the 
temporary absence. You must continue to keep 
up the home during the absence.
Kidnapped child. You may be eligible to file 
as head of household even if the child who is 
your qualifying person has been kidnapped. For 
more information, see Pub 501.
Qualifying Widow(er)
If your spouse died in 2017, you can use mar-
ried filing jointly as your filing status for 2017 if 
you otherwise qualify to use that status. The 
year of death is the last year for which you can 
file jointly with your deceased spouse. See Mar-
ried Filing Jointly, earlier.
You may be eligible to use qualifying 
widow(er) as your filing status for 2 years fol-
lowing the year your spouse died. For example, 
if your spouse died in 2016, and you haven't re-
married, you may be able to use this filing sta-
tus for 2017 and 2018.
This filing status entitles you to use joint re-
turn tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
tion amount (if you don’t itemize deductions). It 
doesn't entitle you to file a joint return.
How to file.  If you file as qualifying widow(er), 
you can use Form 1040. If you also have taxa-
ble income of less than $100,000 and meet cer-
tain other conditions, you may be able to file 
Form 1040A. Check the box on line 5 of either 
form. If the child who qualifies you for this filing 
status isn't claimed as your dependent on 
line 6c of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, enter the 
child's name on line 4 of the form you are filing. 
Use the Married filing jointly  column of the Tax 
Table or Section B of the Tax Computation 
Worksheet to figure your tax.
Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this chapter for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household 
filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
qualifying child (such as a son, 
daughter, or grandchild who lived with 
you more than half the year and meets 
certain other tests)2
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or 
not you can claim an exemption 
for the person.
he or she is married and you can claim an 
exemption for him or her
a qualifying person.
he or she is married and you can’t claim an 
exemption for him or her
not a qualifying person.3
qualifying relative4 who is your father or 
mother
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6
you can’t claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
qualifying relative4 other than your father 
or mother (such as a grandparent, 
brother, or sister who meets certain 
tests)
he or she lived with you more than half the 
year, and he or she is related to you in one 
of the ways listed under Relatives who don’t 
have to live with you in chapter 3 and you 
can claim an exemption for him or her5
a qualifying person.
he or she didn't live with you more than half 
the year
not a qualifying person.
he or she isn't related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don’t have 
to live with you in chapter 3 and is your 
qualifying relative only because he or she 
lived with you all year as a member of your 
household
not a qualifying person.
you can’t claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
1A person can’t qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term “qualifying child” is defined in chapter 3. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head of household filing status doesn't include a child who is your 
qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described under Children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) under Qualifying Child in 
chapter 3. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child generally is your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child isn't a qualifying child 
for whom you can claim an exemption.
3This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you can’t claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone else's return.
4The term “qualifying relative” is defined in chapter 3.
5If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person isn't a qualifying person. See Multiple Support Agreement in chapter 3.
6See Special rule for parent under Qualifying Person, earlier.
Table 2-1.
Page 26 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Eligibility rules.  You are eligible to file your 
2017 return as a qualifying widow(er) if you 
meet all of the following tests.
You were entitled to file a joint return with 
your spouse for the year your spouse died. 
It doesn't matter whether you actually filed 
a joint return.
Your spouse died in 2015 or 2016 and you 
didn't remarry before the end of 2017.
You have a child or stepchild (not a foster 
child) whom you can claim as a dependent 
or could claim as a dependent except that, 
for 2017:
 a. The child had gross income of 
$4,050 or more,
 b. The child filed a joint return, or
 c. You could be claimed as a depend-
ent on someone else’s return.
If the child isn't claimed as your de-
pendent on Form 1040 or Form 1040A, 
line 6c, enter the child's name on line 4 of 
the form you are filing. If you don’t enter 
the name, it will take us longer to process 
your return.
This child lived in your home all year, ex-
cept for temporary absences. See Tempo-
rary absences, earlier, under Head of 
Household. There are also exceptions, de-
scribed later, for a child who was born or 
died during the year and for a kidnapped 
child.
You paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home for the year. See Keep-
ing Up a Home, earlier, under Head of 
Household.
Example. John's wife died in 2015. John 
hasn't remarried. During 2016 and 2017, he 
continued to keep up a home for himself and his 
child, who lives with him and for whom he can 
claim an exemption. For 2015, he was entitled 
to file a joint return for himself and his deceased 
wife. For 2016 and 2017, he can file as qualify-
ing widower. After 2017, he can file as head of 
household if he qualifies.
Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as a 
qualifying widow(er) if the child who qualifies 
you for this filing status is born or dies during 
the year. You must have provided more than 
half of the cost of keeping up a home that was 
the child's main home during the entire part of 
the year he or she was alive.
Kidnapped child.  You may be eligible to file 
as a qualifying widow(er) even if the child who 
qualifies you for this filing status has been kid-
napped. See Pub. 501.
As mentioned earlier, this filing status 
is available for only 2 years following 
the year your spouse died.
CAUTION
!
3.
Personal 
Exemptions and 
Dependents
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can't be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Exemption phaseout. You lose at least part of 
the benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted 
gross income is more than a certain amount. 
For 2017, this amount is $156,900 for a married 
individual filing a separate return; $261,500 for 
a single individual; $287,650 for a head of 
household; and $313,800 for married individu-
als filing jointly or a qualifying widow(er). See 
Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following topics.
Personal exemptions — You generally can 
take one for yourself and, if you are mar-
ried, one for your spouse.
Exemptions for dependents — You gener-
ally can take an exemption for each of your 
dependents. A dependent is your qualify-
ing child or qualifying relative. If you are 
entitled to claim an exemption for a de-
pendent, that dependent can’t claim a per-
sonal exemption on his or her own tax re-
turn.
Phaseout of exemptions — Your deduction 
is reduced if your adjusted gross income is 
more than a certain amount.
Social security number (SSN) requirement 
for dependents — You must list the SSN of 
any dependent for whom you claim an ex-
emption.
Deduction. Exemptions reduce your taxable 
income. You can deduct $4,050 for each ex-
emption you claim in 2017. But you may lose at 
least part of the dollar amount of your exemp-
CAUTION
!
tions if your adjusted gross income is more than 
a certain amount. See Phaseout of Exemptions, 
later.
How to claim exemptions.  How you claim an 
exemption on your tax return depends on which 
form you file.
If you file Form 1040EZ, the exemption 
amount is combined with the standard deduc-
tion amount and entered on line 5.
If you file Form 1040A, complete lines 6a 
through 6d. The total number of exemptions 
you can claim is the total in the box on line 6d. 
Also complete line 26.
If you file Form 1040, complete lines 6a 
through 6d. The total number of exemptions 
you can claim is the total in the box on line 6d. 
Also complete line 42.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, 
and Filing Information
Form (and Instructions)
Multiple Support Declaration
Release/Revocation of Release of 
Claim to Exemption for Child by 
Custodial Parent
Exemptions
There are two types of exemptions you may be 
able to take:
Personal exemptions for yourself and your 
spouse, and
Exemptions for dependents (dependency 
exemptions).
While each is worth the same amount ($4,050 
for 2017), different rules apply to each type.
Personal Exemptions
You are generally allowed one exemption for 
yourself. If you are married, you may be allowed 
one exemption for your spouse. These are 
called personal exemptions.
Your Own Exemption
You can take one exemption for yourself unless 
you can be claimed as a dependent by another 
taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claim 
you as a dependent, you can’t take an exemp-
tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer 
doesn't actually claim you as a dependent.
Your Spouse's Exemption
Your spouse is never considered your depend-
ent.
Joint return.  On a joint return you can claim 
one exemption for yourself and one for your 
spouse.
  501
  2120
  8332
Page 27 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 25

Separate return.  If you file a separate return, 
you can claim an exemption for your spouse 
only if your spouse:
Had no gross income,
Isn't filing a return, and
Wasn't the dependent of another taxpayer.
You can claim an exemption for your spouse 
even if he or she is a nonresident alien. In that 
case, your spouse:
Must have no gross income for U.S. tax 
purposes,
Must not be filing a return, and
Must not be the dependent of another tax-
payer.
Death of spouse.  If your spouse died during 
the year and you file a joint return for yourself 
and your deceased spouse, you generally can 
claim your spouse's exemption under the rules 
just explained in Joint return. If you file a sepa-
rate return for the year, you may be able to 
claim your spouse's exemption under the rules 
just described in Separate return.
If you remarried during the year, you can’t 
take an exemption for your deceased spouse.
If you are a surviving spouse without gross 
income and you remarry in the year your 
spouse died, you can be claimed as an exemp-
tion on both the final separate return of your de-
ceased spouse and the separate return of your 
new spouse for that year. If you file a joint return 
with your new spouse, you can be claimed as 
an exemption only on that return.
Divorced or separated spouse.  If you ob-
tained a final decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance during the year, you can’t take 
your former spouse's exemption. This rule ap-
plies even if you provided all of your former 
spouse's support.
Exemptions for 
Dependents
You are allowed one exemption for each person 
you can claim as a dependent. You can claim 
an exemption for a dependent even if your de-
pendent files a return. However, see Joint Re-
turn Test, later.
The term “dependent” means:
A qualifying child, or
A qualifying relative.
The terms “ qualifying child ” and “ qualifying 
relative” are defined later.
All the requirements for claiming an exemp-
tion for a dependent are summarized in Ta-
ble 3-1.
Dependent not allowed a personal 
exemption. If you can claim an ex-
emption for your dependent, the de-
pendent can’t claim his or her own personal ex-
emption on his or her own tax return. This is 
true even if you don’t claim the dependent's ex-
emption on your return. It is also true if the de-
pendent's exemption on your return is reduced 
or eliminated under the phaseout rule described 
under Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
CAUTION
!
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.  If these 
people work for you, you can’t claim exemp-
tions for them.
Child tax credit. You may be entitled to a child 
tax credit for each qualifying child who was un-
der age 17 at the end of the year if you claimed 
an exemption for that child. For more informa-
tion, see chapter 34.
Exceptions
Even if you have a qualifying child or qualifying 
relative, you can claim an exemption for that 
person only if these three tests are met.
1. Dependent taxpayer test.
2. Joint return test.
3. Citizen or resident test.
These three tests are explained in detail 
here.
Dependent Taxpayer Test
If you can be claimed as a dependent by an-
other person, you can’t claim anyone else as a 
dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child 
or qualifying relative, you can’t claim that per-
son as a dependent.
If you are filing a joint return and your 
spouse can be claimed as a dependent by 
someone else, you and your spouse can’t claim 
any dependents on your joint return.
Joint Return Test
You generally can’t claim a married person as a 
dependent if he or she files a joint return.
Exception. You can claim an exemption for a 
person who files a joint return if that person and 
his or her spouse file the joint return only to 
claim a refund of income tax withheld or estima-
ted tax paid.
Example 1—Child files joint return.  You 
supported your 18-year-old daughter, and she 
lived with you all year while her husband was in 
the Armed Forces. He earned $25,000 for the 
year. The couple files a joint return. You can’t 
take an exemption for your daughter.
Example 2—Child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Your 
18-year-old son and his 17-year-old wife had 
$800 of wages from part-time jobs and no other 
income. They lived with you all year. Neither is 
required to file a tax return. They don’t have a 
child. Taxes were taken out of their pay so they 
filed a joint return only to get a refund of the 
withheld taxes. The exception to the joint return 
test applies, so you aren't disqualified from 
claiming an exemption for each of them just be-
cause they file a joint return. You can claim ex-
emptions for each of them if all the other tests to 
do so are met.
Example 3—Child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in Example 2 except no 
taxes were taken out of your son's pay or his 
wife's pay. However, they file a joint return to 
claim an American opportunity credit of $124 
and get a refund of that amount. Because 
claiming the American opportunity credit is their 
reason for filing the return, they aren't filing it 
only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid. The exception to the joint 
return test doesn't apply, so you can’t claim an 
exemption for either of them.
Citizen or Resident Test
You generally can’t claim a person as a de-
pendent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, 
U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident 
of Canada or Mexico. However, there is an ex-
ception for certain adopted children, as ex-
plained next.
Exception for adopted child.  If you are a 
U.S. citizen or U.S. national who has legally 
adopted a child who isn't a U.S. citizen, U.S. 
resident alien, or U.S. national, this test is met if 
the child lived with you as a member of your 
household all year. This exception also applies 
if the child was lawfully placed with you for legal 
adoption.
Child's place of residence.  Children usually 
are citizens or residents of the country of their 
parents.
If you were a U.S. citizen when your child 
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen and 
meet this test even if the other parent was a 
nonresident alien and the child was born in a 
foreign country.
Foreign students' place of residence.  For-
eign students brought to this country under a 
qualified international education exchange pro-
gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
porary period generally aren't U.S. residents 
and don’t meet this test. You can’t claim an ex-
emption for them. However, if you provided a 
home for a foreign student, you may be able to 
take a charitable contribution deduction. See 
Expenses Paid for Student Living With You  in 
chapter 24.
U.S. national.  A U.S. national is an individual 
who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or 
her allegiance to the United States. U.S. nation-
als include American Samoans and Northern 
Mariana Islanders who chose to become U.S. 
nationals instead of U.S. citizens.
Qualifying Child
Five tests must be met for a child to be your 
qualifying child. The five tests are:
1. Relationship,
2. Age,
3. Residency,
4. Support, and
5. Joint return.
These tests are explained next.
If a child meets the five tests to be the 
qualifying child of more than one per-
son, there are rules you must use to 
determine which person can actually treat the 
child as a qualifying child. See Qualifying Child 
of More Than One Person, later.
CAUTION
!
Page 28 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Relationship Test
To meet this test, a child must be:
Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, 
or a descendant (for example, your grand-
child) of any of them, or
Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descend-
ant (for example, your niece or nephew) of 
any of them.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual who 
is placed with you by an authorized placement 
agency or by judgment, decree, or other order 
of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Age Test
To meet this test, a child must be:
Under age 19 at the end of the year and 
younger than you (or your spouse, if filing 
jointly),
A student under age 24 at the end of the 
year and younger than you (or your 
spouse, if filing jointly), or
Permanently and totally disabled at any 
time during the year, regardless of age.
Example. Your son turned 19 on Decem-
ber 10. Unless he was permanently and totally 
disabled or a student, he doesn't meet the age 
test because, at the end of the year, he wasn't 
under age 19.
Child must be younger than you or spouse. 
To be your qualifying child, a child who isn't per-
manently and totally disabled must be younger 
than you. However, if you are married filing 
jointly, the child must be younger than you or 
Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this chapter.
You can’t claim any dependents if you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
You can’t claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax paid.
You can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of 
Canada or Mexico.1
You can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, 
brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, stepsister, 
or a descendant of any of them.
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year and 
younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), (b) under age 
24 at the end of the year, a student, and younger than you (or 
your spouse, if filing jointly), or (c) any age if permanently and 
totally disabled. 
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of the 
year.2
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or her 
own support for the year.
5. The child must not be filing a joint return for the year (unless 
that return is filed only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid).
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than one 
person, only one person can actually treat the child as a qualifying 
child. See Qualifying Child of More Than One Person to find out 
which person is the person entitled to claim the child as a qualifying 
child.
1. The person can’t be your qualifying child or the 
qualifying child of any other taxpayer.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of 
the ways listed under Relatives who don’t have to live 
with you, or (b) must live with you all year as a member 
of your household2 (and your relationship must not 
violate local law).
3. The person's gross income for the year must be less 
than $4,050.3
4. You must provide more than half of the person's total 
support for the year.4
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or 
parents who live apart), and kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), and kidnapped
 children.
Table 3-1.
Page 29 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

your spouse but doesn't have to be younger 
than both of you.
Example 1—Child not younger than you 
or spouse. Your 23-year-old brother, who is a 
student and unmarried, lives with you and your 
spouse, who provide more than half of his sup-
port. He isn't disabled. Both you and your 
spouse are 21 years old, and you file a joint re-
turn. Your brother isn't your qualifying child be-
cause he isn't younger than you or your spouse.
Example 2—Child younger than your 
spouse but not younger than you.  The facts 
are the same as in Example 1 except your 
spouse is 25 years old. Because your brother is 
younger than your spouse, and you and your 
spouse are filing a joint return, your brother is 
your qualifying child, even though he isn't 
younger than you.
Student defined. To qualify as a student, your 
child must be, during some part of each of any 5 
calendar months of the year:
1. A full-time student at a school that has a 
regular teaching staff, course of study, and 
a regularly enrolled student body at the 
school, or
2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
ing course given by a school described in 
(1), or by a state, county, or local govern-
ment agency.
The 5 calendar months don’t have to be con-
secutive.
Full-time student.  A full-time student is a 
student who is enrolled for the number of hours 
or courses the school considers to be full-time 
attendance.
School defined.  A school can be an ele-
mentary school, junior or senior high school, 
college, university, or technical, trade, or me-
chanical school. However, an on-the-job train-
ing course, correspondence school, or school 
offering courses only through the Internet 
doesn’t count as a school.
Vocational high school students.  Stu-
dents who work on “co-op” jobs in private indus-
try as a part of a school's regular course of 
classroom and practical training are considered 
full-time students.
Permanently and totally disabled. Your child 
is permanently and totally disabled if both of the 
following apply.
He or she can’t engage in any substantial 
gainful activity because of a physical or 
mental condition.
A doctor determines the condition has las-
ted or can be expected to last continuously 
for at least a year or can lead to death.
Residency Test
To meet this test, your child must have lived 
with you for more than half the year. There are 
exceptions for temporary absences, children 
who were born or died during the year, kidnap-
ped children, and children of divorced or sepa-
rated parents.
Temporary absences.  Your child is consid-
ered to have lived with you during periods of 
time when one of you, or both, are temporarily 
absent due to special circumstances such as:
Illness,
Education,
Business,
Vacation,
Military service, or
Detention in a juvenile facility.
Death or birth of child.  A child who was born 
or died during the year is treated as having lived 
with you more than half of the year if your home 
was the child's home more than half of the time 
he or she was alive during the year. The same 
is true if the child lived with you more than half 
the year except for any required hospital stay 
following birth.
Child born alive.  You may be able to claim 
an exemption for a child born alive during the 
year, even if the child lived only for a moment. 
State or local law must treat the child as having 
been born alive. There must be proof of a live 
birth shown by an official document, such as a 
birth certificate. The child must be your qualify-
ing child or qualifying relative, and all the other 
tests to claim an exemption for a dependent 
must be met.
Stillborn child.  You can’t claim an exemp-
tion for a stillborn child.
Kidnapped child.  You may be able to treat 
your child as meeting the residency test even if 
the child has been kidnapped. See Pub. 501 for 
details.
Children of divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart).  In most cases, 
because of the residency test, a child of di-
vorced or separated parents is the qualifying 
child of the custodial parent. However, the child 
will be treated as the qualifying child of the non-
custodial parent if all four of the following state-
ments are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her 
support for the year from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that he or 
she won't claim the child as a depend-
ent for the year, and the noncustodial 
parent attaches this written declara-
tion to his or her return. (If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
1984 and before 2009, see Post-1984 
and pre-2009 divorce decree or sepa-
ration agreement, later. If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
2008, see Post-2008 divorce decree 
or separation agreement, later.)
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance or written separa-
tion agreement that applies to 2017 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement wasn't 
changed after 1984 to say the non-
custodial parent can’t claim the child 
as a dependent, and the noncustodial 
parent provides at least $600 for the 
child's support during the year.
If statements (1) through (4) are all true, only 
the noncustodial parent can:
Claim the child as a dependent, and
Claim the child as a qualifying child for the 
child tax credit.
However, this doesn’t allow the noncustodial 
parent to claim head of household filing status, 
the credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses, the exclusion for dependent care benefits, 
the earned income credit, or the health cover-
age tax credit. See Applying the tiebreaker rules 
to divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), later.
Example—Earned income credit.  Even if 
statements (1) through (4) are all true and the 
custodial parent signs Form 8332 or a substan-
tially similar statement that he or she won’t 
claim the child as a dependent for 2017, this 
doesn’t allow the noncustodial parent to claim 
the child as a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit. The custodial parent or another 
taxpayer, if eligible, can claim the child for the 
earned income credit.
Custodial parent and noncustodial pa-
rent. The custodial parent is the parent with 
whom the child lived for the greater number of 
nights during the year. The other parent is the 
noncustodial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present, or
In the company of the parent, when the 
child doesn't sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca-
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
during the year, the custodial parent is the pa-
rent with the higher adjusted gross income 
(AGI).
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which it begins. For 
example, the night of December 31, 2017, is 
treated as part of 2017.
Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa-
ted under state law, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6.
Page 30 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 28 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Absences. If a child wasn't with either pa-
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night, except for the absence. But if it can’t 
be determined with which parent the child nor-
mally would have lived or if the child would not 
have lived with either parent that night, the child 
is treated as not living with either parent that 
night.
Parent works at night.  If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi-
dence registered with the school.
Example 1—Child lived with one parent 
for a greater number of nights. You and your 
child’s other parent are divorced. In 2017, your 
child lived with you 210 nights and with the 
other parent 155 nights. You are the custodial 
parent.
Example 2—Child is away at camp.  In 
2017, your daughter lives with each parent for 
alternate weeks. In the summer, she spends 6 
weeks at summer camp. During the time she is 
at camp, she is treated as living with you for 3 
weeks and with her other parent, your 
ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how 
long she would have lived with each parent if 
she had not attended summer camp.
Example 3—Child lived same number of 
nights with each parent.  Your son lived with 
you 180 nights during the year and lived the 
same number of nights with his other parent, 
your ex-spouse. Your AGI is $40,000. Your 
ex-spouse's AGI is $25,000. You are treated as 
your son's custodial parent because you have 
the higher AGI.
Example 4—Child is at parent’s home 
but with other parent. Your son normally lives 
with you during the week and with his other pa-
rent, your ex-spouse, every other weekend. 
You become ill and are hospitalized. The other 
parent lives in your home with your son for 10 
consecutive days while you are in the hospital. 
Your son is treated as living with you during this 
10-day period because he was living in your 
home.
Example 5—Child emancipated in May. 
When your son turned age 18 in May 2017, he 
became emancipated under the law of the state 
where he lives. As a result, he isn't considered 
in the custody of his parents for more than half 
of the year. The special rule for children of di-
vorced or separated parents doesn't apply.
Example 6—Child emancipated in Au-
gust. Your daughter lives with you from Janu-
ary 1, 2017, until May 31, 2017, and lives with 
her other parent, your ex-spouse, from June 1, 
2017, through the end of the year. She turns 18 
and is emancipated under state law on August 
1, 2017. Because she is treated as not living 
with either parent beginning on August 1, she is 
treated as living with you the greater number of 
nights in 2017. You are the custodial parent.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
must use either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release the exemption to the noncustodial pa-
rent. The noncustodial parent must attach a 
copy of the form or statement to his or her tax 
return.
The exemption can be released for 1 year, 
for a number of specified years (for example, al-
ternate years), or for all future years, as speci-
fied in the declaration.
Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de-
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent won't claim the child 
as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa-
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to his or her tax return.
The cover page (write the other parent's 
social security number on this page).
The pages that include all of the informa-
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent can’t at-
tach pages from the decree or agreement in-
stead of Form 8332 if the decree or agreement 
went into effect after 2008. The custodial parent 
must sign either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment whose only purpose is to release the cus-
todial parent's claim to an exemption for a child, 
and the noncustodial parent must attach a copy 
to his or her return. The form or statement must 
release the custodial parent's claim to the child 
without any conditions. For example, the re-
lease must not depend on the noncustodial pa-
rent paying support.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a 
release of claim to exemption. For the revoca-
tion to be effective for 2017, the custodial pa-
rent must have given (or made reasonable ef-
forts to give) written notice of the revocation to 
the noncustodial parent in 2016 or earlier. The 
custodial parent can use Part III of Form 8332 
for this purpose and must attach a copy of the 
revocation to his or her return for each tax year 
he or she claims the child as a dependent as a 
result of the revocation.
CAUTION
!
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-
port provided by your new spouse is treated as 
provided by you.
Parents who never married.  This special 
rule for divorced or separated parents also ap-
plies to parents who never married, and who 
lived apart at all times during the last 6 months 
of the year.
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying 
Child)
To meet this test, the child can’t have provided 
more than half of his or her own support for the 
year.
This test is different from the support test to 
be a qualifying relative, which is described later. 
However, to see what is or isn't support, see 
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) , 
later. If you aren't sure whether a child provided 
more than half of his or her own support, you 
may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful.
Example. You provided $4,000 toward 
your 16-year-old son's support for the year. He 
has a part-time job and provided $6,000 to his 
own support. He provided more than half of his 
own support for the year. He isn't your qualify-
ing child.
Foster care payments and expenses.  Pay-
ments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a child placement agency are consid-
ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, 
payments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a state or county are considered sup-
port provided by the state or county.
If you aren't in the trade or business of pro-
viding foster care and your unreimbursed 
out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster 
child were mainly to benefit an organization 
qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-
butions, the expenses are deductible as chari-
table contributions but aren't considered sup-
port you provided. For more information about 
the deduction for charitable contributions, see 
chapter 24 . If your unreimbursed expenses 
aren't deductible as charitable contributions, 
they may qualify as support you provided.
If you are in the trade or business of provid-
ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses 
aren't considered support provided by you.
Example 1.  Lauren, a foster child, lived 
with Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of 
the year. The Smiths cared for Lauren because 
they wanted to adopt her (although she had not 
been placed with them for adoption). They 
didn't care for her as a trade or business or to 
benefit the agency that placed her in their 
home. The Smiths' unreimbursed expenses 
aren't deductible as charitable contributions but 
are considered support they provided for Lau-
ren.
Example 2.  You provided $3,000 toward 
your 10-year-old foster child's support for the 
year. The state government provided $4,000, 
which is considered support provided by the 
state, not by the child. See Support provided by 
the state (welfare, food stamps, housing, etc.) , 
later. Your foster child didn't provide more than 
half of her own support for the year.
Page 31 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

Worksheet for Determining SupportWorksheet 3-1. Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable 
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other 
accounts at the beginning of the year. Don’t include funds provided by the state; include those 
amounts on line 23 instead ........................................................ 1.  
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support ........................ 2.  
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ............................. 3.  
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ...... 4.  
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ............................... 5.  
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
a. Enter the total rent paid ......................................................... 6a.  
b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21 ................................................ 6b.  
7. Enter the total food expenses ...................................................... 7.  
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) ......... 8.  
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ........................... 9.  
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Don’t include expenses of maintaining the home, such as 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance .................................... 10.  
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ........................ 11.  
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ............................... 12.  
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............. 13.  
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses ............................................ 14.  
15. Enter the person's total education expenses .......................................... 15.  
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by 
insurance ...................................................................... 16.  
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ................................. 17.  
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses ......................................... 18.  
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ........... 19.  
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (0.50) ...................................................... 20.  
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support ............... 21.  
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
 
No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be 
a qualifying child, stop here; don’t complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to 
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 
Yes. You don’t meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop 
here.
 
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state, 
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Don’t include any amounts included on 
line 1 .......................................................................... 23.  
24. Add lines 21 and 23 .............................................................. 24.  
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ....... 25.  
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
 
Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 
No. You don’t meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You can’t claim an exemption for this 
person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or separated 
parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement or Support Test for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart), or Kidnapped child under Qualifying Relative.
Page 32 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 30 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Scholarships. A scholarship received by a 
child who is a student isn't taken into account in 
determining whether the child provided more 
than half of his or her own support.
Joint Return Test (To Be a 
Qualifying Child)
To meet this test, the child can’t file a joint re-
turn for the year.
Exception. An exception to the joint return test 
applies if your child and his or her spouse file a 
joint return only to claim a refund of income tax 
withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1—Child files joint return.  You 
supported your 18-year-old daughter, and she 
lived with you all year while her husband was in 
the Armed Forces. He earned $25,000 for the 
year. The couple files a joint return. Because 
your daughter and her husband file a joint re-
turn, she isn't your qualifying child.
Example 2—Child files joint return only 
as a claim for refund of withheld tax.  Your 
18-year-old son and his 17-year-old wife had 
$800 of wages from part-time jobs and no other 
income. They lived with you all year. Neither is 
required to file a tax return. They don’t have a 
child. Taxes were taken out of their pay so they 
filed a joint return only to get a refund of the 
withheld taxes. The exception to the joint return 
test applies, so your son may be your qualifying 
child if all the other tests are met.
Example 3—Child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in Example 2 except no 
taxes were taken out of your son's pay or his 
wife's pay. However, they file a joint return to 
claim an American opportunity credit of $124 
and get a refund of that amount. Because 
claiming the American opportunity credit is their 
reason for filing the return, they aren't filing it 
only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid. The exception to the joint 
return test doesn't apply, so your son isn't your 
qualifying child.
Qualifying Child of More Than One 
Person
If your qualifying child isn't a qualifying 
child of anyone else, this topic doesn't 
apply to you and you don’t need to 
read about it. This is also true if your qualifying 
child isn't a qualifying child of anyone else ex-
cept your spouse with whom you plan to file a 
joint return.
If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under 
the rules for children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart) 
described earlier, see Applying the tiebreaker 
rules to divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart), later.
Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, age, 
residency, support, and joint return tests to be a 
qualifying child of more than one person. Al-
though the child is a qualifying child of each of 
these persons, only one person can actually 
TIP
CAUTION
!
treat the child as a qualifying child to take all of 
the following tax benefits (provided the person 
is eligible for each benefit).
1. The exemption for the child.
2. The child tax credit.
3. Head of household filing status.
4. The credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
5. The exclusion from income for dependent 
care benefits.
6. The earned income credit.
The other person can’t take any of these 
benefits based on this qualifying child. In other 
words, you and the other person can’t agree to 
divide these benefits between you.
Tiebreaker rules. To determine which person 
can treat the child as a qualifying child to claim 
these six tax benefits, the following tiebreaker 
rules apply.
If only one of the persons is the child's pa-
rent, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the parent.
If the parents file a joint return together and 
can claim the child as a qualifying child, 
the child is treated as the qualifying child of 
the parents.
If the parents don’t file a joint return to-
gether but both parents claim the child as a 
qualifying child, the IRS will treat the child 
as the qualifying child of the parent with 
whom the child lived for the longer period 
of time during the year. If the child lived 
with each parent for the same amount of 
time, the IRS will treat the child as the qual-
ifying child of the parent who had the 
higher adjusted gross income (AGI) for the 
year.
If no parent can claim the child as a quali-
fying child, the child is treated as the quali-
fying child of the person who had the high-
est AGI for the year.
If a parent can claim the child as a qualify-
ing child but no parent does so claim the 
child, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the person who had the highest 
AGI for the year, but only if that person's 
AGI is higher than the highest AGI of any of 
the child's parents who can claim the child.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and 
the other person may be able to choose which 
of you claims the child as a qualifying child.
You may be able to qualify for the 
earned income credit under the rules 
for taxpayers without a qualifying child 
if you have a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit who is claimed as a qualifying child 
by another taxpayer. For more information, see 
Pub. 596.
Example 1—Child lived with parent and 
grandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh-
ter Jane lived with your mother all year. You are 
25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is 
$9,000. Your mother's AGI is $15,000. Jane's 
father didn't live with you or your daughter. You 
haven't signed Form 8332 (or a similar 
TIP
statement) to release the child's exemption to 
the noncustodial parent.
Jane is a qualifying child of both you and 
your mother because she meets the relation-
ship, age, residency, support, and joint return 
tests for both you and your mother. However, 
only one of you can claim her. Jane isn't a quali-
fying child of anyone else, including her father. 
You agree to let your mother claim Jane. This 
means your mother can claim Jane as a qualify-
ing child for all of the six tax benefits listed ear-
lier, if she qualifies for each of those benefits 
(and if you don’t claim Jane as a qualifying child 
for any of those tax benefits).
Example 2—Parent has higher AGI than 
grandparent. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 1  except your AGI is $18,000. Because 
your mother's AGI isn't higher than yours, she 
can’t claim Jane. Only you can claim Jane.
Example 3—Two persons claim same 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except that you and your mother both claim 
Jane as a qualifying child. In this case, you, as 
the child's parent, will be the only one allowed 
to claim Jane as a qualifying child. The IRS will 
disallow your mother's claim to the six tax bene-
fits listed earlier based on Jane. However, your 
mother may qualify for the earned income credit 
as a taxpayer without a qualifying child.
Example 4—Qualifying children split be-
tween two persons.  The facts are the same 
as in Example 1 except you also have two other 
young children who are qualifying children of 
both you and your mother. Only one of you can 
claim each child. However, if your mother's AGI 
is higher than yours, you can allow your mother 
to claim one or more of the children. For exam-
ple, if you claim one child, your mother can 
claim the other two.
Example 5—Taxpayer who is a qualify-
ing child. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 1  except you are only 18 years old and 
didn't provide more than half of your own sup-
port for the year. This means you are your 
mother's qualifying child. If she can claim you 
as a dependent, then you can’t claim your 
daughter as a dependent because of the De-
pendent Taxpayer Test explained earlier.
Example 6—Separated parents.  You, 
your husband, and your 10-year-old son lived 
together until August 1, 2017, when your hus-
band moved out of the household. In August 
and September, your son lived with you. For the 
rest of the year, your son lived with your hus-
band, the boy's father. Your son is a qualifying 
child of both you and your husband because 
your son lived with each of you for more than 
half the year and because he met the relation-
ship, age, support, and joint return tests for both 
of you. At the end of the year, you and your hus-
band still weren't divorced, legally separated, or 
separated under a written separation agree-
ment, so the rule for children of divorced or sep-
arated parents (or parents who live apart) 
doesn't apply.
You and your husband will file separate re-
turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your 
son as a qualifying child. This means, if your 
husband doesn't claim your son as a qualifying 
Page 33 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

child, you can claim your son as a qualifying 
child for the dependency exemption, child tax 
credit, and exclusion for dependent care bene-
fits (if you qualify for each of those tax benefits). 
However, you can’t claim head of household fil-
ing status because you and your husband didn't 
live apart for the last 6 months of the year. As a 
result, your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, so you can’t claim the earned income 
credit or the credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
Example 7—Separated parents claim 
same child.  The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 6 except that you and your husband both 
claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case, 
only your husband will be allowed to treat your 
son as a qualifying child. This is because, dur-
ing 2017, the boy lived with him longer than with 
you. If you claimed an exemption or the child 
tax credit for your son, the IRS will disallow your 
claim to both these tax benefits. If you don’t 
have another qualifying child or dependent, the 
IRS will also disallow your claim to the exclu-
sion for dependent care benefits. In addition, 
because you and your husband didn't live apart 
for the last 6 months of the year, your husband 
can’t claim head of household filing status. As a 
result, his filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, so he can’t claim the earned income 
credit or the credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
Example 8—Unmarried parents.  You, 
your 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived 
together all year. You and your son's father 
aren't married. Your son is a qualifying child of 
both you and his father because he meets the 
relationship, age, residency, support, and joint 
return tests for both you and his father. Your 
AGI is $12,000 and your son's father's AGI is 
$14,000. Your son's father agrees to let you 
claim the child as a qualifying child. This means 
you can claim him as a qualifying child for the 
dependency exemption, child tax credit, head 
of household filing status, credit for child and 
dependent care expenses, exclusion for de-
pendent care benefits, and the earned income 
credit, if you qualify for each of those tax bene-
fits (and if your son's father doesn't claim your 
son as a qualifying child for any of those tax 
benefits).
Example 9—Unmarried parents claim 
same child. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 8  except that you and your son's father 
both claim your son as a qualifying child. In this 
case, only your son's father will be allowed to 
treat your son as a qualifying child. This is be-
cause his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI, 
$12,000. If you claimed an exemption or the 
child tax credit for your son, the IRS will disal-
low your claim to both these tax benefits. If you 
don’t have another qualifying child or depend-
ent, the IRS will also disallow your claim to head 
of household filing status, the credit for child 
and dependent care expenses, and the exclu-
sion for dependent care benefits. However, you 
may be able to claim the earned income credit 
as a taxpayer without a qualifying child.
Example 10—Child didn't live with a pa-
rent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your si-
ster's child, lived with your mother all year. You 
are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your 
mother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece's parents 
file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, and 
don’t live with you or their child. Your niece is a 
qualifying child of both you and your mother be-
cause she meets the relationship, age, resi-
dency, support, and joint return tests for both 
you and your mother. However, only your 
mother can treat her as a qualifying child. This 
is because your mother's AGI, $15,000, is more 
than your AGI, $9,300.
Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live 
apart). If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under the rules 
described earlier for children of divorced or sep-
arated parents (or parents who live apart) , only 
the noncustodial parent can claim an exemption 
and the child tax credit for the child. However, 
only the custodial parent can claim the credit for 
child and dependent care expenses or the ex-
clusion for dependent care benefits for the 
child, and only the custodial parent can treat the 
child as a dependent for the health coverage 
tax credit. Also, the noncustodial parent can't 
claim the child as a qualifying child for head of 
household filing status or the earned income 
credit. Instead, the custodial parent, if eligible, 
or other eligible person can claim the child as a 
qualifying child for those two benefits. If the 
child is the qualifying child of more than one 
person for these benefits, then the tiebreaker 
rules just explained determine whether the cus-
todial parent or another eligible person can treat 
the child as a qualifying child.
Example 1.  You and your 5-year-old son 
lived all year with your mother, who paid the en-
tire cost of keeping up the home. Your AGI is 
$10,000. Your mother's AGI is $25,000. Your 
son's father didn't live with you or your son.
Under the rules explained earlier for children 
of divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), your son is treated as the quali-
fying child of his father, who can claim an ex-
emption and the child tax credit for him. Be-
cause of this, you can’t claim an exemption or 
the child tax credit for your son. However, those 
rules don't allow your son's father to claim your 
son as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status, the credit for child and dependent 
care expenses, the exclusion for dependent 
care benefits, the earned income credit, or the 
health coverage tax credit.
You and your mother didn't have any child 
care expenses or dependent care benefits, so 
neither of you can claim the credit for child and 
dependent care expenses or the exclusion for 
dependent care benefits. Also, neither of you 
qualifies for the health coverage tax credit. But 
the boy is a qualifying child of both you and your 
mother for head of household filing status and 
the earned income credit because he meets the 
relationship, age, residency, support, and joint 
return tests for both you and your mother. 
(Note: The support test doesn't apply for the 
earned income credit.) However, you agree to 
let your mother claim your son. This means she 
can claim him for head of household filing sta-
tus and the earned income credit if she qualifies 
for each and if you don’t claim him as a qualify-
ing child for the earned income credit. (You 
can’t claim head of household filing status 
because your mother paid the entire cost of 
keeping up the home.) You may be able to 
claim the earned income credit as a taxpayer 
without a qualifying child.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 except your AGI is $25,000 and your 
mother's AGI is $21,000. Your mother can’t 
claim your son as a qualifying child for any pur-
pose because her AGI isn't higher than yours.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1  except you and your mother both 
claim your son as a qualifying child for the 
earned income credit. Your mother also claims 
him as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status. You, as the child's parent, will be 
the only one allowed to claim your son as a 
qualifying child for the earned income credit. 
The IRS will disallow your mother's claim to 
head of household filing status unless she has 
another qualifying child or dependent. Your 
mother can't claim the earned income credit as 
a taxpayer without a qualifying child because 
her AGI is more than $15,010.
Qualifying Relative
Four tests must be met for a person to be your 
qualifying relative. The four tests are:
1. Not a qualifying child test,
2. Member of household or relationship test,
3. Gross income test, and
4. Support test.
Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rela-
tive can be any age. There is no age test for a 
qualifying relative.
Kidnapped child. You may be able to treat a 
child as your qualifying relative even if the child 
has been kidnapped. See Pub. 501 for details.
Not a Qualifying Child Test
A child isn't your qualifying relative if the child is 
your qualifying child or the qualifying child of 
any other taxpayer.
Example 1.  Your 22-year-old daughter, 
who is a student, lives with you and meets all 
the tests to be your qualifying child. She isn't 
your qualifying relative.
Example 2.  Your 2-year-old son lives with 
your parents and meets all the tests to be their 
qualifying child. He isn't your qualifying relative.
Example 3. Your son lives with you but isn't 
your qualifying child because he is 30 years old 
and doesn't meet the age test. He may be your 
qualifying relative if the gross income test and 
the support test are met.
Example 4.  Your 13-year-old grandson 
lived with his mother for 3 months, with his un-
cle for 4 months, and with you for 5 months dur-
ing the year. He isn't your qualifying child be-
cause he doesn't meet the residency test. He 
may be your qualifying relative if the gross in-
come test and the support test are met.
Page 34 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 32 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Child of person not required to file a return. 
A child isn't the qualifying child of any other tax-
payer and so may qualify as your qualifying rel-
ative if the child's parent (or other person for 
whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) 
isn't required to file an income tax return and ei-
ther:
Doesn't file an income tax return, or
Files a return only to get a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1—Return not required.  You 
support an unrelated friend and her 3-year-old 
child, who lived with you all year in your home. 
Your friend has no gross income, isn't required 
to file a 2017 tax return, and doesn't file a 2017 
tax return. Both your friend and her child are 
your qualifying relatives if the support test is 
met.
Example 2—Return filed to claim refund. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1 except 
your friend had wages of $1,500 during the year 
and had income tax withheld from her wages. 
She files a return only to get a refund of the in-
come tax withheld and doesn't claim the earned 
income credit or any other tax credits or deduc-
tions. Both your friend and her child are your 
qualifying relatives if the support test is met.
Example 3—Earned income credit 
claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 2  except your friend had wages of $8,000 
during the year and claimed the earned income 
credit on her return. Your friend's child is the 
qualifying child of another taxpayer (your 
friend), so you can’t claim your friend's child as 
your qualifying relative. Also, you can’t claim 
your friend as your qualifying relative because 
of the gross income test explained later.
Child in Canada or Mexico.  You may be able 
to claim your child as a dependent even if the 
child lives in Canada or Mexico. If the child 
doesn't live with you, the child doesn't meet the 
residency test to be your qualifying child. How-
ever, the child may still be your qualifying rela-
tive. If the persons the child does live with aren't 
U.S. citizens and have no U.S. gross income, 
those persons aren't “taxpayers,” so the child 
isn't the qualifying child of any other taxpayer. If 
the child isn't the qualifying child of any other 
taxpayer, the child is your qualifying relative as 
long as the gross income test and the support 
test are met.
You can’t claim as a dependent a child who 
lives in a foreign country other than Canada or 
Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S. 
resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an ex-
ception for certain adopted children who lived 
with you all year. See Citizen or Resident Test , 
earlier.
Example. You provide all the support of 
your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in 
Mexico with your mother and have no income. 
You are single and live in the United States. 
Your mother isn't a U.S. citizen and has no U.S. 
income, so she isn't a “taxpayer.” Your children 
aren't your qualifying children because they 
don’t meet the residency test. But since they 
aren't the qualifying children of any other tax-
payer, they are your qualifying relatives and you 
can claim them as dependents. You may also 
be able to claim your mother as a dependent if 
the gross income and support tests are met.
Member of Household or 
Relationship Test
To meet this test, a person must either:
1. Live with you all year as a member of your 
household, or
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed 
under Relatives who don’t have to live with 
you next.
If at any time during the year the person was 
your spouse, that person can’t be your qualify-
ing relative. However, see Personal Exemp-
tions, earlier.
Relatives who don’t have to live with you. A 
person related to you in any of the following 
ways doesn't have to live with you all year as a 
member of your household to meet this test.
Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de-
scendant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild). (A legally adopted child is 
considered your child.)
Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
ter, stepbrother, or stepsister.
Your father, mother, grandparent, or other 
direct ancestor, but not foster parent.
Your stepfather or stepmother.
A son or daughter of your brother or sister.
A son or daughter of your half brother or 
half sister.
A brother or sister of your father or mother.
Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-
ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, 
or sister-in-law.
Any of these relationships that were established 
by marriage aren't ended by death or divorce.
Example. You and your wife began sup-
porting your wife's father, a widower, in 2011. 
Your wife died in 2016. Despite your wife's 
death, your father-in-law continues to meet this 
test, even if he doesn't live with you. You can 
claim him as a dependent if all other tests are 
met, including the gross income test and sup-
port test.
Foster child.  A foster child is an individual 
who is placed with you by an authorized place-
ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other 
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Joint return.  If you file a joint return, the per-
son can be related to either you or your spouse. 
Also, the person doesn't need to be related to 
the spouse who provides support.
For example, your spouse's uncle who re-
ceives more than half of his support from you 
may be your qualifying relative, even though he 
doesn't live with you. However, if you and your 
spouse file separate returns, your spouse's un-
cle can be your qualifying relative only if he lives 
with you all year as a member of your house-
hold.
Temporary absences. A person is considered 
to live with you as a member of your household 
during periods of time when one of you, or both, 
are temporarily absent due to special circum-
stances such as:
Illness,
Education,
Business,
Vacation,
Military service, or
Detention in a juvenile facility.
If the person is placed in a nursing home for 
an indefinite period of time to receive constant 
medical care, the absence may be considered 
temporary.
Death or birth.  A person who died during the 
year, but lived with you as a member of your 
household until death, will meet this test. The 
same is true for a child who was born during the 
year and lived with you as a member of your 
household for the rest of the year. The test is 
also met if a child lived with you as a member of 
your household except for any required hospital 
stay following birth.
If your dependent died during the year and 
you otherwise qualify to claim an exemption for 
the dependent, you can still claim the exemp-
tion.
Example. Your dependent mother died on 
January 15. She met the tests to be your quali-
fying relative. The other tests to claim an ex-
emption for a dependent were also met. You 
can claim an exemption for her on your return.
Local law violated.  A person doesn't meet 
this test if at any time during the year the rela-
tionship between you and that person violates 
local law.
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a 
member of your household all year. However, 
your relationship with her violated the laws of 
the state where you live, because she was mar-
ried to someone else. Therefore, she doesn't 
meet this test and you can’t claim her as a de-
pendent.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if he 
or she lives with you all year as a member of 
your household. A cousin is a descendant of a 
brother or sister of your father or mother.
Gross Income Test
To meet this test, a person's gross income for 
the year must be less than $4,050.
Gross income defined.  Gross income is all 
income in the form of money, property, and 
services that isn't exempt from tax.
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
ing business, gross income is the total net sales 
minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-
neous income from the business.
Gross receipts from rental property are 
gross income. Don’t deduct taxes, repairs, or 
other expenses to determine the gross income 
from rental property.
Page 35 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 33

Gross income includes a partner's share of 
the gross (not a share of the net) partnership in-
come.
Gross income also includes all taxable un-
employment compensation, taxable social se-
curity benefits, and certain scholarship and fel-
lowship grants. Scholarships received by 
degree candidates and used for tuition, fees, 
supplies, books, and equipment required for 
particular courses generally aren't included in 
gross income. For more information about 
scholarships, see chapter 12.
Disabled dependent working at sheltered 
workshop. For purposes of the gross income 
test, the gross income of an individual who is 
permanently and totally disabled at any time 
during the year doesn't include income for serv-
ices the individual performs at a sheltered work-
shop. The availability of medical care at the 
workshop must be the main reason for the indi-
vidual's presence there. Also, the income must 
come solely from activities at the workshop that 
are incident to this medical care.
A “sheltered workshop” is a school that:
Provides special instruction or training de-
signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-
vidual, and
Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-
zations, or by a state, a U.S. possession, a 
political subdivision of a state or posses-
sion, the United States, or the District of 
Columbia.
“Permanently and totally disabled”  has the 
same meaning here as under Qualifying Child, 
earlier.
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying 
Relative)
To meet this test, you generally must provide 
more than half of a person's total support during 
the calendar year.
However, if two or more persons provide 
support, but no one person provides more than 
half of a person's total support, see Multiple 
Support Agreement, later.
How to determine if support test is met. 
You figure whether you have provided more 
than half of a person's total support by compar-
ing the amount you contributed to that person's 
support with the entire amount of support that 
person received from all sources. This includes 
support the person provided from his or her 
own funds.
You may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful in figur-
ing whether you provided more than half of a 
person's support.
Person's own funds not used for support. 
A person's own funds aren't support unless they 
are actually spent for support.
Example. Your mother received $2,400 in 
social security benefits and $300 in interest. 
She paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recre-
ation. She put $300 in a savings account.
Even though your mother received a total of 
$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400 
($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If you 
spent more than $2,400 for her support and no 
other support was received, you have provided 
more than half of her support.
Child's wages used for own support.  You 
can’t include in your contribution to your child's 
support any support paid for by the child with 
the child's own wages, even if you paid the wa-
ges.
Year support is provided.  The year you pro-
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even 
if you do so with borrowed money that you re-
pay in a later year.
If you use a fiscal year to report your in-
come, you must provide more than half of the 
dependent's support for the calendar year in 
which your fiscal year begins.
Armed Forces dependency allotments.  The 
part of the allotment contributed by the govern-
ment and the part taken out of your military pay 
are both considered provided by you in figuring 
whether you provide more than half of the sup-
port. If your allotment is used to support per-
sons other than those you name, you can take 
the exemptions for them if they otherwise qual-
ify.
Example. You are in the Armed Forces. 
You authorize an allotment for your widowed 
mother that she uses to support herself and her 
sister. If the allotment provides more than half of 
each person's support, you can take an exemp-
tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify, 
even though you authorize the allotment only 
for your mother.
Tax-exempt military quarters allowances.
These allowances are treated the same way as 
dependency allotments in figuring support. The 
allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic al-
lowance for quarters are both considered as 
provided by you for support.
Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's to-
tal support, include tax-exempt income, sav-
ings, and borrowed amounts used to support 
that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, 
nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed 
Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, 
and tax-exempt interest.
Example 1.  You provide $4,000 toward 
your mother's support during the year. She has 
earned income of $600, nontaxable social se-
curity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter-
est of $200. She uses all these for her support. 
You can’t claim an exemption for your mother 
because the $4,000 you provide isn't more than 
half of her total support of $9,600 ($4,000 + 
$600 + $4,800 + $200).
Example 2. Your niece takes out a student 
loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her college tui-
tion. She is personally responsible for the loan. 
You provide $2,000 toward her total support. 
You can’t claim an exemption for her because 
you provide less than half of her support.
Social security benefits.  If a married cou-
ple receives benefits that are paid by one check 
made out to both of them, half of the total paid 
is considered to be for the support of each 
spouse, unless they can show otherwise.
If a child receives social security benefits 
and uses them toward his or her own support, 
the benefits are considered as provided by the 
child.
Support provided by the state (welfare, 
food stamps, housing, etc.).  Benefits provi-
ded by the state to a needy person generally 
are considered support provided by the state. 
However, payments based on the needs of the 
recipient won't be considered as used entirely 
for that person's support if it is shown that part 
of the payments weren't used for that purpose.
Foster care.  Payments you receive for the 
support of a foster child from a child placement 
agency are considered support provided by the 
agency. See Foster care payments and expen-
ses, earlier.
Home for the aged.  If you make a lump-sum 
advance payment to a home for the aged to 
take care of your relative for life and the pay-
ment is based on that person's life expectancy, 
the amount of support you provide each year is 
the lump-sum payment divided by the relative's 
life expectancy. The amount of support you pro-
vide also includes any other amounts you provi-
ded during the year.
Total Support
To figure if you provided more than half of a 
person's support, you must first determine the 
total support provided for that person. Total 
support includes amounts spent to provide 
food, lodging, clothing, education, medical and 
dental care, recreation, transportation, and sim-
ilar necessities.
Generally, the amount of an item of support 
is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support 
is the fair rental value of the lodging.
Expenses not directly related to any one 
member of a household, such as the cost of 
food for the household, must be divided among 
the members of the household.
Example 1.  Grace Brown, mother of Mary 
Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and their 
two children. Grace gets social security benefits 
of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-
portation, and recreation. Grace has no other 
income. Frank and Mary's total food expense 
for the household is $5,200. They pay Grace's 
medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair 
rental value of the lodging provided for Grace is 
$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar 
rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support 
as follows:
Fair rental value of lodging ........ $ 1,800 
Clothing, transportation, and 
recreation ................. 2,400 
Medical expenses ............. 1,200 
Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) ....... 1,040 
Total support ............... $6,440 
The support Frank and Mary provide, 
$4,040 ($1,800 lodging + $1,200 medical ex-
penses + $1,040 food), is more than half of 
Grace's $6,440 total support.
Example 2. Your parents live with you, your 
spouse, and your two children in a house you 
own. The fair rental value of your parents' share 
of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each), 
which includes furnishings and utilities. Your 
Page 36 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 34 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

father receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200, 
which he spends equally between your mother 
and himself for items of support such as cloth-
ing, transportation, and recreation. Your total 
food expense for the household is $6,000. Your 
heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Your 
mother has hospital and medical expenses of 
$600, which you pay during the year. Figure 
your parents' total support as follows:
Support provided Father Mother 
Fair rental value of lodging ... $1,000 $1,000 
Pension spent for their 
support ............. 2,100 2,100 
Share of food (1/6 of 
$6,000) ............ 1,000 1,000 
Medical expenses for 
mother ............. 600 
Parents' total support .... $4,100 $4,700 
You must apply the support test separately 
to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000 
lodging + $1,000 food) of your father's total sup-
port of $4,100 — less than half. You provide 
$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging + $1,000 
food + $600 medical) — more than half of her 
total support of $4,700. You meet the support 
test for your mother, but not your father. Heat 
and utility costs are included in the fair rental 
value of the lodging, so these aren't considered 
separately.
Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, 
you are considered to provide support equal to 
the fair rental value of the room, apartment, 
house, or other shelter in which the person 
lives. Fair rental value includes a reasonable al-
lowance for the use of furniture and appliances, 
and for heat and other utilities that are provided.
Fair rental value defined.  Fair rental value 
is the amount you could reasonably expect to 
receive from a stranger for the same kind of 
lodging. It is used instead of actual expenses 
such as taxes, interest, depreciation, paint, in-
surance, utilities, and the cost of furniture and 
appliances. In some cases, fair rental value 
may be equal to the rent paid.
If you provide the total lodging, the amount 
of support you provide is the fair rental value of 
the room the person uses, or a share of the fair 
rental value of the entire dwelling if the person 
has use of your entire home. If you don’t pro-
vide the total lodging, the total fair rental value 
must be divided depending on how much of the 
total lodging you provide. If you provide only a 
part and the person supplies the rest, the fair 
rental value must be divided between both of 
you according to the amount each provides.
Example. Your parents live rent free in a 
house you own. It has a fair rental value of 
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair 
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 
for the furniture. This doesn't include heat and 
utilities. The house is completely furnished with 
furniture belonging to your parents. You pay 
$600 for their utility bills. Utilities aren't usually 
included in rent for houses in the area where 
your parents live. Therefore, you consider the 
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished 
house + $1,800 allowance for the furnishings 
provided by your parents + $600 cost of utilities) 
of which you are considered to provide $4,200 
($3,600 + $600).
Person living in his or her own home. 
The total fair rental value of a person's home 
that he or she owns is considered support con-
tributed by that person.
Living with someone rent free.  If you live 
with a person rent free in his or her home, you 
must reduce the amount you provide for sup-
port of that person by the fair rental value of 
lodging he or she provides you.
Property. Property provided as support is 
measured by its fair market value. Fair market 
value is the price that property would sell for on 
the open market. It is the price that would be 
agreed upon between a willing buyer and a will-
ing seller, with neither being required to act, and 
both having reasonable knowledge of the rele-
vant facts.
Capital expenses.  Capital items, such as 
furniture, appliances, and cars, bought for a 
person during the year can be included in total 
support under certain circumstances.
The following examples show when a capi-
tal item is or isn't support.
Example 1.  You buy a $200 power lawn 
mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is 
given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. Be-
cause the lawn mower benefits all members of 
the household, don’t include the cost of the 
lawn mower in the support of your child.
Example 2.  You buy a $150 television set 
as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child. 
The television set is placed in your child's bed-
room. You can include the cost of the television 
set in the support of your child.
Example 3.  You pay $5,000 for a car and 
register it in your name. You and your 
17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-
cause you own the car and don’t give it to your 
daughter but merely let her use it, don’t include 
the cost of the car in your daughter's total sup-
port. However, you can include in your daugh-
ter's support your out-of-pocket expenses of 
operating the car for her benefit.
Example 4.  Your 17-year-old son, using 
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-
vide the rest of your son's support, $4,000. Be-
cause the car is bought and owned by your son, 
the car's fair market value ($4,500) must be in-
cluded in his support. Your son has provided 
more than half of his own total support of 
$8,500 ($4,500 + $4,000), so he isn't your quali-
fying child. You didn't provide more than half of 
his total support, so he isn't your qualifying rela-
tive. You can’t claim an exemption for your son.
Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur-
ance premiums you pay, including premiums for 
supplementary Medicare coverage, are inclu-
ded in the support you provide.
Medical insurance benefits.  Medical in-
surance benefits, including basic and supple-
mentary Medicare benefits, aren't part of sup-
port.
Tuition payments and allowances under the 
GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the GI 
Bill for tuition payments and allowances while 
they attend school are included in total support.
Example. During the year, your son re-
ceives $2,200 from the government under the 
GI Bill. He uses this amount for his education. 
You provide the rest of his support, $2,000. Be-
cause GI benefits are included in total support, 
your son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 + 
$2,000). You haven't provided more than half of 
his support.
Child care expenses.  If you pay someone to 
provide child or dependent care, you can in-
clude these payments in the amount you provi-
ded for the support of your child or disabled de-
pendent, even if you claim a credit for the 
payments. For information on the credit, see 
chapter 32.
Other support items.  Other items may be 
considered as support depending on the facts 
in each case.
Don’t Include
in Total Support
The following items aren't included in total sup-
port.
1. Federal, state, and local income taxes 
paid by persons from their own income. 
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid 
by persons from their own income. 
3. Life insurance premiums. 
4. Funeral expenses. 
5. Scholarships received by your child if your 
child is a student.
6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educational 
Assistance payments used for the support 
of the child who receives them.
Multiple Support Agreement
Sometimes no one provides more than half of 
the support of a person. Instead, two or more 
persons, each of whom would be able to take 
the exemption but for the support test, together 
provide more than half of the person's support.
When this happens, you can agree that any 
one of you who individually provides more than 
10% of the person's support, but only one, can 
claim an exemption for that person as a qualify-
ing relative. Each of the others must sign a 
statement agreeing not to claim the exemption 
for that year. The person who claims the ex-
emption must keep these signed statements for 
his or her records. A multiple support declara-
tion identifying each of the others who agreed 
not to claim the exemption must be attached to 
the return of the person claiming the exemption. 
Form 2120 can be used for this purpose.
You can claim an exemption under a multi-
ple support agreement for someone related to 
you or for someone who lived with you all year 
as a member of your household.
Example 1. You, your sister, and your two 
brothers provide the entire support of your 
mother for the year. You provide 45%, your sis-
ter 35%, and your two brothers each provide 
Page 37 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 35

10%. Either you or your sister can claim an ex-
emption for your mother. The other must sign a 
statement agreeing not to take an exemption for 
your mother. The one who claims the exemp-
tion must attach Form 2120, or a similar decla-
ration, to his or her return and must keep the 
statement signed by the other for his or her re-
cords. Because neither brother provides more 
than 10% of the support, neither can take the 
exemption and neither has to sign a statement.
Example 2. You and your brother each pro-
vide 20% of your mother's support for the year. 
The remaining 60% of her support is provided 
equally by two persons who aren't related to 
her. She doesn't live with them. Because more 
than half of her support is provided by persons 
who can’t claim an exemption for her, no one 
can take the exemption.
Example 3.  Your father lives with you and 
receives 25% of his support from social secur-
ity, 40% from you, 24% from his brother (your 
uncle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or 
your uncle can take the exemption for your fa-
ther if the other signs a statement agreeing not 
to. The one who takes the exemption must at-
tach Form 2120, or a similar declaration, to his 
return and must keep for his records the signed 
statement from the one agreeing not to take the 
exemption.
Support Test for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or 
Parents Who Live Apart)
In most cases, a child of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart) will be a 
qualifying child of one of the parents. See Chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart)  under Qualifying Child , 
earlier. However, if the child doesn't meet the 
requirements to be a qualifying child of either 
parent, the child may be a qualifying relative of 
one of the parents. If you think this might apply 
to you, see Pub. 501.
Phaseout of 
Exemptions
You lose at least part of the benefit of your ex-
emptions if your adjusted gross income (AGI) is 
above a certain amount. For 2017, the phase-
out begins at the following amounts.
Filing Status
AGI Level That Reduces 
Exemption Amount
Married filing separately ......... $156,900
Single .................. 261,500
Head of household ............ 287,650
Married filing jointly ............ 313,800
Qualifying widow(er) ........... 313,800
You must reduce the dollar amount of your 
exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part of 
$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-
rately), that your AGI exceeds the amount 
shown above for your filing status. If your AGI 
exceeds the amount shown above by more 
than $122,500 ($61,250 if married filing sepa-
rately), the amount of your deduction for ex-
emptions is reduced to zero.
If your AGI exceeds the level for your filing 
status, use Worksheet 3-2 to figure the amount 
of your deduction for exemptions.
Social Security
Numbers for
Dependents
You must show the social security number 
(SSN) of any dependent for whom you claim an 
exemption in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 
1040 or Form 1040A.
If you don’t show the dependent's SSN 
when required or if you show an incor-
rect SSN, the exemption may be disal-
lowed.
No SSN.  If a person for whom you expect to 
claim an exemption on your return doesn't have 
an SSN, either you or that person should apply 
for an SSN as soon as possible by filing Form 
SS-5, Application for a Social Security Card, 
with the Social Security Administration (SSA). 
You can get Form SS-5 online at SSA.gov or at 
your local SSA office.
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN 
once the SSA has all the information it needs. If 
you don’t have a required SSN by the filing due 
date, you can file Form 4868 for an extension of 
time to file.
Born and died in 2017.  If your child was 
born and died in 2017, and you don’t have an 
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the 
child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-
pital records instead. The document must show 
the child was born alive. If you do this, enter 
“DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 
1040 or Form 1040A. 
Alien or adoptee with no SSN.  If your de-
pendent doesn't have and can’t get an SSN, 
you must list the individual taxpayer 
CAUTION
!
Worksheet for Determining the Deduction for Exemptions Worksheet 3-2. Keep for Your Records
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 38, more than the amount on line 4 below for your filing status?
No. Stop. Multiply $4,050 by the total number of exemptions claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 
and enter the result on Form 1040, line 42.
Yes. Continue.
2. Multiply $4,050 by the total number of exemptions claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 ........... 2.  
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38 .................................. 3. 
4. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 
status:
Married filing separately—$156,900
Single—$261,500
Head of household—$287,650
Married filing jointly or Qualifying 
widow(er)—$313,800
............................. 4. 
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If the result is more than $122,500 ($61,250 if 
married filing separately), stop here. You can’t take a deduction for 
exemptions .............................................................. 5. 
6. Divide line 5 by $2,500 ($1,250 if married filing separately). If the result isn't a 
whole number, round it up to the next higher whole number (for example, 
increase .00004 to 1) ..................................................... 6. 
7. Multiply line 6 by 2% (0.02) and enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at 
least three places) ....................................................... 7. 
8. Multiply line 2 by line 7 .................................................... 8.  
9. Deduction for exemptions. Subtract line 8 from line 2. Enter the result here 
and on Form 1040, line 42 ................................................ 9.  
Page 38 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 36 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

identification number (ITIN) or adoption tax-
payer identification number (ATIN) instead of an 
SSN.
Taxpayer identification numbers for ali-
ens. If your dependent is a resident or nonresi-
dent alien who doesn't have and isn't eligible to 
get an SSN, your dependent must apply for an 
individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). 
For details on how to apply, see Form W-7, Ap-
plication for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identifica-
tion Number.
Taxpayer identification numbers for 
adoptees. If you have a child who was placed 
with you by an authorized placement agency, 
you may be able to claim an exemption for the 
child. However, if you can’t get an SSN or an 
ITIN for the child, you must get an adoption tax-
payer identification number (ATIN) for the child 
from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Application for 
Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending 
U.S. Adoptions, for details.
Page 39 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 37

4.
Tax Withholding 
and Estimated 
Tax
What's New for 2018
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Tax law changes for 2018.  When you figure 
how much income tax you want withheld from 
your pay and when you figure your estimated 
tax, consider tax law changes effective in 2018. 
For more information, see Pub. 505, Tax With-
holding and Estimated Tax.
Reminders
Estimated tax safe harbor for higher in-
come taxpayers.  If your 2017 adjusted gross 
income was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if 
you are married filing a separate return), you 
must pay the smaller of 90% of your expected 
tax for 2018 or 110% of the tax shown on your 
2017 return to avoid an estimated tax penalty.
Introduction
This chapter discusses how to pay your tax as 
you earn or receive income during the year. In 
general, the federal income tax is a 
pay-as-you-go tax. There are two ways to pay 
as you go.
Withholding. If you are an employee, your 
employer probably withholds income tax 
from your pay. Tax also may be withheld 
from certain other income, such as pen-
sions, bonuses, commissions, and gam-
bling winnings. The amount withheld is 
paid to the IRS in your name. 
Estimated tax. If you don't pay your tax 
through withholding, or don't pay enough 
tax that way, you may have to pay 
estimated tax. People who are in business 
CAUTION
!
for themselves generally will have to pay 
their tax this way. Also, you may have to 
pay estimated tax if you receive income 
such as dividends, interest, capital gains, 
rent, and royalties. Estimated tax is used to 
pay not only income tax, but self-employ-
ment tax and alternative minimum tax as 
well. 
This chapter explains these methods. In ad-
dition, it also explains the following.
Credit for withholding and estimated 
tax. When you file your 2017 income tax 
return, take credit for all the income tax 
withheld from your salary, wages, pen-
sions, etc., and for the estimated tax you 
paid for 2017. Also take credit for any ex-
cess social security or railroad retirement 
tax withheld (discussed in chapter 38).
Underpayment penalty. If you didn't pay 
enough tax during the year, either through 
withholding or by making estimated tax 
payments, you may have to pay a penalty. 
In most cases, the IRS can figure this pen-
alty for you. See Underpayment Penalty for 
2017 at the end of this chapter. 
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Form (and Instructions)
Employee's Withholding Allowance 
Certificate
Withholding Certificate for Pension 
or Annuity Payments
Request for Federal Income Tax 
Withholding From Sick Pay
Voluntary Withholding Request
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by 
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Underpayment of Estimated Tax 
by Farmers and Fishermen
Tax Withholding
for 2018
This section discusses income tax withholding 
on:
Salaries and wages,
Tips,
Taxable fringe benefits,
Sick pay,
Pensions and annuities,
Gambling winnings,
Unemployment compensation, and
Certain federal payments.
This section explains the rules for withholding 
tax from each of these types of income.
This section also covers backup withholding 
on interest, dividends, and other payments.
  505
  W-4
  W-4P
  W-4S
  W-4V
  1040-ES
  2210
  2210-F
Salaries and Wages
Income tax is withheld from the pay of most em-
ployees. Your pay includes your regular pay, 
bonuses, commissions, and vacation allowan-
ces. It also includes reimbursements and other 
expense allowances paid under a nonaccounta-
ble plan. See Supplemental Wages , later, for 
more information about reimbursements and al-
lowances paid under a nonaccountable plan.
If your income is low enough that you won't 
have to pay income tax for the year, you may be 
exempt from withholding. This is explained un-
der Exemption From Withholding, later.
You can ask your employer to withhold in-
come tax from noncash wages and other wages 
not subject to withholding. If your employer 
doesn't agree to withhold tax, or if not enough is 
withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, as 
discussed later under Estimated Tax for 2018.
Military retirees.  Military retirement pay is 
treated in the same manner as regular pay for 
income tax withholding purposes, even though 
it is treated as a pension or annuity for other tax 
purposes.
Household workers.  If you are a household 
worker, you can ask your employer to withhold 
income tax from your pay. A household worker 
is an employee who performs household work 
in a private home, local college club, or local 
fraternity or sorority chapter.
Tax is withheld only if you want it withheld 
and your employer agrees to withhold it. If you 
don't have enough income tax withheld, you 
may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed 
later under Estimated Tax for 2018.
Farmworkers. Generally, income tax is with-
held from your cash wages for work on a farm 
unless your employer does both of these:
Pays you cash wages of less than $150 
during the year, and
Has expenditures for agricultural labor to-
taling less than $2,500 during the year.
Differential wage payments.  When employ-
ees are on leave from employment for military 
duty, some employers make up the difference 
between the military pay and civilian pay. Pay-
ments to an employee who is on active duty for 
a period of more than 30 days will be subject to 
income tax withholding, but not subject to social 
security, Medicare, or federal unemployment 
(FUTA) tax withholding. The wages and with-
holding will be reported on Form W-2, Wage 
and Tax Statement.
Determining Amount of Tax 
Withheld Using Form W-4
The amount of income tax your employer with-
holds from your regular pay depends on two 
things.
The amount you earn in each payroll pe-
riod.
The information you give your employer on 
Form W-4.
Page 40 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Form W-4 includes four types of information 
that your employer will use to figure your with-
holding.
Whether to withhold at the single rate or at 
the lower married rate.
How many withholding allowances you 
claim (each allowance reduces the amount 
withheld).
Whether you want an additional amount 
withheld.
Whether you are claiming an exemption 
from withholding in 2018. See Exemption 
From Withholding, later.
Note. You must specify a filing status and a 
number of withholding allowances on Form 
W-4. You can’t specify only a dollar amount of 
withholding.
New Job
When you start a new job, you must fill out Form 
W-4 and give it to your employer. Your em-
ployer should have copies of the form. If you 
need to change the information later, you must 
fill out a new form.
If you work only part of the year (for exam-
ple, you start working after the beginning of the 
year), too much tax may be withheld. You may 
be able to avoid overwithholding if your em-
ployer agrees to use the part-year method. See 
Part-Year Method in chapter 1 of Pub. 505 for 
more information.
Employee also receiving pension income. 
If you receive pension or annuity income and 
begin a new job, you will need to file Form W-4 
with your new employer. However, you can 
choose to split your withholding allowances be-
tween your pension and job in any manner.
Changing Your Withholding
During the year changes may occur to your 
marital status, exemptions, adjustments, de-
ductions, or credits you expect to claim on your 
tax return. When this happens, you may need to 
give your employer a new Form W-4 to change 
your withholding status or your number of allow-
ances.
If the changes reduce the number of allow-
ances you are claiming or changes your marital 
status from married to single, you must give 
your employer a new Form W-4 within 10 days.
Generally, you can submit a new Form W-4 
whenever you wish to change the number of 
your withholding allowances for any other rea-
son.
Changing your withholding for 2019.  If 
events in 2018 will decrease the number of your 
withholding allowances for 2019, you must give 
your employer a new Form W-4 by December 
1, 2018. If the event occurs in December 2018, 
submit a new Form W-4 within 10 days.
Checking Your Withholding
After you have given your employer a Form 
W-4, you can check to see whether the amount 
of tax withheld from your pay is too little or too 
much. If too much or too little tax is being with-
held, you should give your employer a new 
Form W-4 to change your withholding. You 
should try to have your withholding match your 
actual tax liability. If not enough tax is withheld, 
you will owe tax at the end of the year and may 
have to pay interest and a penalty. If too much 
tax is withheld, you will lose the use of that 
money until you get your refund. Always check 
your withholding if there are personal or finan-
cial changes in your life or changes in the law 
that might change your tax liability.
Note. You can’t give your employer a pay-
ment to cover withholding on salaries and wa-
ges for past pay periods or a payment for esti-
mated tax.
Completing Form W-4 and 
Worksheets
Form W-4 has worksheets to help you figure 
how many withholding allowances you can 
claim. The worksheets are for your own re-
cords. Don't give them to your employer.
Multiple jobs.  If you have income from more 
than one job at the same time, complete only 
one set of Form W-4 worksheets. Then split 
your allowances between the Forms W-4 for 
each job. You can’t claim the same allowances 
with more than one employer at the same time. 
You can claim all your allowances with one em-
ployer and none with the other(s), or divide 
them any other way.
Married individuals.  If both you and your 
spouse are employed and expect to file a joint 
return, figure your withholding allowances using 
your combined income, adjustments, deduc-
tions, exemptions, and credits. Use only one set 
of worksheets. You can divide your total allow-
ances any way, but you can’t claim an allow-
ance that your spouse also claims.
If you and your spouse expect to file sepa-
rate returns, figure your allowances using sepa-
rate worksheets based on your own individual 
income, adjustments, deductions, exemptions, 
and credits.
Alternative method of figuring withholding 
allowances. You don't have to use the Form 
W-4 worksheets if you use a more accurate 
method of figuring the number of withholding al-
lowances. For more information, see Alternative 
method of figuring withholding allowances un-
der Completing Form W-4 and Worksheets in 
Pub. 505, chapter 1.
Personal Allowances Worksheet.  Use the 
Personal Allowances Worksheet on Form W-4 
to figure your withholding allowances based on 
exemptions and any special allowances that 
apply.
Deduction and Adjustments Worksheet. 
Use the Deduction and Adjustments Worksheet 
on Form W-4 if you plan to itemize your deduc-
tions, claim certain credits, or claim adjust-
ments to the income on your 2018 tax return 
and you want to reduce your withholding. Also, 
complete this worksheet when you have 
changes to these items to see if you need to 
change your withholding.
Two-Earners/Multiple Jobs Worksheet.  You 
may need to complete the Two-Earners/Multi-
ple Jobs Worksheet on Form W-4 if you have 
more than one job, a working spouse, or are 
also receiving a pension. Also, on this work-
sheet you can add any additional withholding 
necessary to cover any amount you expect to 
owe other than income tax, such as self-em-
ployment tax.
Getting the Right Amount of Tax 
Withheld
In most situations, the tax withheld from your 
pay will be close to the tax you figure on your 
return if you follow these two rules.
You accurately complete all the Form W-4 
worksheets that apply to you.
You give your employer a new Form W-4 
when changes occur.
But because the worksheets and withhold-
ing methods don't account for all possible situa-
tions, you may not be getting the right amount 
withheld. This is most likely to happen in the fol-
lowing situations.
You are married and both you and your 
spouse work.
You have more than one job at a time.
You have nonwage income, such as inter-
est, dividends, alimony, unemployment 
compensation, or self-employment in-
come.
You will owe additional amounts with your 
return, such as self-employment tax.
Your withholding is based on obsolete 
Form W-4 information for a substantial part 
of the year.
Your earnings are more than the amount 
shown under Check your withholding in the 
instructions at the top of page 1 of Form 
W-4.
You work only part of the year.
You change the number of your withhold-
ing allowances during the year.
Cumulative wage method.  If you change the 
number of your withholding allowances during 
the year, too much or too little tax may have 
been withheld for the period before you made 
the change. You may be able to compensate for 
this if your employer agrees to use the cumula-
tive wage withholding method for the rest of the 
year. You must ask your employer in writing to 
use this method.
To be eligible, you must have been paid for 
the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi-
weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year.
Publication 505
To make sure you are getting the right amount 
of tax withheld, get Pub. 505. It will help you 
compare the total tax to be withheld during the 
year with the tax you can expect to figure on 
your return. It also will help you determine how 
much, if any, additional withholding is needed 
each payday to avoid owing tax when you file 
your return. If you don't have enough tax with-
held, you may have to pay estimated tax, as ex-
plained under Estimated Tax for 2018, later.
Page 41 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 39

You can use the IRS Withholding Cal-
culator at IRS.gov/W4App, instead of 
Pub. 505 or the worksheets included 
with Form W-4, to determine whether you need 
to have your withholding increased or de-
creased.
Rules Your Employer Must Follow
It may be helpful for you to know some of the 
withholding rules your employer must follow. 
These rules can affect how to fill out your Form 
W-4 and how to handle problems that may 
arise.
New Form W-4.  When you start a new job, 
your employer should have you complete a 
Form W-4. Beginning with your first payday, 
your employer will use the information you give 
on the form to figure your withholding.
If you later fill out a new Form W-4, your em-
ployer can put it into effect as soon as possible. 
The deadline for putting it into effect is the start 
of the first payroll period ending 30 or more 
days after you turn it in.
No Form W-4.  If you don't give your employer 
a completed Form W-4, your employer must 
withhold at the highest rate, as if you were sin-
gle and claimed no withholding allowances.
Repaying withheld tax.  If you find you are 
having too much tax withheld because you 
didn't claim all the withholding allowances you 
are entitled to, you should give your employer a 
new Form W-4. Your employer can’t repay any 
of the tax previously withheld. Instead, claim the 
full amount withheld when you file your tax re-
turn.
However, if your employer has withheld 
more than the correct amount of tax for the 
Form W-4 you have in effect, you don't have to 
fill out a new Form W-4 to have your withholding 
lowered to the correct amount. Your employer 
can repay the amount that was withheld incor-
rectly. If you aren’t repaid, your Form W-2 will 
reflect the full amount actually withheld, which 
you would claim when you file your tax return.
Exemption From Withholding
If you claim exemption from withholding, your 
employer won't withhold federal income tax 
from your wages. The exemption applies only to 
income tax, not to social security, Medicare, or 
FUTA tax withholding.
You can claim exemption from withholding 
for 2018 only if both of the following situations 
apply.
For 2017 you had a right to a refund of all 
federal income tax withheld because you 
had no tax liability.
For 2018 you expect a refund of all federal 
income tax withheld because you expect to 
have no tax liability.
Students. If you are a student, you aren’t auto-
matically exempt. See chapter 1  to find out if 
you must file a return. If you work only part time 
or only during the summer, you may qualify for 
exemption from withholding.
Age 65 or older or blind.  If you are 65 or 
older or blind, use Worksheet 1-3 or 1-4 in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 505, to help you decide if you 
TIP
qualify for exemption from withholding. Don't 
use either worksheet if you will itemize deduc-
tions, claim exemptions for dependents, or 
claim tax credits on your 2018 return. Instead, 
see Itemizing deductions or claiming exemp-
tions or credits in chapter 1 of Pub. 505.
Claiming exemption from withholding.  To 
claim exemption, you must give your employer 
a Form W-4. Don't complete lines 5 and 6. En-
ter “Exempt” on line 7.
If you claim exemption, but later your situa-
tion changes so that you will have to pay in-
come tax after all, you must file a new Form 
W-4 within 10 days after the change. If you 
claim exemption in 2018, but you expect to owe 
income tax for 2019, you must file a new Form 
W-4 by December 1, 2018.
Your claim of exempt status may be re-
viewed by the IRS.
An exemption is good for only 1 year. 
You must give your employer a new Form W-4 
by February 15 each year to continue your ex-
emption.
Supplemental Wages
Supplemental wages include bonuses, commis-
sions, overtime pay, vacation allowances, cer-
tain sick pay, and expense allowances under 
certain plans. The payer can figure withholding 
on supplemental wages using the same method 
used for your regular wages. However, if these 
payments are identified separately from your 
regular wages, your employer or other payer of 
supplemental wages can withhold income tax 
from these wages at a flat rate.
Expense allowances.  Reimbursements or 
other expense allowances paid by your em-
ployer under a nonaccountable plan are treated 
as supplemental wages.
Reimbursements or other expense allowan-
ces paid under an accountable plan that are 
more than your proven expenses are treated as 
paid under a nonaccountable plan if you don't 
return the excess payments within a reasonable 
period of time.
For more information about accountable and 
nonaccountable expense allowance plans, see 
Reimbursements in chapter 26.
Penalties
You may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both 
of the following apply.
You make statements or claim withholding 
allowances on your Form W-4 that reduce 
the amount of tax withheld.
You have no reasonable basis for those 
statements or allowances at the time you 
prepare your Form W-4.
There is also a criminal penalty for willfully 
supplying false or fraudulent information on 
your Form W-4 or for willfully failing to supply in-
formation that would increase the amount with-
held. The penalty upon conviction can be either 
a fine of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 
1 year, or both.
These penalties will apply if you deliberately 
and knowingly falsify your Form W-4 in an at-
tempt to reduce or eliminate the proper with-
holding of taxes. A simple error or an honest 
mistake won't result in one of these penalties. 
For example, a person who has tried to figure 
the number of withholding allowances correctly, 
but claims seven when the proper number is 
six, won't be charged a W-4 penalty.
Tips
The tips you receive while working on your job 
are considered part of your pay. You must in-
clude your tips on your tax return on the same 
line as your regular pay. However, tax isn't with-
held directly from tip income, as it is from your 
regular pay. Nevertheless, your employer will 
take into account the tips you report when figur-
ing how much to withhold from your regular pay.
See chapter 6  for information on reporting 
your tips to your employer. For more informa-
tion on the withholding rules for tip income, see 
Pub. 531, Reporting Tip Income.
How employer figures amount to withhold. 
The tips you report to your employer are coun-
ted as part of your income for the month you re-
port them. Your employer can figure your with-
holding in either of two ways.
By withholding at the regular rate on the 
sum of your pay plus your reported tips.
By withholding at the regular rate on your 
pay plus a percentage of your reported 
tips.
Not enough pay to cover taxes.  If your regu-
lar pay isn't enough for your employer to with-
hold all the tax (including income tax and social 
security and Medicare taxes (or the equivalent 
railroad retirement tax)) due on your pay plus 
your tips, you can give your employer money to 
cover the shortage. See Giving your employer 
money for taxes in chapter 6.
Allocated tips.  Your employer shouldn't with-
hold income tax, Medicare tax, social security 
tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allocated 
tips. Withholding is based only on your pay plus 
your reported tips. Your employer should refund 
to you any incorrectly withheld tax. See Alloca-
ted Tips in chapter 6 for more information.
Taxable Fringe Benefits
The value of certain noncash fringe benefits you 
receive from your employer is considered part 
of your pay. Your employer generally must with-
hold income tax on these benefits from your 
regular pay.
For information on fringe benefits, see 
Fringe Benefits under Employee Compensation 
in chapter 5.
Although the value of your personal use of 
an employer-provided car, truck, or other high-
way motor vehicle is taxable, your employer can 
choose not to withhold income tax on that 
amount. Your employer must notify you if this 
choice is made.
For more information on withholding on tax-
able fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Pub. 505.
Sick Pay
Sick pay is a payment to you to replace your 
regular wages while you are temporarily absent 
from work due to sickness or personal injury. To 
Page 42 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 40 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

qualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plan 
to which your employer is a party.
If you receive sick pay from your employer 
or an agent of your employer, income tax must 
be withheld. An agent who doesn't pay regular 
wages to you may choose to withhold income 
tax at a flat rate.
However, if you receive sick pay from a third 
party who isn't acting as an agent of your em-
ployer, income tax will be withheld only if you 
choose to have it withheld. See Form W-4S , 
later.
If you receive payments under a plan in 
which your employer doesn't participate (such 
as an accident or health plan where you paid all 
the premiums), the payments aren’t sick pay 
and usually aren’t taxable.
Union agreements. If you receive sick pay un-
der a collective bargaining agreement between 
your union and your employer, the agreement 
may determine the amount of income tax with-
holding. See your union representative or your 
employer for more information.
Form W-4S. If you choose to have income tax 
withheld from sick pay paid by a third party, 
such as an insurance company, you must fill out 
Form W-4S. Its instructions contain a worksheet 
you can use to figure the amount you want with-
held. They also explain restrictions that may ap-
ply.
Give the completed form to the payer of your 
sick pay. The payer must withhold according to 
your directions on the form.
Estimated tax. If you don't request withholding 
on Form W-4S, or if you don't have enough tax 
withheld, you may have to make estimated tax 
payments. If you don't pay enough tax, either 
through estimated tax or withholding, or a com-
bination of both, you may have to pay a penalty. 
See Underpayment Penalty for 2017  at the end 
of this chapter.
Pensions and Annuities
Income tax usually will be withheld from your 
pension or annuity distributions unless you 
choose not to have it withheld. This rule applies 
to distributions from:
A traditional individual retirement arrange-
ment (IRA);
A life insurance company under an endow-
ment, annuity, or life insurance contract;
A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan;
A stock bonus plan; and
Any other plan that defers the time you re-
ceive compensation.
The amount withheld depends on whether 
you receive payments spread out over more 
than 1 year (periodic payments), within 1 year 
(nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible roll-
over distribution (ERD). Income tax withholding 
from an ERD is mandatory.
More information.  For more information on 
taxation of annuities and distributions (including 
ERDs) from qualified retirement plans, see 
chapter 10. For information on IRAs, see chap-
ter 17. For more information on withholding on 
pensions and annuities, including a discussion 
of Form W-4P, see Pensions and Annuities in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 505.
Gambling Winnings
Income tax is withheld at a flat 25% rate from 
certain kinds of gambling winnings.
Gambling winnings of more than $5,000 
from the following sources are subject to in-
come tax withholding.
Any sweepstakes; wagering pool, includ-
ing payments made to winners of poker 
tournaments; or lottery.
Any other wager, if the proceeds are at 
least 300 times the amount of the bet.
It doesn't matter whether your winnings are paid 
in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Winnings 
not paid in cash are taken into account at their 
fair market value.
Exception.  Gambling winnings from bingo, 
keno, and slot machines generally aren’t sub-
ject to income tax withholding. However, you 
may need to provide the payer with a social se-
curity number to avoid withholding. See Backup 
withholding on gambling winnings in chapter 1 
of Pub. 505. If you receive gambling winnings 
not subject to withholding, you may need to pay 
estimated tax. See Estimated Tax for 2018 , 
later.
If you don't pay enough tax, either through 
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination 
of both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un-
derpayment Penalty for 2017  at the end of this 
chapter.
Form W-2G.  If a payer withholds income tax 
from your gambling winnings, you should re-
ceive a Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Win-
nings, showing the amount you won and the 
amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on 
line 64 of Form 1040.
Unemployment 
Compensation
You can choose to have income tax withheld 
from unemployment compensation. To make 
this choice, fill out Form W-4V (or a similar form 
provided by the payer) and give it to the payer.
All unemployment compensation is taxable. 
If you don't have income tax withheld, you may 
have to pay estimated tax. See Estimated Tax 
for 2018, later.
If you don't pay enough tax, either through 
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination 
of both, you may have to pay a penalty. For in-
formation, see Underpayment Penalty for 2017 
at the end of this chapter.
Federal Payments
You can choose to have income tax withheld 
from certain federal payments you receive. 
These payments are:
1. Social security benefits,
2. Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,
3. Commodity credit corporation loans you 
choose to include in your gross income,
4. Payments under the Agricultural Act of 
1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), as amen-
ded, or title II of the Disaster Assistance 
Act of 1988, that are treated as insurance 
proceeds and that you receive because:
a. Your crops were destroyed or dam-
aged by drought, flood, or any other 
natural disaster, or
b. You were unable to plant crops be-
cause of a natural disaster described 
in (a), and
5. Any other payment under federal law as 
determined by the Secretary.
To make this choice, fill out Form W-4V (or a 
similar form provided by the payer) and give it 
to the payer.
If you don't choose to have income tax with-
held, you may have to pay estimated tax. See 
Estimated Tax for 2018, later.
If you don't pay enough tax, either through 
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination 
of both, you may have to pay a penalty. For in-
formation, see Underpayment Penalty for 2017 
at the end of this chapter.
More information. For more information about 
the tax treatment of social security and railroad 
retirement benefits, see chapter 11 . Get Pub. 
225, Farmer's Tax Guide, for information about 
the tax treatment of commodity credit corpora-
tion loans or crop disaster payments.
Backup Withholding
Banks or other businesses that pay you certain 
kinds of income must file an information return 
(Form 1099) with the IRS. The information re-
turn shows how much you were paid during the 
year. It also includes your name and taxpayer 
identification number (TIN). TINs are explained 
in chapter 1 under Social Security Number 
(SSN).
These payments generally aren’t subject to 
withholding. However, “backup” withholding is 
required in certain situations. Backup withhold-
ing can apply to most kinds of payments that 
are reported on Form 1099.
The payer must withhold at a flat 28% rate in 
the following situations.
You don't give the payer your TIN in the re-
quired manner.
The IRS notifies the payer that the TIN you 
gave is incorrect.
You are required, but fail, to certify that you 
aren’t subject to backup withholding.
The IRS notifies the payer to start withhold-
ing on interest or dividends because you 
have underreported interest or dividends 
on your income tax return. The IRS will do 
this only after it has mailed you four notices 
over at least a 210-day period.
See Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 505 for more information.
Penalties. There are civil and criminal penal-
ties for giving false information to avoid backup 
withholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi-
nal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up to 
$1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both.
Page 43 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

Estimated Tax for 2018
Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax on 
income that isn't subject to withholding. This in-
cludes income from self-employment, interest, 
dividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale of 
assets, prizes, and awards. You also may have 
to pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax 
being withheld from your salary, pension, or 
other income isn't enough.
Estimated tax is used to pay both income 
tax and self-employment tax, as well as other 
taxes and amounts reported on your tax return. 
If you don't pay enough tax, either through with-
holding or estimated tax, or a combination of 
both, you may have to pay a penalty. If you 
don't pay enough by the due date of each pay-
ment period (see When To Pay Estimated Tax , 
later), you may be charged a penalty even if you 
are due a refund when you file your tax return. 
For information on when the penalty applies, 
see Underpayment Penalty for 2017  at the end 
of this chapter.
Who Doesn't Have To Pay 
Estimated Tax
If you receive salaries or wages, you can avoid 
having to pay estimated tax by asking your em-
ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. To 
do this, give a new Form W-4 to your employer. 
See chapter 1 of Pub. 505.
Estimated tax not required.  You don't have 
to pay estimated tax for 2018 if you meet all 
three of the following conditions.
You had no tax liability for 2017.
You were a U.S. citizen or resident alien for 
the whole year.
Your 2017 tax year covered a 12-month 
period.
You had no tax liability for 2017 if your total 
tax was zero or you didn't have to file an income 
tax return. For the definition of “total tax” for 
2017, see Pub. 505, chapter 2.
Who Must Pay Estimated 
Tax
If you owe additional tax for 2017, you may 
have to pay estimated tax for 2018.
You can use the following general rule as a 
guide during the year to see if you will have 
enough withholding, or if you should increase 
your withholding or make estimated tax pay-
ments.
General rule. In most cases, you must pay es-
timated tax for 2018 if both of the following ap-
ply.
1. You expect to owe at least $1,000 in tax 
for 2018, after subtracting your withholding 
and refundable credits.
2. You expect your withholding plus your re-
fundable credits to be less than the 
smaller of:
a. 90% of the tax to be shown on your 
2018 tax return, or
b. 100% of the tax shown on your 2017 
tax return (but see Special rules for 
farmers, fishermen, and higher in-
come taxpayers, later). Your 2017 tax 
return must cover all 12 months.
If the result from using the general rule 
above suggests that you won't have 
enough withholding, complete the 
2018 Estimated Tax Worksheet in Pub. 505 for 
a more accurate calculation.
Special rules for farmers, fishermen, and 
higher income taxpayers.  If at least 
two-thirds of your gross income for tax year 
2017 or 2018 is from farming or fishing, substi-
tute 66 23% for 90% in (2a) under the General 
rule, earlier. If your AGI for 2017 was more than 
$150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2018 
is married filing a separate return), substitute 
110% for 100% in (2b) under General rule, ear-
lier. See Figure 4-A and Pub. 505, chapter 2, for 
more information.
Aliens.  Resident and nonresident aliens also 
may have to pay estimated tax. Resident aliens 
should follow the rules in this chapter unless no-
ted otherwise. Nonresident aliens should get 
Form 1040-ES (NR), U.S. Estimated Tax for 
Nonresident Alien Individuals.
You are an alien if you aren’t a citizen or na-
tional of the United States. You are a resident 
alien if you either have a green card or meet the 
substantial presence test. For more information 
about the substantial presence test, see Pub. 
519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Married taxpayers. If you qualify to make joint 
estimated tax payments, apply the rules dis-
cussed here to your joint estimated income.
You and your spouse can make joint estima-
ted tax payments even if you aren’t living to-
gether.
CAUTION
!
Figure 4-A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Start Here
No
Yes
Yes
NoNo
Yes
Will you owe $1,000 or more 
for 2018 after subtracting 
income tax withholding and 
refundable credits* from your 
total tax? (Don’t subtract any 
estimated tax payments.)
Will your income tax 
withholding and refundable 
credits* be at least 90%       
(662/3% for farmers and 
/f_ishermen) of the tax shown on 
your 2018 tax return?
Will your income tax 
withholding and refundable 
credits* be at least 100%** of 
the tax shown on your 2017 
tax return?
Note: Your 2017 return must 
have covered a 12-month 
period.
You are NOT required to pay 
estimated tax.
*Use the refundable credits shown on the 2018 Estimated Tax Worksheet.
**110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2017 and 2018 is from farming or /f_ishing and your 2017 
adjusted gross income was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if your /f_iling status for 2018 is married /f_iling a separate return).
You MUST make estimated 
tax payment(s) by the 
required due date(s).
See When To Pay 
Estimated Tax.
Page 44 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 42 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

However, you and your spouse can’t make 
joint estimated tax payments if:
You are legally separated under a decree 
of divorce or separate maintenance,
You and your spouse have different tax 
years, or
Either spouse is a nonresident alien (un-
less that spouse elected to be treated as a 
resident alien for tax purposes (see chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 519)).
If you don't qualify to make joint estimated 
tax payments, apply these rules to your sepa-
rate estimated income. Making joint or separate 
estimated tax payments won't affect your 
choice of filing a joint tax return or separate re-
turns for 2018.
2017 separate returns and 2018 joint re-
turn. If you plan to file a joint return with your 
spouse for 2018, but you filed separate returns 
for 2017, your 2017 tax is the total of the tax 
shown on your separate returns. You filed a 
separate return if you filed as single, head of 
household, or married filing separately.
2017 joint return and 2018 separate re-
turns. If you plan to file a separate return for 
2018 but you filed a joint return for 2017, your 
2017 tax is your share of the tax on the joint re-
turn. You file a separate return if you file as sin-
gle, head of household, or married filing sepa-
rately.
To figure your share of the tax on the joint 
return, first figure the tax both you and your 
spouse would have paid had you filed separate 
returns for 2017 using the same filing status as 
for 2018. Then multiply the tax on the joint re-
turn by the following fraction.
The tax you would have paid had 
you filed a separate return
The total tax you and your 
spouse would have paid had 
you filed separate returns
Example. Joe and Heather filed a joint re-
turn for 2017 showing taxable income of 
$48,500 and a tax of $6,346. Of the $48,500 
taxable income, $40,100 was Joe's and the rest 
was Heather's. For 2018, they plan to file mar-
ried filing separately. Joe figures his share of 
the tax on the 2017 joint return as follows.
Tax on $40,100 based on a 
separate return ....... $5,770
Tax on $8,400 based on a 
separate return .......  843
Total ............... $6,613
Joe's percentage of total 
($5,770 ÷ $6,613) ...... 87.3% 
Joe's share of tax on joint 
return 
($6,346 × 87.3%) ...... $5,540
How To Figure
Estimated Tax
To figure your estimated tax, you must figure 
your expected adjusted gross income (AGI), 
taxable income, taxes, deductions, and credits 
for the year.
When figuring your 2018 estimated tax, it 
may be helpful to use your income, deductions, 
and credits for 2017 as a starting point. Use 
your 2017 federal tax return as a guide. You 
can use Form 1040-ES and Pub. 505 to figure 
your estimated tax. Nonresident aliens use 
Form 1040-ES (NR) and Pub. 505 to figure esti-
mated tax (see chapter 8 of Pub. 519 for more 
information).
You must make adjustments both for 
changes in your own situation and for recent 
changes in the tax law. For a discussion of 
these changes, visit IRS.gov.
For more complete information on how to 
figure your estimated tax for 2018, see chap-
ter 2 of Pub. 505.
When To Pay Estimated 
Tax
For estimated tax purposes, the tax year is divi-
ded into four payment periods. Each period has 
a specific payment due date. If you don't pay 
enough tax by the due date of each payment 
period, you may be charged a penalty even if 
you are due a refund when you file your income 
tax return. The payment periods and due dates 
for estimated tax payments are shown next.
For the period: Due date:*
Jan. 1 – March 31 ..... April 17
April 1 – May 31 ...... June 15
June 1 – August 31 .... Sept. 17
Sept. 1– Dec. 31 ...... Jan. 15, next year
. 
*See Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule and 
January payment.
Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule.  If the due 
date for an estimated tax payment falls on a 
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the pay-
ment will be on time if you make it on the next 
day that isn't a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holi-
day.
January payment.  If you file your 2018 Form 
1040 or Form 1040A by January 31, 2019, and 
pay the rest of the tax you owe, you don't need 
to make the payment due on January 15, 2019.
Fiscal year taxpayers. If your tax year doesn't 
start on January 1, see the Form 1040-ES in-
structions for your payment due dates.
When To Start
You don't have to make estimated tax pay-
ments until you have income on which you will 
owe income tax. If you have income subject to 
estimated tax during the first payment period, 
you must make your first payment by the due 
date for the first payment period. You can pay 
all your estimated tax at that time, or you can 
pay it in installments. If you choose to pay in in-
stallments, make your first payment by the due 
date for the first payment period. Make your re-
maining installment payments by the due dates 
for the later periods.
No income subject to estimated tax during 
first period.  If you don't have income subject 
to estimated tax until a later payment period, 
you must make your first payment by the due 
date for that period. You can pay your entire es-
timated tax by the due date for that period or 
you can pay it in installments by the due date 
for that period and the due dates for the remain-
ing periods. The following chart shows when to 
make installment payments.
If you first have 
income on 
which you must 
pay estimated 
tax: 
Make a
payment 
by:*
Make later
installments
by:*
Before April 1 April 17 June 15
Sept. 17
Jan. 15, next year
April 1–May 31 June 15 Sept. 17
Jan. 15, next year 
June 1–Aug. 31 Sept. 17 Jan. 15, next year
After Aug. 31 Jan. 15,
next year
(None) 
*See Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule and January 
payment. 
How much to pay to avoid a penalty.  To de-
termine how much you should pay by each pay-
ment due date, see How To Figure Each Pay-
ment next.
How To Figure
Each Payment
You should pay enough estimated tax by the 
due date of each payment period to avoid a 
penalty for that period. You can figure your re-
quired payment for each period by using either 
the regular installment method or the annual-
ized income installment method. These meth-
ods are described in chapter 2 of Pub. 505. If 
you don't pay enough during each payment pe-
riod, you may be charged a penalty even if you 
are due a refund when you file your tax return.
If the earlier discussion of No income sub-
ject to estimated tax during first period  or the 
later discussion of Change in estimated tax  ap-
plies to you, you may benefit from reading An-
nualized Income Installment Method in chap-
ter 2 of Pub. 505 for information on how to avoid 
a penalty.
Underpayment penalty. Under the regular in-
stallment method, if your estimated tax payment 
for any period is less than one-fourth of your es-
timated tax, you may be charged a penalty for 
underpayment of estimated tax for that period 
when you file your tax return. Under the annual-
ized income installment method, your estimated 
tax payments vary with your income, but the 
amount required must be paid each period. See 
chapter 4 of Pub. 505 for more information.
Change in estimated tax.  After you make an 
estimated tax payment, changes in your in-
come, adjustments, deductions, credits, or ex-
emptions may make it necessary for you to re-
figure your estimated tax. Pay the unpaid 
balance of your amended estimated tax by the 
Page 45 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 43

next payment due date after the change or in in-
stallments by that date and the due dates for 
the remaining payment periods.
Estimated Tax Payments
Not Required
You don't have to pay estimated tax if your with-
holding in each payment period is at least as 
much as:
One-fourth of your required annual pay-
ment, or
Your required annualized income install-
ment for that period.
You also don't have to pay estimated tax if you 
will pay enough through withholding to keep the 
amount you owe with your return under $1,000.
How To Pay Estimated Tax
There are several ways to pay estimated tax.
Credit an overpayment on your 2017 return 
to your 2018 estimated tax.
Pay by direct transfer from your bank ac-
count, or pay by debit or credit card using 
a pay-by-phone system or the Internet.
Send in your payment (check or money or-
der) with a payment voucher from Form 
1040-ES.
Credit an Overpayment
If you show an overpayment of tax after com-
pleting your Form 1040 or Form 1040A for 
2017, you can apply part or all of it to your esti-
mated tax for 2018. On line 77 of Form 1040, or 
line 49 of Form 1040A, enter the amount you 
want credited to your estimated tax rather than 
refunded. Take the amount you have credited 
into account when figuring your estimated tax 
payments.
You can’t have any of the amount you credi-
ted to your estimated tax refunded to you until 
you file your tax return for the following year. 
You also can’t use that overpayment in any 
other way.
Pay Online
The IRS offers an electronic payment option 
that is right for you. Paying online is convenient, 
secure, and helps make sure we get your pay-
ments on time. To pay your taxes online or for 
more information, go to IRS.gov/Payments. You 
can pay using any of the following methods.
IRS Direct Pay for online transfers directly 
from your checking or savings account at 
no cost to you, go to IRS.gov/Payments.
Pay by Card. To pay by debit or credit 
card, go to IRS.gov/Payments. A conven-
ience fee is charged by these service pro-
viders.
Electronic Funds Withdrawal (EFW) is 
an integrated e-file/e-pay option offered 
when filing your federal taxes electronically 
using tax preparation software, through a 
tax professional, or the IRS at IRS.gov/
Payments.
Online Payment Agreement. If you can’t 
pay in full by the due date of your tax re-
turn, you can apply for an online monthly 
installment agreement at IRS.gov/
Payments. Once you complete the online 
process, you will receive immediate notifi-
cation of whether your agreement has 
been approved. A user fee is charged.
IRS2GO is the mobile application of the 
IRS. You can access Direct Pay or Pay By 
Card by downloading the application.
Pay by Phone
Paying by phone is another safe and secure 
method of paying electronically. Use one of the 
following methods (1) call one of the debit or 
credit card providers, or (2) use the Electronic 
Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS).
Debit or credit card.  Call one of our service 
providers. Each charges a fee that varies by 
provider, card type, and payment amount.
WorldPay US, Inc.
1-844-PAY-TAX-8TM (1-844-729-8298)
www.payUSAtax.com
Official Payments Corporation
1-888-UPAY-TAXTM (1-888-872-9829)
www.officialpayments.com
Link2Gov Corporation
1-888-PAY-1040TM (1-888-729-1040)
www.PAY1040.com
EFTPS. To use EFTPS, you must be enrolled 
either online or have an enrollment form mailed 
to you. To make a payment using EFTPS, call 
1-800-555-4477 (English) or 1-800-244-4829 
(Español). People who are deaf, hard of hear-
ing, or have a speech disability and who have 
access to TTY/TDD equipment can call 
1-800-733-4829. For more information about 
EFTPS, go to IRS.gov/Payments or 
www.EFTPS.gov.
Pay by Mobile Device
To pay through your mobile device, download 
the IRS2Go application.
Pay by Cash
Cash is an in-person payment option for individ-
uals provided through retail partners with a 
maximum of $1,000 per day per transaction. To 
make a cash payment, you must first be regis-
tered online at www.officialpayments.com, our 
Official Payment provider.
Pay by Check or Money Order 
Using the Estimated Tax
Payment Voucher
Before submitting a payment through the mail 
using the estimated tax payment voucher, 
please consider alternative methods. One of 
our safe, quick, and easy electronic payment 
options might be right for you.
If you choose to mail in your payment, each 
payment of estimated tax by check or money 
order must be accompanied by a payment 
voucher from Form 1040-ES.
During 2017, if you:
made at least one estimated tax payment 
but not by electronic means,
didn't use software or a paid preparer to 
prepare or file your return,
then you should receive a copy of the 2018 
Form 1040-ES/V.
The enclosed payment vouchers will be pre-
printed with your name, address, and social se-
curity number. Using the preprinted vouchers 
will speed processing, reduce the chance of er-
ror, and help save processing costs.
Use the window envelopes that came with 
your Form 1040-ES package. If you use your 
own envelopes, make sure you mail your pay-
ment vouchers to the address shown in the 
Form 1040-ES instructions for the place where 
you live.
No checks of $100 million or more accep-
ted.  The IRS can’t accept a single check (in-
cluding a cashier’s check) for amounts of 
$100,000,000 ($100 million) or more. If you are 
sending $100 million or more by check, you’ll 
need to spread the payment over 2 or more 
checks with each check made out for an 
amount less than $100 million. This limit does 
not apply to other methods of payment (such as 
electronic payments). Please consider a 
method of payment other than check if the 
amount of the payment is over $100 million.
Note. These criteria can change without no-
tice. If you don't receive a Form 1040-ES/V 
package and you are required to make an esti-
mated tax payment, you should go to IRS.gov/
Form1040ES and print a copy of Form 1040-ES 
which includes four blank payment vouchers. 
Complete one of these and make your payment 
timely to avoid penalties for paying late.
Don't use the address shown in the 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions 
for your estimated tax payments.
If you didn't pay estimated tax last year, you 
can order Form 1040-ES from the IRS (see the 
inside back cover of this publication) or down-
load it from IRS.gov. Follow the instructions to 
make sure you use the vouchers correctly.
Joint estimated tax payments.  If you file a 
joint return and are making joint estimated tax 
payments, enter the names and social security 
numbers on the payment voucher in the same 
order as they will appear on the joint return.
Change of address. You must notify the IRS if 
you are making estimated tax payments and 
you changed your address during the year. 
Complete Form 8822, Change of Address, and 
mail it to the address shown in the instructions 
for that form.
Credit for Withholding 
and Estimated Tax
for 2017
When you file your 2017 income tax return, take 
credit for all the income tax and excess social 
security or railroad retirement tax withheld from 
CAUTION
!
Page 46 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 44 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

your salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also take 
credit for the estimated tax you paid for 2017. 
These credits are subtracted from your total tax. 
Because these credits are refundable, you 
should file a return and claim these credits, 
even if you don't owe tax.
Two or more employers.  If you had two or 
more employers in 2017 and were paid wages 
of more than $127,200, too much social secur-
ity or tier 1 railroad retirement tax may have 
been withheld from your pay. You may be able 
to claim the excess as a credit against your in-
come tax when you file your return. See Credit 
for Excess Social Security Tax or Railroad Re-
tirement Tax Withheld in chapter 38.
Withholding
If you had income tax withheld during 2017, you 
should be sent a statement by January 31, 
2018, showing your income and the tax with-
held. Depending on the source of your income, 
you should receive:
Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement,
Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, 
or
A form in the 1099 series.
Forms W-2 and W-2G.  If you file a paper re-
turn, always file Form W-2 with your income tax 
return. File Form W-2G with your return only if it 
shows any federal income tax withheld from 
your winnings.
You should get at least two copies of each 
form. If you file a paper return, attach one copy 
to the front of your federal income tax return. 
Keep one copy for your records. You also 
should receive copies to file with your state and 
local returns.
Form W-2
Your employer is required to provide or send 
Form W-2 to you no later than January 31, 
2018. You should receive a separate Form W-2 
from each employer you worked for.
If you stopped working before the end of 
2017, your employer could have given you your 
Form W-2 at any time after you stopped work-
ing. However, your employer must provide or 
send it to you by January 31, 2018.
If you ask for the form, your employer must 
send it to you within 30 days after receiving your 
written request or within 30 days after your final 
wage payment, whichever is later.
If you haven't received your Form W-2 by 
January 31, you should ask your employer for it. 
If you don't receive it by early February, call the 
IRS.
Form W-2 shows your total pay and other 
compensation and the income tax, social secur-
ity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur-
ing the year. Include the federal income tax 
withheld (as shown in box 2 of Form W-2) on:
Line 64 if you file Form 1040,
Line 40 if you file Form 1040A, or
Line 7 if you file Form 1040EZ.
In addition, Form W-2 is used to report any tax-
able sick pay you received and any income tax 
withheld from your sick pay.
Form W-2G
If you had gambling winnings in 2017, the payer 
may have withheld income tax. If tax was with-
held, the payer will give you a Form W-2G 
showing the amount you won and the amount of 
tax withheld.
Report the amounts you won on line 21 of 
Form 1040. Take credit for the tax withheld on 
line 64 of Form 1040. If you had gambling win-
nings, you must use Form 1040; you can’t use 
Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
The 1099 Series
Most forms in the 1099 series aren’t filed with 
your return. These forms should be furnished to 
you by January 31, 2018 (or, for Forms 1099-B, 
1099-S, and certain Forms 1099-MISC, by Feb-
ruary 15, 2018). Unless instructed to file any of 
these forms with your return, keep them for your 
records. There are several different forms in this 
series, including:
Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and 
Barter Exchange Transactions;
Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distribu-
tions;
Form 1099-G, Certain Government Pay-
ments;
Form 1099-INT, Interest Income;
Form 1099-K, Payment Card and Third 
Party Network Transactions;
Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income;
Form 1099-OID, Original Issue Discount;
Form 1099-PATR, Taxable Distributions 
Received From Cooperatives;
Form 1099-Q, Payments From Qualified 
Education Programs;
Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen-
sions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-
ing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc.;
Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Real Estate 
Transactions;
Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Rail-
road Retirement Board.
If you received the types of income reported 
on some forms in the 1099 series, you may not 
be able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. 
See the instructions to these forms for details.
Form 1099-R. Attach Form 1099-R to your pa-
per return if box 4 shows federal income tax 
withheld. Include the amount withheld in the to-
tal on line 64 of Form 1040 or line 40 of Form 
1040A. You can’t use Form 1040EZ if you re-
ceived payments reported on Form 1099-R.
Backup withholding.  If you were subject to 
backup withholding on income you received 
during 2017, include the amount withheld, as 
shown on your Form 1099, in the total on line 64 
of Form 1040, line 40 of Form 1040A, or line 7 
of Form 1040EZ.
Form Not Correct
If you receive a form with incorrect information 
on it, you should ask the payer for a corrected 
form. Call the telephone number or write to the 
address given for the payer on the form. The 
corrected Form W-2G or Form 1099 you re-
ceive will have an “X” in the “CORRECTED” box 
at the top of the form. A special form, Form 
W-2c, Corrected Wage and Tax Statement, is 
used to correct a Form W-2.
In certain situations, you will receive two 
forms in place of the original incorrect form. 
This will happen when your taxpayer identifica-
tion number is wrong or missing, your name 
and address are wrong, or you received the 
wrong type of form (for example, a Form 
1099-DIV instead of a Form 1099-INT). One 
new form you receive will be the same incorrect 
form or have the same incorrect information, but 
all money amounts will be zero. This form will 
have an “X” in the “CORRECTED” box at the 
top of the form. The second new form should 
have all the correct information, prepared as 
though it is the original (the “CORRECTED” box 
won't be checked).
Form Received After Filing
If you file your return and you later receive a 
form for income that you didn't include on your 
return, you should report the income and take 
credit for any income tax withheld by filing Form 
1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax 
Return.
Separate Returns
If you are married but file a separate return, you 
can take credit only for the tax withheld from 
your own income. Don't include any amount 
withheld from your spouse's income. However, 
different rules may apply if you live in a com-
munity property state.
Community property states are listed in 
chapter 2. For more information on these rules, 
and some exceptions, see Pub. 555, Commun-
ity Property.
Fiscal Years
If you file your tax return on the basis of a fiscal 
year (a 12-month period ending on the last day 
of any month except December), you must fol-
low special rules to determine your credit for 
federal income tax withholding. For a discus-
sion of how to take credit for withholding on a 
fiscal year return, see Fiscal Years (FY) in chap-
ter 3 of Pub. 505.
Estimated Tax
Take credit for all your estimated tax payments 
for 2017 on line 65 of Form 1040 or line 41 of 
Form 1040A. Include any overpayment from 
2016 that you had credited to your 2017 estima-
ted tax. You must use Form 1040 or Form 
1040A if you paid estimated tax. You can’t use 
Form 1040EZ.
Name changed.  If you changed your name, 
and you made estimated tax payments using 
your old name, attach a brief statement to the 
front of your paper tax return indicating:
When you made the payments,
The amount of each payment,
Your name when you made the payments, 
and
Page 47 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 45

Your social security number.
The statement should cover payments you 
made jointly with your spouse as well as any 
you made separately.
Be sure to report the change to the Social 
Security Administration. This prevents delays in 
processing your return and issuing any refunds.
Separate Returns
If you and your spouse made separate estima-
ted tax payments for 2017 and you file separate 
returns, you can take credit only for your own 
payments.
If you made joint estimated tax payments, 
you must decide how to divide the payments 
between your returns. One of you can claim all 
of the estimated tax paid and the other none, or 
you can divide it in any other way you agree on. 
If you can’t agree, you must divide the pay-
ments in proportion to each spouse's individual 
tax as shown on your separate returns for 2017.
Divorced Taxpayers
If you made joint estimated tax payments for 
2017, and you were divorced during the year, 
either you or your former spouse can claim all of 
the joint payments, or you each can claim part 
of them. If you can’t agree on how to divide the 
payments, you must divide them in proportion 
to each spouse's individual tax as shown on 
your separate returns for 2017.
If you claim any of the joint payments on 
your tax return, enter your former spouse's so-
cial security number (SSN) in the space provi-
ded on the front of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If 
you divorced and remarried in 2017, enter your 
present spouse's SSN in that space and write 
your former spouse's SSN, followed by “DIV,” to 
the left of Form 1040, line 65, or Form 1040A, 
line 41.
Underpayment Penalty 
for 2017
If you didn't pay enough tax, either through with-
holding or by making timely estimated tax pay-
ments, you will have an underpayment of esti-
mated tax and you may have to pay a penalty.
Generally, you won't have to pay a penalty 
for 2017 if any of the following apply.
The total of your withholding and estimated 
tax payments was at least as much as your 
2016 tax (or 110% of your 2016 tax if your 
AGI was more than $150,000, $75,000 if 
your 2017 filing status is married filing sep-
arately) and you paid all required estima-
ted tax payments on time;
The tax balance due on your 2017 return is 
no more than 10% of your total 2017 tax, 
and you paid all required estimated tax 
payments on time;
Your total 2017 tax minus your withholding 
and refundable credits is less than $1,000;
You didn't have a tax liability for 2016 and 
your 2016 tax year was 12 months; or
You didn't have any withholding taxes and 
your current year tax less any household 
employment taxes is less than $1,000.
See Pub. 505, chapter 4, for a definition of “total 
tax” for 2016 and 2017.
Farmers and fishermen. Special rules apply if 
you are a farmer or fisherman. See Farmers 
and Fishermen in chapter 4 of Pub. 505 for 
more information.
IRS can figure the penalty for you.  If you 
think you owe the penalty but you don't want to 
figure it yourself when you file your tax return, 
you may not have to. Generally, the IRS will fig-
ure the penalty for you and send you a bill. 
However, if you think you are able to lower or 
eliminate your penalty, you must complete 
Form 2210 or Form 2210-F and attach it to your 
paper return. See chapter 4 of Pub. 505.
Page 48 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 46 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Part Two.
Income The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They explain 
which income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information on gains 
and losses you report on Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040) and for 
information on selling your home.
5.
Wages, Salaries, 
and Other 
Earnings
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as California 
wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted, 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Reminder
Foreign income. If you’re a U.S. citizen or res-
ident alien, you must report income from sour-
ces outside the United States (foreign income) 
on your tax return unless it’s exempt by U.S. 
law. This is true whether you reside inside or 
outside the United States and whether or not 
you receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-
ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This 
applies to earned income (such as wages and 
tips) as well as unearned income (such as inter-
est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, 
and royalties).
If you reside outside the United States, you 
may be able to exclude part or all of your for-
eign source earned income. For details, see 
CAUTION
!
Pub. 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-
dent Aliens Abroad.
Introduction
This chapter discusses compensation received 
for services as an employee, such as wages, 
salaries, and fringe benefits. The following top-
ics are included.
Bonuses and awards.
Special rules for certain employees.
Sickness and injury benefits.
The chapter explains what income is inclu-
ded and isn’t included in the employee's gross 
income and what’s not included.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car 
Expenses
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Tax Guide for Seniors
Household Employer's Tax Guide
Tax Relief for Victims of Terrorist 
Attacks
Employee 
Compensation
This section discusses various types of em-
ployee compensation, including fringe benefits, 
retirement plan contributions, stock options, 
and restricted property.
Form W-2.  If you’re an employee, you should 
receive a Form W-2 from your employer show-
ing the pay you received for your services. In-
clude your pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 
1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you 
don’t receive a Form W-2.
In some instances your employer isn’t re-
quired to give you a Form W-2. Your employer 
isn’t required to give you a Form W-2 if you per-
form household work in your employer's home 
for less than $2,000 in cash wages during the 
calendar year and you have no federal income 
taxes withheld from your wages. Household 
work is work done in or around an employer's 
home. Some examples of workers who do 
household work are:
Babysitters,
Caretakers,
House cleaning workers,
  463
  525
  554
  926
  3920
Domestic workers,
Drivers,
Health aides,
Housekeepers,
Maids,
Nannies,
Private nurses, and
Yard workers.
See Schedule H (Form 1040), Household 
Employment Taxes, and its instructions, and 
Pub. 926, Household Employer's Tax Guide, for 
more information.
If you performed services, other than as an 
independent contractor, and your employer 
didn’t withhold social security and Medicare 
taxes from your pay, you must file Form 8919, 
Uncollected Social Security and Medicare Tax 
on Wages, with your Form 1040. See Form 
8919 and its instructions for more information 
on how to calculate unreported wages and 
taxes and how to include them on your income 
tax return.
Childcare providers. If you provide childcare, 
either in the child's home or in your home or 
other place of business, the pay you receive 
must be included in your income. If you aren’t 
an employee, you’re probably self-employed 
and must include payments for your services on 
Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From 
Business, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net 
Profit From Business. You generally aren’t an 
employee unless you’re subject to the will and 
control of the person who employs you as to 
what you’re to do and how you’re to do it.
Babysitting. If you’re paid to babysit, even 
for relatives or neighborhood children, whether 
on a regular basis or only periodically, the rules 
for childcare providers apply to you.
Employment tax.  Whether you're an em-
ployee or self-employed person, your income 
could be subject to self-employment tax. See 
the instructions for Schedule C and SE (Form 
1040) if you're self-employed. Also see Pub. 
926, Household Employer's Tax Guide, for 
more information.
Miscellaneous 
Compensation
This section discusses different types of em-
ployee compensation.
Advance commissions and other earnings.
If you receive advance commissions or other 
amounts for services to be performed in the fu-
ture and you’re a cash-method taxpayer, you 
Page 49 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 47

must include these amounts in your income in 
the year you receive them.
If you repay unearned commissions or other 
amounts in the same year you receive them, re-
duce the amount included in your income by the 
repayment. If you repay them in a later tax year, 
you can deduct the repayment as an itemized 
deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040), or 
you may be able to take a credit for that year. 
See Repayments in chapter 12.
Allowances and reimbursements.  If you re-
ceive travel, transportation, or other business 
expense allowances or reimbursements from 
your employer, see Pub. 463. If you’re reim-
bursed for moving expenses, see Pub. 521, 
Moving Expenses.
Back pay awards. If you receive an amount in 
payment of a settlement or judgment for back 
pay, you must include the amount of the pay-
ment in your income. This includes payments 
made to you for damages, unpaid life insurance 
premiums, and unpaid health insurance premi-
ums. They should be reported to you by your 
employer on Form W-2.
Bonuses and awards.  If you receive a bonus 
or award (cash, goods, services) from your em-
ployer, you must include its value in your in-
come. However, if your employer merely prom-
ises to pay you a bonus or award at some future 
time, it isn’t taxable until you receive it or it’s 
made available to you.
Employee achievement award.  If you re-
ceive tangible personal property (other than 
cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as 
an award for length of service or safety achieve-
ment, you generally can exclude its value from 
your income. The amount you can exclude is 
limited to your employer's cost and can’t be 
more than $1,600 for qualified plan awards or 
$400 for nonqualified plan awards for all such 
awards you receive during the year. Your em-
ployer can tell you whether your award is a 
qualified plan award. Your employer must make 
the award as part of a meaningful presentation, 
under conditions and circumstances that don’t 
create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
guised pay.
However, the exclusion doesn’t apply to the 
following awards.
A length-of-service award if you received it 
for less than 5 years of service or if you re-
ceived another length-of-service award 
during the year or the previous 4 years.
A safety achievement award if you’re a 
manager, administrator, clerical employee, 
or other professional employee or if more 
than 10% of eligible employees previously 
received safety achievement awards dur-
ing the year.
Example. Ben Green received three em-
ployee achievement awards during the year: a 
nonqualified plan award of a watch valued at 
$250, two qualified plan awards of a stereo val-
ued at $1,000, and a set of golf clubs valued at 
$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-
fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each 
award by itself would be excluded from income. 
However, because the $1,750 total value of the 
awards is more than $1,600, Ben must include 
$150 ($1,750 – $1,600) in his income.
Differential wage payments. This is any pay-
ment made to you by an employer for any pe-
riod during which you’re, for a period of more 
than 30 days, an active duty member of the uni-
formed services and represents all or a portion 
of the wages you would have received from the 
employer during that period. These payments 
are treated as wages and are subject to income 
tax withholding, but not FICA or FUTA taxes. 
The payments are reported as wages on Form 
W-2.
Government cost-of-living allowances.
Most payments received by U.S. Government 
civilian employees for working abroad are taxa-
ble. However, certain cost-of-living allowances 
are tax free. Pub. 516, U.S. Government Civil-
ian Employees Stationed Abroad, explains the 
tax treatment of allowances, differentials, and 
other special pay you receive for employment 
abroad.
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans.
Your employer may report to you the total 
amount of deferrals for the year under a non-
qualified deferred compensation plan on Form 
W-2, box 12, using code Y. This amount isn’t in-
cluded in your income.
However, if at any time during the tax year, 
the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or 
isn’t operated under those requirements, all 
amounts deferred under the plan for the tax 
year and all preceding tax years to the extent 
vested and not previously included in income 
are included in your income for the current year. 
This amount is included in your wages shown 
on Form W-2, box 1. It’s also shown on Form 
W-2, box 12, using code Z.
Note received for services.  If your employer 
gives you a secured note as payment for your 
services, you must include the fair market value 
(usually the discount value) of the note in your 
income for the year you receive it. When you 
later receive payments on the note, a propor-
tionate part of each payment is the recovery of 
the fair market value that you previously inclu-
ded in your income. Don’t include that part 
again in your income. Include the rest of the 
payment in your income in the year of payment.
If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable 
unsecured note as payment for your services, 
payments on the note that are credited toward 
the principal amount of the note are compensa-
tion income when you receive them.
Severance pay.  If you receive a severance 
payment when your employment with your em-
ployer ends or is terminated, you must include 
this amount in your income.
Accrued leave payment. If you’re a federal 
employee and receive a lump-sum payment for 
accrued annual leave when you retire or resign, 
this amount will be included as wages on your 
Form W-2.
If you resign from one agency and are reem-
ployed by another agency, you may have to re-
pay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-
ment to the second agency. You can reduce 
gross wages by the amount you repaid in the 
same tax year in which you received it. Attach 
to your tax return a copy of the receipt or state-
ment given to you by the agency you repaid to 
explain the difference between the wages on 
the return and the wages on your Forms W-2.
Outplacement services.  If you choose to 
accept a reduced amount of severance pay so 
that you can receive outplacement services 
(such as training in résumé writing and inter-
view techniques), you must include the unre-
duced amount of the severance pay in income.
However, you can deduct the value of these 
outplacement services (up to the difference be-
tween the severance pay included in income 
and the amount actually received) as a miscel-
laneous deduction (subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income (AGI) limit) on Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer 
while you’re sick or injured is part of your salary 
or wages. In addition, you must include in your 
income sick pay benefits received from any of 
the following payers.
A welfare fund.
A state sickness or disability fund.
An association of employers or employees.
An insurance company, if your employer 
paid for the plan.
However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-
dent or health insurance policy yourself, the 
benefits you receive under the policy aren’t tax-
able. For more information, see Pub. 525.
Social security and Medicare taxes paid by 
employer. If you and your employer have an 
agreement that your employer pays your social 
security and Medicare taxes without deducting 
them from your gross wages, you must report 
the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages 
on your tax return. The payment also is treated 
as wages for figuring your social security and 
Medicare taxes and your social security and 
Medicare benefits. However, these payments 
aren’t treated as social security and Medicare 
wages if you’re a household worker or a farm 
worker.
Stock appreciation rights.  Don’t include a 
stock appreciation right granted by your em-
ployer in income until you exercise (use) the 
right. When you use the right, you’re generally 
entitled to a cash payment equal to the fair mar-
ket value of the corporation's stock on the date 
of use minus the fair market value on the date 
the right was granted. You include the cash 
payment in your income in the year you use the 
right.
Fringe Benefits
Fringe benefits received in connection with the 
performance of your services are included in 
your income as compensation unless you pay 
fair market value for them or they’re specifically 
excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-
ance of services (for example, under a cove-
nant not to compete) is treated as the perform-
ance of services for purposes of these rules.
Accounting period.  You must use the same 
accounting period your employer uses to report 
your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-
ployer has the option to report taxable noncash 
Page 50 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 48 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

fringe benefits by using either of the following 
rules.
The general rule: benefits are reported for 
a full calendar year (January 1–December 
31).
The special accounting period rule: bene-
fits provided during the last 2 months of the 
calendar year (or any shorter period) are 
treated as paid during the following calen-
dar year. For example, each year your em-
ployer reports the value of benefits provi-
ded during the last 2 months of the prior 
year and the first 10 months of the current 
year.
Your employer doesn’t have to use the same 
accounting period for each fringe benefit, but 
must use the same period for all employees 
who receive a particular benefit.
You must use the same accounting period 
that you use to report the benefit to claim an 
employee business deduction (for use of a car, 
for example).
Form W-2. Your employer must include all tax-
able fringe benefits in box 1 of Form W-2 as wa-
ges, tips, and other compensation and, if appli-
cable, in boxes 3 and 5 as social security and 
Medicare wages. Although not required, your 
employer may include the total value of fringe 
benefits in box 14 (or on a separate statement). 
However, if your employer provided you with a 
vehicle and included 100% of its annual lease 
value in your income, the employer must sepa-
rately report this value to you in box 14 (or on a 
separate statement).
Accident or Health Plan
In most cases, the value of accident or health 
plan coverage provided to you by your em-
ployer isn’t included in your income. Benefits 
you receive from the plan may be taxable, as 
explained later under Sickness and Injury Bene-
fits.
For information on the items covered in this 
section, other than Long-term care coverage, 
see Pub. 969, Health Savings Accounts and 
Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.
Long-term care coverage.  Contributions by 
your employer to provide coverage for 
long-term care services generally aren’t inclu-
ded in your income. However, contributions 
made through a flexible spending or similar ar-
rangement offered by your employer must be 
included in your income. This amount will be re-
ported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.
Contributions you make to the plan are dis-
cussed in Pub. 502, Medical and Dental Expen-
ses.
Archer MSA contributions.  Contributions by 
your employer to your Archer MSA generally 
aren’t included in your income. Their total will 
be reported in box 12 of Form W-2 with code R. 
You must report this amount on Form 8853, 
Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance 
Contracts. File the form with your return.
Health flexible spending arrangement 
(health FSA).  If your employer provides a 
health FSA that qualifies as an accident or 
health plan, the amount of your salary reduc-
tion, and reimbursements of your medical care 
expenses, in most cases, aren’t included in 
your income.
Note. Health FSAs are subject to a $2,500 
limit on salary reduction contributions for plan 
years beginning after 2012. The $2,500 limit is 
subject to an inflation adjustment for plan years 
beginning after 2013. For more information, see 
Notice 2012-40, 2012-26 I.R.B. 1046, available 
at IRS.gov/irb/2012-26 IRB/ar09.html.
For tax year 2017, the dollar limitation under 
section 125(i) on voluntary employee salary re-
ductions for contributions to health flexible 
spending arrangements is $2,600.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).
If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies 
as an accident or health plan, coverage and re-
imbursements of your medical care expenses 
generally aren’t included in your income.
Health savings account (HSA).  If you’re an 
eligible individual, you and any other person, in-
cluding your employer or a family member, can 
make contributions to your HSA. Contributions, 
other than employer contributions, are deducti-
ble on your return whether or not you itemize 
deductions. Contributions made by your em-
ployer aren’t included in your income. Distribu-
tions from your HSA that are used to pay quali-
fied medical expenses aren’t included in your 
income. Distributions not used for qualified 
medical expenses are included in your income. 
See Pub. 969 for the requirements of an HSA.
Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide 
partner's HSA aren’t contributions by an em-
ployer. The contributions are treated as a distri-
bution of money and aren’t included in the part-
ner's gross income. Contributions by a 
partnership to a partner's HSA for services ren-
dered are treated as guaranteed payments that 
are includible in the partner's gross income. In 
both situations, the partner can deduct the con-
tribution made to the partner's HSA.
Contributions by an S corporation to a 2% 
shareholder-employee's HSA for services ren-
dered are treated as guaranteed payments and 
are includible in the shareholder-employee's 
gross income. The shareholder-employee can 
deduct the contribution made to the share-
holder-employee's HSA.
Qualified HSA funding distribution.  You 
can make a one-time distribution from your indi-
vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA and 
you generally won’t include any of the distribu-
tion in your income.
Adoption Assistance
You may be able to exclude from your income 
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-
nection with your adoption of an eligible child. 
See the Instructions for Form 8839, Qualified 
Adoption Expenses, for more information.
Adoption benefits are reported by your em-
ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. They 
also are included as social security and Medi-
care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they 
aren’t included as wages in box 1. To determine 
the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must 
complete Part III of Form 8839. File the form 
with your return.
De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
If your employer provides you with a product or 
service and the cost of it is so small that it would 
be unreasonable for the employer to account 
for it, you generally don’t include its value in 
your income. In most cases, don’t include in 
your income the value of discounts at company 
cafeterias, cab fares home when working over-
time, and company picnics.
Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you a tur-
key, ham, or other item of nominal value at 
Christmas or other holidays, don’t include the 
value of the gift in your income. However, if your 
employer gives you cash or a cash equivalent, 
you must include it in your income.
Educational Assistance
You can exclude from your income up to $5,250 
of qualified employer-provided educational as-
sistance. For more information, see Pub. 970, 
Tax Benefits for Education.
Group-Term Life Insurance
In most cases, the cost of up to $50,000 of 
group-term life insurance coverage provided to 
you by your employer (or former employer) isn’t 
included in your income. However, you must in-
clude in income the cost of employer-provided 
insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000 
of coverage reduced by any amount you pay to-
ward the purchase of the insurance.
For exceptions, see Entire cost excluded , 
and Entire cost taxed, later.
If your employer provided more than 
$50,000 of coverage, the amount included in 
your income is reported as part of your wages in 
box 1 of your Form W-2. Also, it’s shown sepa-
rately in box 12 with code C.
Group-term life insurance.  This insurance is 
term life insurance protection (insurance for a 
fixed period of time) that:
Provides a general death benefit,
Is provided to a group of employees,
Is provided under a policy carried by the 
employer, and
Provides an amount of insurance to each 
employee based on a formula that pre-
vents individual selection.
Permanent benefits. If your group-term life 
insurance policy includes permanent benefits, 
such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you 
must include in your income, as wages, the cost 
of the permanent benefits minus the amount 
you pay for them. Your employer should be able 
to tell you the amount to include in your income.
Accidental death benefits.  Insurance that 
provides accidental or other death benefits but 
doesn’t provide general death benefits (travel 
insurance, for example) isn’t group-term life in-
surance.
Former employer.  If your former employer 
provided more than $50,000 of group-term life 
insurance coverage during the year, the amount 
included in your income is reported as wages in 
box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it’s shown separately 
in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show the 
amount of uncollected social security and 
Page 51 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 49

Medicare taxes on the excess coverage, with 
codes M and N. You must pay these taxes with 
your income tax return. Include them on Form 
1040, line 62, and follow the instructions there.
Two or more employers.  Your exclusion for 
employer-provided group-term life insurance 
coverage can’t exceed the cost of $50,000 of 
coverage, whether the insurance is provided by 
a single employer or multiple employers. If two 
or more employers provide insurance coverage 
that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-
ported as wages on your Forms W-2 won’t be 
correct. You must figure how much to include in 
your income. Reduce the amount you figure by 
any amount reported with code C in box 12 of 
your Forms W-2, add the result to the wages re-
ported in box 1, and report the total on your re-
turn.
Figuring the taxable cost.  Use Worksheet 
5-1 to figure the amount to include in your in-
come.
Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the 
Cost of Group-Term Life 
Insurance To Include in 
Income
Keep for Your Records
1. Enter the total amount of 
your insurance coverage 
from your 
employer(s) ............ 1.  
2. Limit on exclusion for 
employer-provided 
group-term life insurance 
coverage .............. 2. 50,000
3. Subtract line 2 from 
line 1 ................. 3.  
4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 
Figure to the nearest 
tenth ................. 4.  
5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your 
age on the last day of the tax 
year, find your age group in 
the left column, and enter the 
cost from the column on the 
right for your age 
group ................ 5.  
6. Multiply line 4 by 
line 5 ................. 6.  
7. Enter the number of full 
months of coverage at this 
cost .................. 7.  
8. Multiply line 6 by 
line 7 ................. 8.  
9. Enter the 
premiums you paid 
per month ..... 9.  
10. Enter the number 
of months you paid 
the 
premiums ..... 10.  
11. Multiply line 9 by 
line 10 ................ 11.  
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. 
Include this amount in 
your income as 
wages ............... 12.  
Table 5-1. Cost of $1,000 of 
Group-Term Life Insurance for 1 
Month
Age Cost
Under 25 ................. $ 0.05
25 through 29 .............. 0.06
30 through 34 .............. 0.08
35 through 39 .............. 0.09
40 through 44 .............. 0.10
45 through 49 .............. 0.15
50 through 54 .............. 0.23
55 through 59 .............. 0.43
60 through 64 .............. 0.66
65 through 69 .............. 1.27
70 and above .............. 2.06
Example. You are 51 years old and work 
for employers A and B. Both employers provide 
group-term life insurance coverage for you for 
the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with 
employer A and $45,000 with employer B. You 
pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to 
include in your income as shown in Worksheet 
5-1. Figuring the Cost of Group-Term Life Insur-
ance to Include in Income—Illustrated next.
Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the 
Cost of Group-Term Life 
Insurance to Include in 
Income—Illustrated
Keep for Your Records
1. Enter the total amount of 
your insurance coverage 
from your 
employer(s) ............ 1. 80,000
2. Limit on exclusion for 
employer-provided 
group-term life insurance 
coverage .............. 2. 50,000
3. Subtract line 2 from 
line 1 ................. 3. 30,000
4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 
Figure to the nearest 
tenth ................. 4. 30.0
5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your 
age on the last day of the tax 
year, find your age group in 
the left column, and enter the 
cost from the column on the 
right for your age 
group ................ 5. 0.23
6. Multiply line 4 by 
line 5 ................. 6. 6.90
7. Enter the number of full 
months of coverage at this 
cost .................. 7. 12
8. Multiply line 6 by 
line 7 ................. 8. 82.80
9. Enter the 
premiums you paid 
per month ..... 9. 4.15
10. Enter the number 
of months you paid 
the 
premiums ..... 10. 12
11. Multiply line 9 by 
line 10 ................ 11. 49.80
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. 
Include this amount in 
your income as 
wages ............... 12. 33.00
Entire cost excluded. You aren’t taxed on the 
cost of group-term life insurance if any of the 
following circumstances apply.
1. You’re permanently and totally disabled 
and have ended your employment.
2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the 
policy for the entire period the insurance is 
in force during the tax year.
3. A charitable organization (defined in chap-
ter 24) to which contributions are deducti-
ble is the only beneficiary of the policy for 
the entire period the insurance is in force 
during the tax year. (You aren’t entitled to 
a deduction for a charitable contribution 
for naming a charitable organization as the 
beneficiary of your policy.)
4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and
a. You retired before January 2, 1984, 
and were covered by the plan when 
you retired, or
b. You reached age 55 before January 
2, 1984, and were employed by the 
employer or its predecessor in 1983.
Entire cost taxed.  You’re taxed on the entire 
cost of group-term life insurance if either of the 
following circumstances apply.
The insurance is provided by your em-
ployer through a qualified employees' trust, 
such as a pension trust or a qualified annu-
ity plan.
You‘re a key employee and your employ-
er's plan discriminates in favor of key em-
ployees.
Retirement Planning Services
Generally, don’t include the value of qualified 
retirement planning services provided to you 
and your spouse by your employer's qualified 
retirement plan. Qualified services include re-
tirement planning advice, information about 
your employer's retirement plan, and informa-
tion about how the plan may fit into your overall 
individual retirement income plan. You can’t ex-
clude the value of any tax preparation, account-
ing, legal, or brokerage services provided by 
your employer.
Transportation
If your employer provides you with a qualified 
transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded 
from your income, up to certain limits. A quali-
fied transportation fringe benefit is:
Transportation in a commuter highway ve-
hicle (such as a van) between your home 
and work place,
A transit pass,
Qualified parking, or
Qualified bicycle commuting reimburse-
ment. 
Cash reimbursement by your employer for 
these expenses under a bona fide reimburse-
ment arrangement is also excludable. However, 
cash reimbursement for a transit pass is exclud-
able only if a voucher or similar item that can be 
exchanged only for a transit pass isn’t readily 
available for direct distribution to you.
Page 52 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 50 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Exclusion limit.  The exclusion for commuter 
vehicle transportation and transit pass fringe 
benefits can’t be more than $255 a month.
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe 
benefit can’t be more than $255 a month.
The exclusion for qualified bicycle commut-
ing in a calendar year is $20 multiplied by the 
number of qualified bicycle commuting months 
that year. You can’t exclude from your income 
any qualified bicycle commuting reimbursement 
if you can choose between reimbursement and 
compensation that is otherwise includible in 
your income.
If the benefits have a value that is more than 
these limits, the excess must be included in 
your income.
Commuter highway vehicle.  This is a high-
way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not in-
cluding the driver). At least 80% of the vehicle's 
mileage must reasonably be expected to be:
For transporting employees between their 
homes and workplace, and
On trips during which employees occupy at 
least half of the vehicle's adult seating ca-
pacity (not including the driver).
Transit pass.  This is any pass, token, fare-
card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person 
to ride mass transit (whether public or private) 
free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a com-
muter highway vehicle operated by a person in 
the business of transporting persons for com-
pensation.
Qualified parking. This is parking provided to 
an employee at or near the employer's place of 
business. It also includes parking provided on 
or near a location from which the employee 
commutes to work by mass transit, in a com-
muter highway vehicle, or by carpool. It doesn’t 
include parking at or near the employee's 
home.
Qualified bicycle commuting.  This is reim-
bursement based on the number of qualified bi-
cycle commuting months for the year. A quali-
fied bicycle commuting month is any month you 
use the bicycle regularly for a substantial por-
tion of the travel between your home and place 
of employment and you don’t receive any of the 
other qualified transportation fringe benefits. 
The reimbursement can be for expenses you in-
curred during the year for the purchase of a bi-
cycle and bicycle improvements, repair, and 
storage.
Retirement Plan 
Contributions
Your employer's contributions to a qualified re-
tirement plan for you aren’t included in income 
at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell 
you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) 
However, the cost of life insurance coverage in-
cluded in the plan may have to be included. See 
Group-Term Life Insurance , earlier, under 
Fringe Benefits.
If your employer pays into a nonqualified 
plan for you, you generally must include the 
contributions in your income as wages for the 
tax year in which the contributions are made. 
However, if your interest in the plan isn’t trans-
ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of 
forfeiture (you have a good chance of losing it) 
at the time of the contribution, you don’t have to 
include the value of your interest in your income 
until it’s transferable or is no longer subject to a 
substantial risk of forfeiture.
For information on distributions from 
retirement plans, see Pub. 575, Pen-
sion and Annuity Income (or Pub. 721, 
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirement Ben-
efits, if you’re a federal employee or retiree).
Elective deferrals. If you’re covered by certain 
kinds of retirement plans, you can choose to 
have part of your compensation contributed by 
your employer to a retirement fund, rather than 
have it paid to you. The amount you set aside 
(called an elective deferral) is treated as an em-
ployer contribution to a qualified plan. An elec-
tive deferral, other than a designated Roth con-
tribution (discussed later), isn’t included in 
wages subject to income tax at the time contrib-
uted. Rather, it’s subject to income tax when 
distributed from the plan. However, it’s included 
in wages subject to social security and Medi-
care taxes at the time contributed.
Elective deferrals include elective contribu-
tions to the following retirement plans.
1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section 
401(k) plans).
2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal em-
ployees.
3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-
sion plans (SARSEP).
4. Savings incentive match plans for employ-
ees (SIMPLE plans).
5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (section 
403(b) plans).
6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans.
7. Section 457 plans.
Qualified automatic contribution arrange-
ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu-
tion arrangement, your employer can treat you 
as having elected to have a part of your com-
pensation contributed to a section 401(k) plan. 
You’re to receive written notice of your rights 
and obligations under the qualified automatic 
contribution arrangement. The notice must ex-
plain:
Your rights to elect not to have elective 
contributions made, or to have contribu-
tions made at a different percentage, and
How contributions made will be invested in 
the absence of any investment decision by 
you.
You must be given a reasonable period of 
time after receipt of the notice and before the 
first elective contribution is made to make an 
election with respect to the contributions.
Overall limit on deferrals.  For 2017, in 
most cases, you shouldn’t have deferred more 
than a total of $18,000 of contributions to the 
plans listed in (1) through (3) and (5) above. 
The limit for SIMPLE plans is $12,500. The limit 
for section 501(c)(18)(D) plans is the lesser of 
$7,000 or 25% of your compensation. The limit 
for section 457 plans is the lesser of your in-
cludible compensation or $18,000. Amounts 
TIP
deferred under specific plan limits are part of 
the overall limit on deferrals.
Designated Roth contributions.  Employ-
ers with section 401(k) and section 403(b) 
plans can create qualified Roth contribution 
programs so that you may elect to have part or 
all of your elective deferrals to the plan designa-
ted as after-tax Roth contributions. Designated 
Roth contributions are treated as elective defer-
rals, except that they’re included in income at 
the time contributed.
Excess deferrals.  Your employer or plan 
administrator should apply the proper annual 
limit when figuring your plan contributions. How-
ever, you’re responsible for monitoring the total 
you defer to ensure that the deferrals aren’t 
more than the overall limit.
If you set aside more than the limit, the ex-
cess generally must be included in your income 
for that year, unless you have an excess defer-
ral of a designated Roth contribution. See Pub. 
525 for a discussion of the tax treatment of ex-
cess deferrals.
Catch-up contributions.  You may be al-
lowed catch-up contributions (additional elec-
tive deferral) if you’re age 50 or older by the end 
of the tax year.
Stock Options
If you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or 
sell stock or other property as payment for your 
services, you usually will have income when 
you receive the option, when you exercise the 
option (use it to buy or sell the stock or other 
property), or when you sell or otherwise dispose 
of the option. However, if your option is a statu-
tory stock option, you won’t have any income 
until you sell or exchange your stock. Your em-
ployer can tell you which kind of option you 
hold. For more information, see Pub. 525.
Restricted Property
In most cases, if you receive property for your 
services, you must include its fair market value 
in your income in the year you receive the prop-
erty. However, if you receive stock or other 
property that has certain restrictions that affect 
its value, you don’t include the value of the 
property in your income until it has substantially 
vested. (Although you can elect to include the 
value of the property in your income in the year 
it‘s transferred to you.) For more information, 
see Restricted Property in Pub. 525. 
Dividends received on restricted stock. 
Dividends you receive on restricted stock are 
treated as compensation and not as dividend 
income. Your employer should include these 
payments on your Form W-2.
Stock you elected to include in income.
Dividends you receive on restricted stock you 
elected to include in your income in the year 
transferred are treated the same as any other 
dividends. Report them on your return as divi-
dends. For a discussion of dividends, see chap-
ter 8.
For information on how to treat dividends re-
ported on both your Form W-2 and Form 
1099-DIV, see Dividends received on restricted 
stock in Pub. 525.
Page 53 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 51

Special Rules for
Certain Employees
This section deals with special rules for people 
in certain types of employment: members of the 
clergy, members of religious orders, people 
working for foreign employers, military person-
nel, and volunteers.
Clergy
Generally, if you’re a member of the clergy, you 
must include in your income offerings and fees 
you receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals, 
masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the of-
fering is made to the religious institution, it isn’t 
taxable to you.
If you’re a member of a religious organiza-
tion and you give your outside earnings to the 
religious organization, you still must include the 
earnings in your income. However, you may be 
entitled to a charitable contribution deduction 
for the amount paid to the organization. See 
chapter 24.
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a 
member of the clergy usually is treated as any 
other pension or annuity. It must be reported on 
lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12a 
and 12b of Form 1040A.
Housing. Special rules for housing apply to 
members of the clergy. Under these rules, you 
don’t include in your income the rental value of 
a home (including utilities) or a designated 
housing allowance provided to you as part of 
your pay. However, the exclusion can’t be more 
than the lesser of the following amounts: 1) the 
amount actually used to provide or rent a home; 
2) the fair market rental value of the home (in-
cluding furnishings, utilities, garage, etc.); 3) the 
amount officially designated (in advance of pay-
ment) as a rental or housing allowance; or 4) an 
amount that represents reasonable pay for your 
services. If you pay for the utilities, you can ex-
clude any allowance designated for utility cost, 
up to your actual cost. The home or allowance 
must be provided as compensation for your 
services as an ordained, licensed, or commis-
sioned minister. However, you must include the 
rental value of the home or the housing allow-
ance as earnings from self-employment on 
Schedule SE (Form 1040) if you’re subject to 
the self-employment tax. For more information, 
see Pub. 517, Social Security and Other Infor-
mation for Members of the Clergy and Religious 
Workers.
Members of Religious 
Orders
If you’re a member of a religious order who has 
taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings 
that you renounce and turn over to the order de-
pends on whether your services are performed 
for the order.
Services performed for the order.  If you’re 
performing the services as an agent of the order 
in the exercise of duties required by the order, 
don’t include in your income the amounts 
turned over to the order.
If your order directs you to perform services 
for another agency of the supervising church or 
an associated institution, you’re considered to 
be performing the services as an agent of the 
order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an 
order that you turn over to the order aren’t inclu-
ded in your income.
Example. You’re a member of a church or-
der and have taken a vow of poverty. You re-
nounce any claims to your earnings and turn 
over to the order any salaries or wages you 
earn. You’re a registered nurse, so your order 
assigns you to work in a hospital that is an as-
sociated institution of the church. However, you 
remain under the general direction and control 
of the order. You’re considered to be an agent 
of the order and any wages you earn at the hos-
pital that you turn over to your order aren’t inclu-
ded in your income.
Services performed outside the order.  If 
you’re directed to work outside the order, your 
services aren’t an exercise of duties required by 
the order unless they meet both of the following 
requirements.
They’re the kind of services that are ordi-
narily the duties of members of the order.
They‘re part of the duties that you must ex-
ercise for, or on behalf of, the religious or-
der as its agent.
If you’re an employee of a third party, the serv-
ices you perform for the third party won’t be 
considered directed or required of you by the 
order. Amounts you receive for these services 
are included in your income, even if you have 
taken a vow of poverty.
Example. Mark Brown is a member of a re-
ligious order and has taken a vow of poverty. 
He renounces all claims to his earnings and 
turns over his earnings to the order.
Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed 
by the superiors of the order to get a job with a 
private tax-exempt school. Mark became an 
employee of the school, and, at his request, the 
school made the salary payments directly to the 
order.
Because Mark is an employee of the school, 
he is performing services for the school rather 
than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark 
earns working for the school are included in his 
income.
Foreign Employer
Special rules apply if you work for a foreign em-
ployer.
U.S. citizen. If you’re a U.S. citizen who works 
in the United States for a foreign government, 
an international organization, a foreign em-
bassy, or any foreign employer, you must in-
clude your salary in your income.
Social security and Medicare taxes.
You’re exempt from social security and Medi-
care employee taxes if you’re employed in the 
United States by an international organization 
or a foreign government. However, you must 
pay self-employment tax on your earnings from 
services performed in the United States, even 
though you aren’t self-employed. This rule also 
applies if you’re an employee of a qualifying 
wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-
ernment.
Employees of international organizations or 
foreign governments. Your compensation for 
official services to an international organization 
is exempt from federal income tax if you aren’t a 
citizen of the United States or you’re a citizen of 
the Philippines (whether or not you‘re a citizen 
of the United States).
Your compensation for official services to a 
foreign government is exempt from federal in-
come tax if all of the following are true.
You aren’t a citizen of the United States or 
you’re a citizen of the Philippines (whether 
or not you’re a citizen of the United States).
Your work is like the work done by employ-
ees of the United States in foreign coun-
tries.
The foreign government gives an equal ex-
emption to employees of the United States 
in its country.
Waiver of alien status.  If you’re an alien 
who works for a foreign government or interna-
tional organization and you file a waiver under 
section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-
ity Act to keep your immigrant status, different 
rules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Pub. 
525.
Employment abroad.  For information on the 
tax treatment of income earned abroad, see 
Pub. 54.
Military
Payments you receive as a member of a military 
service generally are taxed as wages except for 
retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. Al-
lowances generally aren’t taxed. For more infor-
mation on the tax treatment of military allowan-
ces and benefits, see Pub. 3, Armed Forces' 
Tax Guide.
Differential wage payments.  Any payments 
made to you by an employer during the time 
you’re performing service in the uniformed serv-
ices are treated as compensation. These wages 
are subject to income tax withholding and are 
reported on a Form W-2. See the discussion 
under Miscellaneous Compensation, earlier.
Military retirement pay. If your retirement pay 
is based on age or length of service, it’s taxable 
and must be included in your income as a pen-
sion on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on 
lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Don’t include 
in your income the amount of any reduction in 
retirement or retainer pay to provide a survivor 
annuity for your spouse or children under the 
Retired Serviceman's Family Protection Plan or 
the Survivor Benefit Plan.
For more detailed discussion of survivor an-
nuities, see chapter 10.
Disability. If you’re retired on disability, see 
Military and Government Disability Pensions 
under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.
Veterans' benefits.  Don’t include in your in-
come any veterans' benefits paid under any 
Page 54 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 52 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

law, regulation, or administrative practice ad-
ministered by the Department of Veterans Af-
fairs (VA). The following amounts paid to veter-
ans or their families aren’t taxable.
Education, training, and subsistence allow-
ances.
Disability compensation and pension pay-
ments for disabilities paid either to veter-
ans or their families.
Grants for homes designed for wheelchair 
living.
Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who 
lost their sight or the use of their limbs.
Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-
dends paid either to veterans or their bene-
ficiaries, including the proceeds of a veter-
an's endowment policy paid before death.
Interest on insurance dividends you leave 
on deposit with the VA.
Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
tance program.
The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a 
member of the Armed Forces who died af-
ter September 10, 2001.
Payments made under the compensated 
work therapy program.
Any bonus payment by a state or political 
subdivision because of service in a combat 
zone.
Volunteers
The tax treatment of amounts you receive as a 
volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similar 
agency is covered in the following discussions.
Peace Corps.  Living allowances you receive 
as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader 
for housing, utilities, household supplies, food, 
and clothing are generally exempt from tax.
Taxable allowances.  The following allow-
ances, however, must be included in your in-
come and reported as wages.
Allowances paid to your spouse and minor 
children while you’re a volunteer leader 
training in the United States.
Living allowances designated by the Direc-
tor of the Peace Corps as basic compen-
sation. These are allowances for personal 
items such as domestic help, laundry and 
clothing maintenance, entertainment and 
recreation, transportation, and other mis-
cellaneous expenses.
Leave allowances.
Readjustment allowances or termination 
payments. These are considered received 
by you when credited to your account.
Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps 
volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment 
allowance during his period of service, to be 
paid to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour 
of duty. Although the allowance isn’t available 
to him until the end of his service, Gary must in-
clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it’s 
credited to his account.
Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If 
you’re a VISTA volunteer, you must include 
meal and lodging allowances paid to you in 
your income as wages.
National Senior Services Corps programs. 
Don’t include in your income amounts you re-
ceive for supportive services or reimburse-
ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-
lowing programs.
Retired Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP).
Foster Grandparent Program.
Senior Companion Program. 
Service Corps of Retired Executives 
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for suppor-
tive services or reimbursements for 
out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, don’t in-
clude these amounts in gross income.
Volunteer tax counseling.  Don’t include in 
your income any reimbursements you receive 
for transportation, meals, and other expenses 
you have in training for, or actually providing, 
volunteer federal income tax counseling for the 
elderly (TCE).
You can deduct as a charitable contribution 
your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in 
taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-
tance (VITA) program. See chapter 24.
Sickness and Injury 
Benefits
This section discusses sickness and injury ben-
efits, including disability pensions, long-term 
care insurance contracts, workers' compensa-
tion, and other benefits.
In most cases, you must report as income 
any amount you receive for personal injury or 
sickness through an accident or health plan that 
is paid for by your employer. If both you and 
your employer pay for the plan, only the amount 
you receive that is due to your employer's pay-
ments is reported as income. However, certain 
payments may not be taxable to you. Your em-
ployer should be able to give you specific de-
tails about your pension plan and tell you the 
amount you paid for your disability pension. In 
addition to disability pensions and annuities, 
you may be receiving other payments for sick-
ness and injury.
Don’t report as income any amounts 
paid to reimburse you for medical ex-
penses you incurred after the plan was 
established.
Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of 
a health or accident insurance plan, don’t in-
clude any amounts you receive from the plan 
for personal injury or sickness as income on 
your tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for 
medical expenses you deducted in an earlier 
year, you may have to include some, or all, of 
the reimbursement in your income. See Reim-
bursement in a later year in chapter 21.
Cafeteria plans. In most cases, if you’re cov-
ered by an accident or health insurance plan 
through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the 
insurance premiums wasn’t included in your in-
come, you aren’t considered to have paid the 
premiums and you must include any benefits 
you receive in your income. If the amount of the 
premiums was included in your income, you’re 
TIP
considered to have paid the premiums, and any 
benefits you receive aren’t taxable.
Disability Pensions
If you retired on disability, you must include in 
income any disability pension you receive under 
a plan that is paid for by your employer. You 
must report your taxable disability payments as 
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, 
until you reach minimum retirement age. Mini-
mum retirement age generally is the age at 
which you can first receive a pension or annuity 
if you’re not disabled.
You may be entitled to a tax credit if 
you were permanently and totally disa-
bled when you retired. For information 
on this credit and the definition of permanent 
and total disability, see chapter 33.
Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
mum retirement age, payments you receive are 
taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the pay-
ments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on 
lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. The rules for 
reporting pensions are explained in How To Re-
port in chapter 10.
For information on disability payments from 
a governmental program provided as a substi-
tute for unemployment compensation, see 
chapter 12.
Retirement and profit-sharing plans.  If you 
receive payments from a retirement or 
profit-sharing plan that doesn’t provide for disa-
bility retirement, don’t treat the payments as a 
disability pension. The payments must be re-
ported as a pension or annuity. For more infor-
mation on pensions, see chapter 10.
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa-
bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for 
accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The 
payment is not a disability payment. Include it in 
your income in the tax year you receive it.
Military and Government
Disability Pensions
Certain military and government disability pen-
sions aren’t taxable.
Service-connected disability.  You may be 
able to exclude from income amounts you re-
ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allow-
ance for personal injury or sickness resulting 
from active service in one of the following gov-
ernment services.
The armed forces of any country.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration.
The Public Health Service.
The Foreign Service.
Conditions for exclusion.  Don’t include 
the disability payments in your income if any of 
the following conditions apply.
1. You were entitled to receive a disability 
payment before September 25, 1975.
2. You were a member of a listed govern-
ment service or its reserve component, or 
were under a binding written commitment 
TIP
Page 55 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 53

to become a member, on September 24, 
1975.
3. You receive the disability payments for a 
combat-related injury. This is a personal 
injury or sickness that:
a. Results directly from armed conflict,
b. Takes place while you’re engaged in 
extra-hazardous service,
c. Takes place under conditions simulat-
ing war, including training exercises 
such as maneuvers, or
d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.
4. You would be entitled to receive disability 
compensation from the Department of Vet-
erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-
tion for it. Your exclusion under this condi-
tion is equal to the amount you would be 
entitled to receive from the VA.
Pension based on years of service.  If you 
receive a disability pension based on years of 
service, in most cases you must include it in 
your income. However, if the pension qualifies 
for the exclusion for a Service-connected disa-
bility (discussed earlier), don’t include in income 
the part of your pension that you would have re-
ceived if the pension had been based on a per-
centage of disability. You must include the rest 
of your pension in your income.
Retroactive VA determination. If you retire 
from the armed services based on years of 
service and are later given a retroactive serv-
ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your 
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-
cluded from income up to the amount of VA dis-
ability benefits you would have been entitled to 
receive. You can claim a refund of any tax paid 
on the excludable amount (subject to the stat-
ute of limitations) by filing an amended return 
on Form 1040X for each previous year during 
the retroactive period. You must include with 
each Form 1040X a copy of the official VA De-
termination letter granting the retroactive bene-
fit. The letter must show the amount withheld 
and the effective date of the benefit.
If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-
ance payment and are later awarded VA disa-
bility benefits, exclude 100% of the severance 
benefit from your income. However, you must 
include in your income any lump-sum readjust-
ment or other nondisability severance payment 
you received on release from active duty, even 
if you’re later given a retroactive disability rating 
by the VA.
Special period of limitation.  In most ca-
ses, under the period of limitation, a claim for 
credit or refund must be filed within 3 years 
from the time a return was filed or 2 years from 
the time the tax was paid. However, if you re-
ceive a retroactive service-connected disability 
rating determination, the period of limitation is 
extended by a 1-year period beginning on the 
date of the determination. This 1-year extended 
period applies to claims for credit or refund filed 
after June 17, 2008, and doesn’t apply to any 
tax year that began more than 5 years before 
the date of the determination.
Terrorist attack or military action.  Don’t in-
clude in your income disability payments you 
receive for injuries incurred as a direct result of 
a terrorist attack directed against the United 
States (or its allies), whether outside or within 
the United States or from military action. See 
Pub. 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Terrorist At-
tacks, for more information.
Long-Term Care
Insurance Contracts
Long-term care insurance contracts in most ca-
ses are treated as accident and health insur-
ance contracts. Amounts you receive from them 
(other than policyholder dividends or premium 
refunds) in most cases are excludable from in-
come as amounts received for personal injury 
or sickness. To claim an exclusion for payments 
made on a per diem or other periodic basis un-
der a long-term care insurance contract, you 
must file Form 8853 with your return.
A long-term care insurance contract is an in-
surance contract that only provides coverage 
for qualified long-term care services. The con-
tract must:
Be guaranteed renewable;
Not provide for a cash surrender value or 
other money that can be paid, assigned, 
pledged, or borrowed;
Provide that refunds, other than refunds on 
the death of the insured or complete sur-
render or cancellation of the contract, and 
dividends under the contract, may only be 
used to reduce future premiums or in-
crease future benefits; and
In most cases, not pay or reimburse ex-
penses incurred for services or items that 
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer 
or the contract makes per diem or other 
periodic payments without regard to ex-
penses.
Qualified long-term care services.  Qualified 
long-term care services are:
Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-
habilitative services, and maintenance and 
personal care services; and
Required by a chronically ill individual and 
provided pursuant to a plan of care prescri-
bed by a licensed health care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill indi-
vidual is one who has been certified by a li-
censed health care practitioner within the previ-
ous 12 months as one of the following.
An individual who, for at least 90 days, is 
unable to perform at least two activities of 
daily living without substantial assistance 
due to loss of functional capacity. Activities 
of daily living are eating, toileting, transfer-
ring, bathing, dressing, and continence.
An individual who requires substantial su-
pervision to be protected from threats to 
health and safety due to severe cognitive 
impairment.
Limit on exclusion.  You generally can ex-
clude from gross income up to $360 a day for 
2017. See Limit on exclusion, under Long-Term 
Care Insurance Contracts, under Sickness and 
Injury Benefits in Pub. 525 for more information.
Workers' Compensation
Amounts you receive as workers' compensation 
for an occupational sickness or injury are fully 
exempt from tax if they’re paid under a workers' 
compensation act or a statute in the nature of a 
workers' compensation act. The exemption also 
applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-
ever, doesn’t apply to retirement plan benefits 
you receive based on your age, length of serv-
ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you 
retired because of an occupational sickness or 
injury.
If part of your workers' compensation 
reduces your social security or equiva-
lent railroad retirement benefits re-
ceived, that part is considered social security 
(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and 
may be taxable. For more information, see Pub. 
915, Social Security and Equivalent Railroad 
Retirement Benefits.
Return to work.  If you return to work after 
qualifying for workers' compensation, salary 
payments you receive for performing light du-
ties are taxable as wages.
Other Sickness and Injury 
Benefits
In addition to disability pensions and annuities, 
you may receive other payments for sickness or 
injury.
Railroad sick pay.  Payments you receive as 
sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
surance Act are taxable and you must include 
them in your income. However, don’t include 
them in your income if they’re for an on-the-job 
injury.
If you received income because of a disabil-
ity, see Disability Pensions, earlier.
Federal Employees' Compensation Act 
(FECA). Payments received under this Act for 
personal injury or sickness, including payments 
to beneficiaries in case of death, aren’t taxable. 
However, you’re taxed on amounts you receive 
under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 
45 days while a claim is being decided. Report 
this income as wages. Also, pay for sick leave 
while a claim is being processed is taxable and 
must be included in your income as wages.
If part of the payments you receive un-
der FECA reduces your social security 
or equivalent railroad retirement bene-
fits received, that part is considered social se-
curity (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits 
and may be taxable. See Pub. 554 for more in-
formation.
You can deduct the amount you spend to 
buy back sick leave for an earlier year to be eli-
gible for nontaxable FECA benefits for that pe-
riod. It’s a miscellaneous deduction subject to 
the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). 
If you buy back sick leave in the same year you 
used it, the amount reduces your taxable sick 
leave pay. Don’t deduct it separately.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 56 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 54 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Other compensation.  Many other amounts 
you receive as compensation for sickness or in-
jury aren’t taxable. These include the following 
amounts.
Compensatory damages you receive for 
physical injury or physical sickness, 
whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic 
payments.
Benefits you receive under an accident or 
health insurance policy on which either you 
paid the premiums or your employer paid 
the premiums but you had to include them 
in your income.
Disability benefits you receive for loss of 
income or earning capacity as a result of 
injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-
icy.
Compensation you receive for permanent 
loss or loss of use of a part or function of 
your body, or for your permanent disfigure-
ment. This compensation must be based 
only on the injury and not on the period of 
your absence from work. These benefits 
aren’t taxable even if your employer pays 
for the accident and health plan that pro-
vides these benefits.
Reimbursement for medical care.  A reim-
bursement for medical care is generally not tax-
able. However, it may reduce your medical ex-
pense deduction. For more information, see 
chapter 21.
6.
Tip Income
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To find out whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
This chapter is for employees who receive tips.
All tips you receive are income and are sub-
ject to federal income tax. You must include in 
CAUTION
!
gross income all tips you receive directly, 
charged tips paid to you by your employer, and 
your share of any tips you receive under a 
tip-splitting or tip-pooling arrangement.
The value of noncash tips, such as tickets, 
passes, or other items of value, also is income 
and subject to tax.
Reporting your tip income correctly isn't diffi-
cult. You must do three things.
1. Keep a daily tip record.
2. Report tips to your employer.
3. Report all your tips on your income tax re-
turn.
This chapter will explain these three things and 
show you what to do on your tax return if you 
haven't done the first two. This chapter also will 
show you how to treat allocated tips.
For information on special tip programs and 
agreements, see Pub. 531.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Reporting Tip Income
Employee's Daily Record of Tips 
and Report to Employer
Form (and Instructions)
Social Security and Medicare Tax 
on Unreported Tip Income
Employee's Report of Tips to 
Employer
Keeping a Daily Tip 
Record
Why keep a daily tip record.  You must keep 
a daily tip record so you can:
Report your tips accurately to your em-
ployer,
Report your tips accurately on your tax re-
turn, and
Prove your tip income if your return is ever 
questioned.
How to keep a daily tip record.  There are 
two ways to keep a daily tip record. You can ei-
ther:
Write information about your tips in a tip di-
ary; or
Keep copies of documents that show your 
tips, such as restaurant bills and credit or 
debit card charge slips.
You should keep your daily tip record with your 
tax or other personal records. You must keep 
your records for as long as they're important for 
administration of the federal tax law. For infor-
mation on how long to keep records, see How 
Long To Keep Records in chapter 1.
To help you keep a record or diary of your 
tips, you can use Form 4070A, Employee's 
Daily Record of Tips. To get Form 4070A, ask 
your employer for Pub. 1244, which includes a 
1-year supply of Form 4070A or go online to 
IRS.gov/Pub1244 for a copy of Pub. 1244. Each 
  531
  1244
  4137
  4070
day, write in the information asked for on the 
form.
In addition to the information asked for on 
Form 4070A, you also need to keep a record of 
the date and value of any noncash tips you get, 
such as tickets, passes, or other items of value. 
Although you don't report these tips to your em-
ployer, you must report them on your tax return.
If you don't use Form 4070A, start your re-
cords by writing your name, your employer's 
name, and the name of the business (if it's dif-
ferent from your employer's name). Then, each 
workday, write the date and the following infor-
mation.
Cash tips you get directly from customers 
or from other employees.
Tips from credit and debit card charge cus-
tomers that your employer pays you.
The value of any noncash tips you get, 
such as tickets, passes, or other items of 
value.
The amount of tips you paid out to other 
employees through tip pools or tip splitting, 
or other arrangements, and the names of 
the employees to whom you paid the tips.
Electronic tip record. You can use an elec-
tronic system provided by your employer to re-
cord your daily tips. If you do, you must receive 
and keep a paper copy of this record.
Service charges.  Don't write in your tip diary 
the amount of any service charge that your em-
ployer adds to a customer's bill and then pays 
to you and treats as wages. This is part of your 
wages, not a tip. See examples below.
Example 1.  Good Food Restaurant adds 
an 18% charge to the bill for parties of 6 or more 
customers. Jane’s bill for food and beverages 
for her party of 8 includes an amount on the tip 
line equal to 18% of the charges for food and 
beverages, and the total includes this amount. 
Because Jane didn't have an unrestricted right 
to determine the amount on the “tip line,” the 
18% charge is considered a service charge. 
Don't include the 18% charge in your tip diary. 
Service charges that are paid to you are consid-
ered wages, not tips.
Example 2. Good Food Restaurant also in-
cludes sample calculations of tip amounts at the 
bottom of its bills for food and beverages provi-
ded to customers. David’s bill includes a blank 
“tip line,” with sample tip calculations of 15%, 
18%, and 20% of his charges for food and bev-
erages at the bottom of the bill beneath the sig-
nature line. Because David is free to enter any 
amount on the “tip line” or leave it blank, any 
amount he includes is considered a tip. Be sure 
to include this amount in your tip diary.
Reporting Tips to Your 
Employer
Why report tips to your employer.  You must 
report tips to your employer so that:
Your employer can withhold federal in-
come tax and social security, Medicare, 
Additional Medicare, or railroad retirement 
taxes;
Page 57 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 Tip Income Page 55

Your employer can report the correct 
amount of your earnings to the Social Se-
curity Administration or Railroad Retire-
ment Board (which affects your benefits 
when you retire or if you become disabled, 
or your family's benefits if you die); and
You can avoid the penalty for not reporting 
tips to your employer (explained later).
What tips to report.  Report to your employer 
only cash, check, and debit and credit card tips 
you receive.
If your total tips for any 1 month from any 
one job are less than $20, don't report the tips 
for that month to that employer.
If you participate in a tip-splitting or tip-pool-
ing arrangement, report only the tips you re-
ceive and retain. Don't report to your employer 
any portion of the tips you receive that you pass 
on to other employees. However, you must re-
port tips you receive from other employees.
Don't report the value of any noncash tips, 
such as tickets or passes, to your employer. 
You don't pay social security, Medicare, Addi-
tional Medicare, or railroad retirement taxes on 
these tips.
How to report.  If your employer doesn't give 
you any other way to report tips, you can use 
Form 4070. Fill in the information asked for on 
the form, sign and date the form, and give it to 
your employer. To get a 1-year supply of the 
form, ask your employer for Pub. 1244 or go on-
line to IRS.gov/Pub1244 for a copy of Pub. 
1244.
If you don't use Form 4070, give your em-
ployer a statement with the following informa-
tion.
Your name, address, and social security 
number.
Your employer's name, address, and busi-
ness name (if it’s different from your em-
ployer's name).
The month (or the dates of any shorter pe-
riod) in which you received tips.
The total tips required to be reported for 
that period.
You must sign and date the statement. Be sure 
to keep a copy with your tax or other personal 
records.
Your employer may require you to report 
your tips more than once a month. However, 
the statement can’t cover a period of more than 
1 calendar month.
Electronic tip statement.  Your employer 
can have you furnish your tip statements elec-
tronically.
When to report.  Give your report for each 
month to your employer by the 10th of the next 
month. If the 10th falls on a Saturday, Sunday, 
or legal holiday, give your employer the report 
by the next day that isn't a Saturday, Sunday, or 
legal holiday.
Example 1.  You must report your tips re-
ceived in October 2018 by November 13, 2018. 
November 10 is a Saturday and November 12 
is a legal holiday (Veterans' Day). November 13 
is the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, 
or legal holiday.
Example 2.  You must report your tips re-
ceived in September 2018 by October 10, 
2018.
Final report.  If your employment ends dur-
ing the month, you can report your tips when 
your employment ends.
Penalty for not reporting tips. If you don't re-
port tips to your employer as required, you may 
be subject to a penalty equal to 50% of the so-
cial security, Medicare, and Additional Medi-
care taxes or railroad retirement tax you owe on 
the unreported tips. For information about these 
taxes, see Reporting social security, Medicare, 
Additional Medicare, or railroad retirement 
taxes on tips not reported to your employer  un-
der Reporting Tips on Your Tax Return , later. 
The penalty amount is in addition to the taxes 
you owe.
You can avoid this penalty if you can show 
reasonable cause for not reporting the tips to 
your employer. To do so, attach a statement to 
your return explaining why you didn't report 
them.
Giving your employer money for taxes.
Your regular pay may not be enough for your 
employer to withhold all the taxes you owe on 
your regular pay plus your reported tips. If this 
happens, you can give your employer money 
until the close of the calendar year to pay the 
rest of the taxes.
If you don't give your employer enough 
money, your employer will apply your regular 
pay and any money you give in the following or-
der.
1. All taxes on your regular pay.
2. Social security, Medicare, and Additional 
Medicare taxes or railroad retirement 
taxes on your reported tips.
3. Federal, state, and local income taxes on 
your reported tips.
Any taxes that remain unpaid can be collec-
ted by your employer from your next paycheck. 
If withholding taxes remain uncollected at the 
end of the year, you may be subject to a penalty 
for underpayment of estimated taxes. See Pub. 
505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, for 
more information.
Uncollected taxes. You must report 
on your tax return any social security 
and Medicare taxes or railroad retire-
ment tax that remained uncollected at the end 
of 2017. These uncollected taxes will be shown 
on your 2017 Form W-2. See Reporting uncol-
lected social security, Medicare, or railroad re-
tirement taxes on tips reported to your employer 
under Reporting Tips on Your Tax Return, later.
Reporting Tips on Your 
Tax Return
How to report tips.  Report your tips with your 
wages on Form 1040, line 7; Form 1040A, 
line 7; or Form 1040EZ, line 1.
What tips to report.  You must report all tips 
you received in 2017 on your tax return, includ-
ing both cash tips and noncash tips. Any tips 
you reported to your employer for 2017 are in-
cluded in the wages shown on your Form W-2, 
CAUTION
!
box 1. Add to the amount in box 1 only the tips 
you didn’t report to your employer.
If you received $20 or more in cash and 
charge tips in a month and didn't report 
all of those tips to your employer, see 
Reporting social security, Medicare, Additional 
Medicare, or railroad retirement taxes on tips 
not reported to your employer, later.
If you didn't keep a daily tip record as 
required and an amount is shown on 
your Form W-2, box 8, see Allocated 
Tips, later.
If you kept a daily tip record and reported 
tips to your employer as required under the 
rules explained earlier, add the following tips to 
the amount on your Form W-2, box 1.
Cash and charge tips you received that to-
taled less than $20 for any month.
The value of noncash tips, such as tickets, 
passes, or other items of value.
Example. Ben Smith began working at the 
Blue Ocean Restaurant (his only employer in 
2017) on June 30 and received $10,000 in wa-
ges during the year. Ben kept a daily tip record 
showing that his tips for June were $18 and his 
tips for the rest of the year totaled $7,000. He 
wasn't required to report his June tips to his em-
ployer, but he reported all of the rest of his tips 
to his employer as required.
Ben's Form W-2 from Blue Ocean Restau-
rant shows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plus 
$7,000 reported tips) in box 1. He adds the $18 
unreported tips to that amount and reports 
$17,018 as wages on his tax return.
Reporting social security, Medicare, Addi-
tional Medicare, or railroad retirement taxes 
on tips not reported to your employer.  If 
you received $20 or more in cash and charge 
tips in a month from any one job and didn't re-
port all of those tips to your employer, you must 
report the social security, Medicare, and Addi-
tional Medicare taxes on the unreported tips as 
additional tax on your return. To report these 
taxes, you must file Form 1040, 1040NR, 
1040-PR, or 1040-SS (not Form 1040EZ or 
Form 1040A) even if you wouldn't otherwise 
have to file.
Use Form 4137 to figure social security and 
Medicare taxes and/or Form 8959 to figure Ad-
ditional Medicare Tax. Enter the taxes on your 
return as instructed, and attach the completed 
Form 4137 and/or Form 8959 to your return.
If you're subject to the Railroad Retire-
ment Tax Act, you can’t use Form 4137 
to pay railroad retirement tax on unre-
ported tips. To get railroad retirement credit, 
you must report tips to your employer.
Reporting uncollected social security, Med-
icare, or railroad retirement taxes on tips 
reported to your employer.  You may have 
uncollected taxes if your regular pay wasn't 
enough for your employer to withhold all the 
taxes you owe and you didn't give your em-
ployer enough money to pay the rest of the 
taxes. For more information, see Giving your 
employer money for taxes under Reporting Tips 
to Your Employer, earlier.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 58 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 56 Chapter 6 Tip Income

If your employer couldn't collect all the social 
security and Medicare taxes or railroad retire-
ment tax you owe on tips reported for 2017, the 
uncollected taxes will be shown on your Form 
W-2, box 12 (codes A and B). You must report 
these amounts as additional tax on your return. 
Unlike the uncollected portion of the regular 
(1.45%) Medicare tax, the uncollected Addi-
tional Medicare Tax isn't reported on your Form 
W-2.
To report these uncollected taxes, you must 
file Form 1040, 1040NR, 1040-PR, or 1040-SS 
(not Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A) even if you 
wouldn't otherwise have to file. You must report 
these taxes on Form 1040, line 62, or the corre-
sponding line of Form 1040NR, 1040-PR, or 
1040-SS (not Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A). 
See the instructions for these forms for exact 
reporting information.
Allocated Tips
If your employer allocated tips to you, they're 
shown separately on your Form W-2, box 8. 
They aren't included in box 1 with your wages 
and reported tips. If box 8 is blank, this discus-
sion doesn't apply to you.
What are allocated tips.  These are tips that 
your employer assigned to you in addition to the 
tips you reported to your employer for the year. 
Your employer will have done this only if:
You worked in an establishment (restau-
rant, cocktail lounge, or similar business) 
that must allocate tips to employees; and
The tips you reported to your employer 
were less than your share of 8% of food 
and drink sales.
No income, social security, Medicare, Addi-
tional Medicare, or railroad retirement taxes are 
withheld on allocated tips.
How were your allocated tips figured.  The 
tips allocated to you are your share of an 
amount figured by subtracting the reported tips 
of all employees from 8% (or an approved lower 
rate) of food and drink sales (other than carry-
out sales and sales with a service charge of 
10% or more). Your share of that amount was 
figured using either a method provided by an 
employer-employee agreement or a method 
provided by IRS regulations based on employ-
ees' sales or hours worked. For information 
about the exact allocation method used, ask 
your employer.
Must you report your allocated tips on your 
tax return.  You must report all tips you re-
ceived in 2017, including both cash tips and 
noncash tips, on your tax return. Any tips you 
reported to your employer for 2017 are included 
in the wages shown on your Form W-2, box 1. 
Add to the amount in box 1 only the tips you 
didn't report to your employer. This should in-
clude any allocated tips shown on your Form(s) 
W-2, box 8, unless you have adequate records 
to show that you received less tips in the year 
than the allocated figures.
See What tips to report  under Reporting 
Tips on Your Tax Return , and Keeping a Daily 
Tip Record, earlier.
How to report allocated tips.  Report the 
amounts shown on your Form(s) W-2, box 1 
(wages and tips) and box 8 (allocated tips), as 
wages on Form 1040, line 7; Form 1040NR, 
line 8; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 3. You can’t file 
Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ when you have 
allocated tips.
Because social security, Medicare, and Ad-
ditional Medicare taxes weren't withheld from 
the allocated tips, you must report those taxes 
as additional tax on your return. Complete Form 
4137, and include the allocated tips on line 1 of 
the form. See Reporting social security, Medi-
care, Additional Medicare, or railroad retirement 
taxes on tips not reported to your employer  un-
der Reporting Tips on Your Tax Return, earlier. 
7.
Interest Income
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as California 
wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted, 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Reminder
Foreign-source income. If you are a U.S. citi-
zen with interest income from sources outside 
the United States (foreign income), you must re-
port that income on your tax return unless it is 
exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-
side inside or outside the United States and 
whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from 
the foreign payer.
 
Automatic 6-month extension.  If you receive 
your Form 1099 reporting your interest income 
late and you need more time to file your tax re-
turn, you can request a 6-month extension of 
time to file. See Automatic Extension  in chap-
ter 1.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following topics.
Different types of interest income.
CAUTION
!
What interest is taxable and what interest 
is nontaxable.
When to report interest income.
How to report interest income on your tax 
return.
In general, any interest you receive or that is 
credited to your account and can be withdrawn 
is taxable income. Exceptions to this rule are 
discussed later in this chapter.
You may be able to deduct expenses you 
have in earning this income on Schedule A 
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. See 
Money borrowed to invest in certificate of de-
posit, later, and chapter 28.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Installment Sales
Investment Income and Expenses
Guide to Original Issue Discount 
(OID) Instruments
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized 
Deductions
Interest and Ordinary Dividends
Tax for Certain Children Who Have 
Unearned Income
Parents' Election To Report Child's 
Interest and Dividends
Exclusion of Interest From Series 
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued 
After 1989
Optional Form To Record 
Redemption of Series EE and I U.S. 
Savings Bonds Issued After 1989
General Information
A few items of general interest are covered 
here.
Recordkeeping. You should keep a 
list showing sources of interest income 
and interest amounts received during 
the year. Also, keep the forms you receive 
showing your interest income (Forms 1099-INT, 
for example) as an important part of your re-
cords.
Tax on unearned income of certain chil-
dren. Part of a child's 2017 unearned income 
may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. If so, 
Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children Who Have 
Unearned Income, must be completed and at-
tached to the child's tax return. If not, Form 
8615 isn't required and the child's income is 
taxed at his or her own tax rate.
Some parents can choose to include the 
child's interest and dividends on the parent's re-
turn. If you can, use Form 8814, Parents' Elec-
tion To Report Child's Interest and Dividends, 
for this purpose.
  537 
  550 
  1212
  Schedule A (Form 1040) 
  Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) 
  8615
  8814
  8815
  8818
RECORDS
Page 59 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 57

For more information about the tax on un-
earned income of children and the parents' 
election, see chapter 31.
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.  Interest 
you receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust 
is generally taxable income. You should receive 
a Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's 
Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., 
from the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 
(Form 1041) and its instructions will tell you 
where to report the income on your Form 1040.
Social security number (SSN).  You must 
give your name and SSN or individual taxpayer 
identification number (ITIN) to any person re-
quired by federal tax law to make a return, 
statement, or other document that relates to 
you. This includes payers of interest. If you 
don't give your SSN or ITIN to the payer of inter-
est, you may have to pay a penalty.
SSN for joint account. If the funds in a joint 
account belong to one person, list that person's 
name first on the account and give that person's 
SSN to the payer. (For information on who 
owns the funds in a joint account, see Joint ac-
counts, later.) If the joint account contains com-
bined funds, give the SSN of the person whose 
name is listed first on the account. This is be-
cause only one name and SSN can be shown 
on Form 1099.
These rules apply to both joint ownership by 
a married couple and to joint ownership by 
other individuals. For example, if you open a 
joint savings account with your child using 
funds belonging to the child, list the child's 
name first on the account and give the child's 
SSN.
Custodian account for your child.  If your 
child is the actual owner of an account that is 
recorded in your name as custodian for the 
child, give the child's SSN to the payer. For ex-
ample, you must give your child's SSN to the 
payer of interest on an account owned by your 
child, even though the interest is paid to you as 
custodian.
Penalty for failure to supply SSN.  If you 
don't give your SSN to the payer of interest, you 
may have to pay a penalty. See Failure to sup-
ply SSN  under Penalties in chapter 1. Backup 
withholding also may apply.
Backup withholding.  Your interest income is 
generally not subject to regular withholding. 
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the 
income. Under backup withholding, the payer of 
interest must withhold, as income tax, on the 
amount you are paid, by applying the appropri-
ate withholding rate.
Backup withholding may also be required if 
the IRS has determined that you underreported 
your interest or dividend income. For more in-
formation, see Backup Withholding  in chap-
ter 4.
Reporting backup withholding.  If backup 
withholding is deducted from your interest in-
come, the payer must give you a Form 
1099-INT for the year indicating the amount 
withheld. The Form 1099-INT will show any 
backup withholding as “Federal income tax 
withheld.”
Joint accounts.  If two or more persons hold 
property (such as a savings account or bond) 
as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or ten-
ants in common, each person's share of any in-
terest from the property is determined by local 
law.
Income from property given to a child.
Property you give as a parent to your child un-
der the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, 
the Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar 
law becomes the child's property.
Income from the property is taxable to the 
child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal 
obligation to support the child is taxable to the 
parent or guardian having that legal obligation.
Savings account with parent as trustee. 
Interest income from a savings account opened 
for a minor child, but placed in the name and 
subject to the order of the parents as trustees, 
is taxable to the child if, under the law of the 
state in which the child resides, both of the fol-
lowing are true.
The savings account legally belongs to the 
child.
The parents aren't legally permitted to use 
any of the funds to support the child.
Form 1099-INT.  Interest income is generally 
reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar 
statement, by banks, savings and loans, and 
other payers of interest. This form shows you 
the interest income you received during the 
year. Keep this form for your records. You don't 
have to attach it to your tax return.
Report on your tax return the total interest 
income you receive for the tax year. See the in-
structions to Form 1099-INT to see whether you 
need to adjust any of the amounts reported to 
you.
Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT. 
Even if you don't receive a Form 1099-INT, you 
must still report all of your interest income. For 
example, you may receive distributive shares of 
interest from partnerships or S corporations. 
This interest is reported to you on Schedule K-1 
(Form 1065), Partner's Share of Income, De-
duction, Credits, etc., or Schedule K-1 (Form 
1120S), Shareholder's Share of Income, De-
ductions, Credits, etc.
Nominees. Generally, if someone receives 
interest as a nominee for you, that person must 
give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest 
received on your behalf.
If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes 
amounts belonging to another person, see the 
discussion on nominee distributions under How 
To Report Interest Income  in chapter 1 of Pub. 
550, or the Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) 
instructions.
Incorrect amount.  If you receive a Form 
1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount or 
other incorrect information, you should ask the 
issuer for a corrected form. The new Form 
1099-INT you receive will have the “CORREC-
TED” box checked.
Form 1099-OID.  Reportable interest income 
also may be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original 
Issue Discount. For more information about 
amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue 
Discount (OID), later in this chapter.
Exempt-interest dividends.  Exempt-interest 
dividends you receive from a mutual fund or 
other regulated investment company, including 
those received from a qualified fund of funds in 
any tax year beginning after December 22, 
2010, aren't included in your taxable income. 
(However, see Information-reporting require-
ment next.) Exempt-interest dividends should 
be shown in box 10 of Form 1099-DIV. You 
don't reduce your basis for distributions that are 
exempt-interest dividends.
Information-reporting requirement.  Al-
though exempt-interest dividends aren't taxa-
ble, you must show them on your tax return if 
you have to file. This is an information-reporting 
requirement and doesn't change the exempt-in-
terest dividends into taxable income.
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from 
specified private activity bonds may be subject 
to the alternative minimum tax. See Alternative 
Minimum Tax (AMT)  in chapter 30 for more in-
formation. Chapter 1 of Pub. 550 contains a dis-
cussion on private activity bonds under State or 
Local Government Obligations.
Interest on VA dividends.  Interest on insur-
ance dividends left on deposit with the Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) isn't taxable. This 
includes interest paid on dividends on conver-
ted United States Government Life Insurance 
and on National Service Life Insurance policies.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). 
Interest on a Roth IRA generally isn't taxable. 
Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You 
generally don't include interest earned in an IRA 
in your income until you make withdrawals from 
the IRA. See chapter 17.
Taxable Interest
Taxable interest includes interest you receive 
from bank accounts, loans you make to others, 
and other sources. The following are some 
sources of taxable interest.
Dividends that are actually interest.  Certain 
distributions commonly called dividends are ac-
tually interest. You must report as interest 
so-called “dividends” on deposits or on share 
accounts in:
Cooperative banks,
Credit unions,
Domestic building and loan associations,
Domestic savings and loan associations,
Federal savings and loan associations, 
and
Mutual savings banks.
The “dividends” will be shown as interest in-
come on Form 1099-INT.
Money market funds.  Money market funds 
pay dividends and are offered by nonbank fi-
nancial institutions, such as mutual funds and 
stock brokerage houses. Generally, amounts 
you receive from money market funds should 
be reported as dividends, not as interest.
Certificates of deposit and other deferred 
interest accounts.  If you open any of these 
accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals 
of 1 year or less during the term of the account. 
Page 60 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 58 Chapter 7 Interest Income

You generally must include this interest in your 
income when you actually receive it or are enti-
tled to receive it without paying a substantial 
penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-
ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single 
payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for 
more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discount 
(OID), later.
Interest subject to penalty for early with-
drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferred 
interest account before maturity, you may have 
to pay a penalty. You must report the total 
amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-
count during the year, without subtracting the 
penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-
ings in chapter 1 of Pub. 550 for more informa-
tion on how to report the interest and deduct the 
penalty.
Money borrowed to invest in certificate 
of deposit.  The interest expense you pay on 
money borrowed from a bank or savings institu-
tion to meet the minimum deposit required for a 
certificate of deposit from the institution and the 
interest you earn on the certificate are two sep-
arate items. You must report the total interest 
income you earn on the certificate in your in-
come. If you itemize deductions, you can de-
duct the interest you pay as investment interest, 
up to the amount of your net investment in-
come. See Interest Expenses  in chapter 3 of 
Pub. 550.
Example. You deposited $5,000 with a 
bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to 
make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required 
to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-
tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2017, but you 
received only $265, which represented the 
$575 you earned minus $310 interest charged 
on your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a 
Form 1099-INT for 2017 showing the $575 in-
terest you earned. The bank also gives you a 
statement showing that you paid $310 of inter-
est for 2017. You must include the $575 in your 
income. If you itemize your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, 
subject to the net investment income limit.
Gift for opening account.  If you receive non-
cash gifts or services for making deposits or for 
opening an account in a savings institution, you 
may have to report the value as interest.
For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or 
services valued at more than $10 must be re-
ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or 
more, gifts or services valued at more than $20 
must be reported as interest. The value is deter-
mined by the cost to the financial institution.
Example. You open a savings account at 
your local bank and deposit $800. The account 
earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-
culator. If no other interest is credited to your 
account during the year, the Form 1099-INT 
you receive will show $35 interest for the year. 
You must report $35 interest income on your tax 
return.
Interest on insurance dividends.  Interest on 
insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-
surance company that can be withdrawn annu-
ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to 
your account. However, if you can withdraw it 
only on the anniversary date of the policy (or 
other specified date), the interest is taxable in 
the year that date occurs.
Prepaid insurance premiums.  Any increase 
in the value of prepaid insurance premiums, ad-
vance premiums, or premium deposit funds is 
interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-
ums due on insurance policies or made availa-
ble for you to withdraw.
U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations, 
such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, 
issued by any agency or instrumentality of the 
United States is taxable for federal income tax 
purposes.
Interest on tax refunds.  Interest you receive 
on tax refunds is taxable income.
Interest on condemnation award.  If the con-
demning authority pays you interest to compen-
sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the 
interest is taxable.
Installment sale payments.  If a contract for 
the sale or exchange of property provides for 
deferred payments, it also usually provides for 
interest payable with the deferred payments. 
Generally, that interest is taxable when you re-
ceive it. If little or no interest is provided for in a 
deferred payment contract, part of each pay-
ment may be treated as interest. See Unstated 
Interest and Original Issue Discount in Pub. 
537, Installment Sales.
Interest on annuity contract.  Accumulated 
interest on an annuity contract you sell before 
its maturity date is taxable.
Usurious interest. Usurious interest is interest 
charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as in-
terest unless state law automatically changes it 
to a payment on the principal.
Interest income on frozen deposits.  Ex-
clude from your gross income interest on frozen 
deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the 
year, you can't withdraw any part of the deposit 
because:
The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
solvent, or
The state where the institution is located 
has placed limits on withdrawals because 
other financial institutions in the state are 
bankrupt or insolvent.
The amount of interest you must exclude is 
the interest that was credited on the frozen de-
posits minus the sum of:
The net amount you withdrew from these 
deposits during the year, and
The amount you could have withdrawn as 
of the end of the year (not reduced by any 
penalty for premature withdrawals of a time 
deposit).
If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in-
come on deposits that were frozen at the end of 
2017, see Frozen deposits  under How To Re-
port Interest Income in chapter 1 of Pub. 550 for 
information about reporting this interest income 
exclusion on your tax return.
The interest you exclude is treated as credi-
ted to your account in the following year. You 
must include it in income in the year you can 
withdraw it.
Example. $100 of interest was credited on 
your frozen deposit during the year. You with-
drew $80 but couldn't withdraw any more as of 
the end of the year. You must include $80 in 
your income and exclude $20 from your income 
for the year. You must include the $20 in your 
income for the year you can withdraw it.
Bonds traded flat.  If you buy a bond at a dis-
count when interest has been defaulted or 
when the interest has accrued but hasn't been 
paid, the transaction is described as trading a 
bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest isn't 
income and isn't taxable as interest if paid later. 
When you receive a payment of that interest, it 
is a return of capital that reduces the remaining 
cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues 
after the date of purchase, however, is taxable 
interest income for the year it is received or ac-
crued. See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, 
later, for more information.
Below-market loans. In general, a below-mar-
ket loan is a loan on which no interest is 
charged or on which interest is charged at a 
rate below the applicable federal rate. See Be-
low-Market Loans  in chapter 1 of Pub. 550 for 
more information.
U.S. Savings Bonds
This section provides tax information on U.S. 
savings bonds. It explains how to report the in-
terest income on these bonds and how to treat 
transfers of these bonds.
For other information on U.S. savings 
bonds, write to:
For series HH/H:
Series HH and Series H
Treasury Retail Securities Site
P.O. Box 2186
Minneapolis, MN 55480-2186
 
For series EE and I paper savings bonds:
Series EE and Series I
Treasury Retail Securities Site
P.O. Box 214
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0214
 
For series EE and I electronic bonds:
Series EE and Series I
Treasury Retail Securities Site
P.O. Box 7015
Minneapolis, MN 55480-7015
Or, on the Internet, visit 
www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/
indiv.htm.
Accrual method taxpayers.  If you use an ac-
crual method of accounting, you must report in-
terest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it ac-
crues. You can't postpone reporting interest 
until you receive it or until the bonds mature. 
Accrual methods of accounting are explained in 
chapter 1 under Accounting Methods.
Cash method taxpayers.  If you use the cash 
method of accounting, as most individual tax-
payers do, you generally report the interest on 
U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. The 
cash method of accounting is explained in 
Page 61 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 59

chapter 1 under Accounting Methods . But see 
Reporting options for cash method taxpayers , 
later.
Series HH bonds.  These bonds were issued 
at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by di-
rect deposit to your bank account. If you are a 
cash method taxpayer, you must report interest 
on these bonds as income in the year you re-
ceive it.
Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980 
and last offered in August 2004. Before 1980, 
series H bonds were issued. Series H bonds 
are treated the same as series HH bonds. If you 
are a cash method taxpayer, you must report 
the interest when you receive it.
Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30 
years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years. 
The last series H bonds matured in 2009.
Series EE and series I bonds.  Interest on 
these bonds is payable when you redeem the 
bonds. The difference between the purchase 
price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
est.
Series EE bonds.  Series EE bonds were 
first offered in January 1980 and have a matur-
ity period of 30 years.
Before July 1980, series E bonds were is-
sued. The original 10-year maturity period of 
series E bonds has been extended to 40 years 
for bonds issued before December 1965 and 30 
years for bonds issued after November 1965. 
Paper series EE and series E bonds are issued 
at a discount. The face value is payable to you 
at maturity. Electronic series EE bonds are is-
sued at their face value. The face value plus ac-
crued interest is payable to you at maturity. As 
of January 1, 2012, paper savings bonds were 
no longer sold at financial institutions.
Owners of paper series EE bonds can con-
vert them to electronic bonds. These converted 
bonds don't retain the denomination listed on 
the paper certificate but are posted at their pur-
chase price (with accrued interest).
Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first of-
fered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed 
bonds issued at their face amount with a matur-
ity period of 30 years. The face value plus all 
accrued interest is payable to you at maturity.
Reporting options for cash method tax-
payers. If you use the cash method of report-
ing income, you can report the interest on ser-
ies EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of 
the following ways.
1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest 
until the earlier of the year you cash or dis-
pose of the bonds or the year they mature. 
(However, see Savings bonds traded, 
later.)
2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase 
in redemption value as interest each year.
You must use the same method for all series 
EE, series E, and series I bonds you own. If you 
don't choose method 2 by reporting the in-
crease in redemption value as interest each 
year, you must use method 1.
If you plan to cash your bonds in the 
same year you will pay for higher edu-
cation expenses, you may want to use 
method 1 because you may be able to exclude 
the interest from your income. To learn how, 
see Education Savings Bond Program, later.
Change from method 1.  If you want to 
change your method of reporting the interest 
from method 1 to method 2, you can do so with-
out permission from the IRS. In the year of 
change, you must report all interest accrued to 
date and not previously reported for all your 
bonds.
Once you choose to report the interest each 
year, you must continue to do so for all series 
EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and 
for any you get later, unless you request per-
mission to change, as explained next.
Change from method 2.  To change from 
method 2 to method 1, you must request per-
mission from the IRS. Permission for the 
change is automatically granted if you send the 
IRS a statement that meets all the following re-
quirements.
1. You have typed or printed the following 
number at the top: “131.”
2. It includes your name and social security 
number under “131.”
3. It includes the year of change (both the 
beginning and ending dates).
4. It identifies the savings bonds for which 
you are requesting this change.
5. It includes your agreement to:
a. Report all interest on any bonds ac-
quired during or after the year of 
change when the interest is realized 
upon disposition, redemption, or final 
maturity, whichever is earliest; and
b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-
quired before the year of change 
when the interest is realized upon dis-
position, redemption, or final maturity, 
whichever is earliest, with the excep-
tion of the interest reported in prior tax 
years.
You must attach this statement to your tax 
return for the year of change, which you must 
file by the due date (including extensions).
You can have an automatic extension of 6 
months from the due date of your return for the 
year of change (excluding extensions) to file the 
statement with an amended return. To get this 
extension, you must have filed your original re-
turn for the year of the change by the due date 
(including extensions).
Instead of filing this statement, you can re-
quest permission to change from method 2 to 
method 1 by filing Form 3115, Application for 
Change in Accounting Method. In that case, fol-
low the form instructions for an automatic 
change. No user fee is required.
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in 
the names of co-owners, such as you and your 
child or you and your spouse, interest on the 
bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who 
bought the bond.
One co-owner's funds used.  If you used 
your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the 
TIP
tax on the interest. This is true even if you let 
the other co-owner redeem the bond and keep 
all the proceeds. Under these circumstances, 
the co-owner who redeemed the bond will re-
ceive a Form 1099-INT at the time of redemp-
tion and must provide you with another Form 
1099-INT showing the amount of interest from 
the bond taxable to you. The co-owner who re-
deemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nominee 
distributions under How To Report Interest In-
come in chapter 1 of Pub. 550 for more informa-
tion about how a person who is a nominee re-
ports interest income belonging to another 
person.
Both co-owners' funds used.  If you and 
the other co-owner each contribute part of the 
bond's purchase price, the interest is generally 
taxable to each of you, in proportion to the 
amount each of you paid.
Community property.  If you and your 
spouse live in a community property state and 
hold bonds as community property, one-half of 
the interest is considered received by each of 
you. If you file separate returns, each of you 
generally must report one-half of the bond inter-
est. For more information about community 
property, see Pub. 555.
Table 7-1.  These rules are also shown in 
Table 7-1.
Ownership transferred.  If you bought series 
E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with your 
own funds and had them reissued in your 
co-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone, 
you must include in your gross income for the 
year of reissue all interest that you earned on 
these bonds and have not previously reported. 
But, if the bonds were reissued in your name 
alone, you don't have to report the interest ac-
crued at that time.
This same rule applies when bonds (other 
than bonds held as community property) are 
transferred between spouses or incident to di-
vorce.
Purchased jointly.  If you and a co-owner 
each contributed funds to buy series E, series 
EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the 
bonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone, 
you must include in your gross income for the 
year of reissue your share of all the interest 
earned on the bonds that you have not previ-
ously reported. The former co-owner doesn't 
have to include in gross income at the time of 
reissue his or her share of the interest earned 
that was not reported before the transfer. This 
interest, however, as well as all interest earned 
after the reissue, is income to the former 
co-owner.
This income-reporting rule also applies 
when the bonds are reissued in the name of 
your former co-owner and a new co-owner. But 
the new co-owner will report only his or her 
share of the interest earned after the transfer.
If bonds that you and a co-owner bought 
jointly are reissued to each of you separately in 
the same proportion as your contribution to the 
purchase price, neither you nor your co-owner 
has to report at that time the interest earned be-
fore the bonds were reissued.
Example 1.  You and your spouse each 
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series 
Page 62 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 60 Chapter 7 Interest Income

EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you 
and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-
pone reporting interest on the bond. You later 
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, 
one in your name and one in your spouse's 
name. At that time, neither you nor your spouse 
has to report the interest earned to the date of 
reissue.
Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE 
savings bond entirely with your own funds. The 
bond was issued to you and your spouse as 
co-owners. You both postpone reporting inter-
est on the bond. You later have the bond reis-
sued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and 
one in your spouse's name. You must report 
half the interest earned to the date of reissue.
Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, series 
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a 
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must 
include in your income for that year the interest 
earned to the date of transfer if you have not al-
ready reported it. However, if you are consid-
ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in 
value both before and after the transfer contin-
ues to be taxable to you, you can continue to 
defer reporting the interest earned each year. 
You must include the total interest in your in-
come in the year you cash or dispose of the 
bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, 
whichever is earlier.
The same rules apply to previously unrepor-
ted interest on series EE or series E bonds if the 
transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or ser-
ies H bonds you acquired in a trade for the ser-
ies EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds 
traded, later.
Decedents. The manner of reporting interest 
income on series E, series EE, or series I 
bonds, after the death of the owner (decedent), 
depends on the accounting and income-report-
ing methods previously used by the decedent. 
This is explained in chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
Savings bonds traded.  If you postponed re-
porting the interest on your series EE or series 
E bonds, you didn't recognize taxable income 
when you traded the bonds for series HH or 
series H bonds, unless you received cash in the 
trade. (You can't trade series I bonds for series 
HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can't 
trade any other series of bonds for series HH 
bonds.) Any cash you received is income up to 
the amount of the interest earned on the bonds 
traded. When your series HH or series H bonds 
mature, or if you dispose of them before matur-
ity, you report as interest the difference be-
tween their redemption value and your cost. 
Your cost is the sum of the amount you paid for 
the traded series EE or series E bonds plus any 
amount you had to pay at the time of the trade.
Example. You traded series EE bonds (on 
which you postponed reporting the interest) for 
$2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 in cash. 
You reported the $223 as taxable income on 
your tax return. At the time of the trade, the ser-
ies EE bonds had accrued interest of $523 and 
a redemption value of $2,723. You hold the ser-
ies HH bonds until maturity, when you receive 
$2,500. You must report $300 as interest in-
come in the year of maturity. This is the differ-
ence between their redemption value, $2,500, 
and your cost, $2,200 (the amount you paid for 
the series EE bonds). It is also the difference 
between the accrued interest of $523 on the 
series EE bonds and the $223 cash received on 
the trade.
Choice to report interest in year of trade. 
You could have chosen to treat all of the previ-
ously unreported accrued interest on the series 
EE or series E bonds traded for series HH 
bonds as income in the year of the trade. If you 
made this choice, it is treated as a change from 
method 1. See Change from method 1, earlier.
Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds inter-
est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other 
payer that redeems it must give you a Form 
1099-INT if the interest part of the payment you 
receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form 
1099-INT should show the interest as the differ-
ence between the amount you received and the 
amount paid for the bond. However, your Form 
1099-INT may show more interest than you 
have to include on your income tax return. For 
example, this may happen if any of the following 
are true.
You chose to report the increase in the re-
demption value of the bond each year. The 
interest shown on your Form 1099-INT 
won't be reduced by amounts previously 
included in income.
You received the bond from a decedent. 
The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT 
won't be reduced by any interest reported 
by the decedent before death, or on the 
decedent's final return, or by the estate on 
the estate's income tax return.
Ownership of the bond was transferred. 
The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT 
won't be reduced by interest that accrued 
before the transfer.
You were named as a co-owner, and the 
other co-owner contributed funds to buy 
the bond. The interest shown on your Form 
1099-INT won't be reduced by the amount 
you received as nominee for the other 
co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in this 
chapter, for more information about the re-
porting requirements.)
You received the bond in a taxable distri-
bution from a retirement or profit-sharing 
plan. The interest shown on your Form 
1099-INT won't be reduced by the interest 
portion of the amount taxable as a distribu-
tion from the plan and not taxable as inter-
est. (This amount is generally shown on 
Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen-
sions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-
ing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc., 
for the year of distribution.)
For more information on including the cor-
rect amount of interest on your return, see How 
To Report Interest Income , later. Pub. 550 in-
cludes examples showing how to report these 
amounts.
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-
empt from state and local taxes. The 
Form 1099-INT you receive will indi-
cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond in-
terest in box 3.
Education Savings
Bond Program
You may be able to exclude from income all or 
part of the interest you receive on the redemp-
tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the 
year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-
penses during the same year. This exclusion is 
known as the Education Savings Bond Pro-
gram.
You don't qualify for this exclusion if your fil-
ing status is married filing separately.
Form 8815.  Use Form 8815 to figure your 
exclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 or 
Form 1040A.
Qualified U.S. savings bonds.  A qualified 
U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued 
after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be 
issued either in your name (sole owner) or in 
your and your spouse's names (co-owners). 
You must be at least 24 years old before the 
bond's issue date. For example, a bond bought 
by a parent and issued in the name of his or her 
child under age 24 doesn't qualify for the exclu-
sion by the parent or child.
The issue date of a bond may be ear-
lier than the date the bond is pur-
chased because the issue date as-
signed to a bond is the first day of the month in 
which it is purchased.
Beneficiary. You can designate any individual 
(including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.
Verification by IRS.  If you claim the exclu-
sion, the IRS will check it by using bond re-
demption information from the Department of 
the Treasury.
Qualified expenses.  Qualified higher edu-
cation expenses are tuition and fees required 
for you, your spouse, or your dependent (for 
whom you claim an exemption) to attend an eli-
gible educational institution.
Qualified expenses include any contribution 
you make to a qualified tuition program or to a 
Coverdell education savings account.
Qualified expenses don't include expenses 
for room and board or for courses involving 
sports, games, or hobbies that aren't part of a 
degree or certificate granting program.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Table 7-1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
IF... THEN the interest must be reported by...
you buy a bond in your name and the name of another 
person as co-owners, using only your own funds
you.
you buy a bond in the name of another person, who is the 
sole owner of the bond
the person for whom you bought the bond.
you and another person buy a bond as co-owners, each 
contributing part of the purchase price
both you and the other co-owner, in proportion to the 
amount each paid for the bond.
you and your spouse, who live in a community property 
state, buy a bond that is community property
you and your spouse. If you file separate returns, both you 
and your spouse generally report one-half of the interest.
Page 63 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 61

Eligible educational institutions.  These 
institutions include most public, private, and 
nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational 
schools that are accredited and eligible to par-
ticipate in student aid programs run by the U.S. 
Department of Education.
Reduction for certain benefits.  You must 
reduce your qualified higher education expen-
ses by all of the following tax-free benefits.
1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-
ships (see Scholarships and fellowships in 
chapter 12).
2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.
3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
tion of distributions from a qualified tuition 
program.
4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or 
inheritances) received for educational ex-
penses, such as:
a. Veterans' educational assistance ben-
efits,
b. Qualified tuition reductions, or
c. Employer-provided educational assis-
tance.
5. Any expense used in figuring the Ameri-
can opportunity and lifetime learning cred-
its.
Amount excludable.  If the total proceeds 
(interest and principal) from the qualified U.S. 
savings bonds you redeem during the year 
aren't more than your adjusted qualified higher 
education expenses for the year, you may be 
able to exclude all of the interest. If the pro-
ceeds are more than the expenses, you may be 
able to exclude only part of the interest.
To determine the excludable amount, multi-
ply the interest part of the proceeds by a frac-
tion. The numerator of the fraction is the quali-
fied higher education expenses you paid during 
the year. The denominator of the fraction is the 
total proceeds you received during the year.
Example. In February 2017, Mark and 
Joan, a married couple, cashed qualified series 
EE U.S. savings bonds with a total denomina-
tion of $10,000 that they bought in April 2001 
for $5,000. They received proceeds of $7,520, 
representing principal of $5,000 and interest of 
$2,520. In 2017, they paid $4,000 of their 
daughter's college tuition. They aren't claiming 
an education credit for that amount, and their 
daughter doesn't have any tax-free educational 
assistance. They can exclude $1,340 ($2,520 × 
($4,000 ÷ $7,520)) of interest in 2017. They 
must include the remaining $1,180 ($2,520 − 
$1,340) interest in gross income.
Modified adjusted gross income limit. 
The interest exclusion is limited if your modified 
adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:
$78,150 to $93,150 for taxpayers filing sin-
gle or head of household, and
$117,250 to $147,250 for married taxpay-
ers filing jointly or for a qualifying widow(er) 
with dependent child.
You don't qualify for the interest exclusion if 
your modified AGI is equal to or more than the 
upper limit for your filing status.
Modified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion, 
is adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line 37, 
or Form 1040A, line 21) figured before the inter-
est exclusion, and modified by adding back 
any:
1. Foreign earned income exclusion,
2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction,
3. Exclusion of income for bona fide resi-
dents of American Samoa,
4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,
5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received 
under an employer's adoption assistance 
program,
6. Deduction for student loan interest, and
7. Deduction for domestic production activi-
ties.
Use the Line 9 Worksheet in the Form 8815 
instructions to figure your modified AGI.
If you have investment interest expense in-
curred to earn royalties and other investment in-
come, see Education Savings Bond Program  in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-
est exclusion, you must keep a written 
record of the qualified U.S. savings 
bonds you redeem. Your record must include 
the serial number, issue date, face value, and 
total redemption proceeds (principal and inter-
est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818 to 
record this information. You should also keep 
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-
mentation that shows you paid qualified higher 
education expenses during the year.
U.S. Treasury Bills,
Notes, and Bonds
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct 
debts (obligations) of the U.S. Government.
Taxation of interest.  Interest income from 
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to 
federal income tax but is exempt from all state 
and local income taxes. You should receive a 
Form 1099-INT showing the interest paid to you 
for the year in box 3.
Payments of principal and interest generally 
will be credited to your designated checking or 
savings account by direct deposit through the 
TreasuryDirect® system.
Treasury bills. These bills generally have a 
4-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week matur-
ity period. They are generally issued at a dis-
count in the amount of $100 and multiples of 
$100. The difference between the discounted 
price you pay for the bills and the face value 
you receive at maturity is interest income. Gen-
erally, you report this interest income when the 
bill is paid at maturity. If you paid a premium for 
a bill (more than the face value), you generally 
report the premium as a section 171 deduction 
when the bill is paid at maturity.
Treasury notes and bonds.  Treasury 
notes have maturity periods of more than 1 
RECORDS
year, ranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods 
for Treasury bonds are longer than 10 years. 
Both generally are issued in denominations of 
$100 to $1 million and generally pay interest ev-
ery 6 months. Generally, you report this interest 
for the year paid. For more information, see 
U.S. Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds  in chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 550.
For other information on Treasury 
notes or bonds, write to:
Treasury Retail Securities Site
P.O. Box 7015
Minneapolis, MN 55480-7015
Or, click on the link to the Treasury 
website at: www.treasurydirect.gov/
indiv/indiv.htm.
For information on series EE, series I, and 
series HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savings 
Bonds, earlier.
Treasury inflation-protected securities 
(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a 
year at a fixed rate, based on a principal 
amount adjusted to take into account inflation 
and deflation. For the tax treatment of these se-
curities, see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments 
under Original Issue Discount (OID)  in Pub. 
550.
Bonds Sold Between
Interest Dates
If you sell a bond between interest payment 
dates, part of the sales price represents interest 
accrued to the date of sale. You must report 
that part of the sales price as interest income for 
the year of sale.
If you buy a bond between interest payment 
dates, part of the purchase price represents in-
terest accrued before the date of purchase. 
When that interest is paid to you, treat it as a 
nontaxable return of your capital investment, 
rather than as interest income. See Accrued in-
terest on bonds  under How To Report Interest 
Income in chapter 1 of Pub. 550 for information 
on reporting the payment.
Insurance
Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
ciary of the insured person are usually not taxa-
ble. But if you receive the proceeds in install-
ments, you must usually report a part of each 
installment payment as interest income.
For more information about insurance pro-
ceeds received in installments, see Pub. 525, 
Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-
ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-
ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income 
from a nonqualified plan, not as interest in-
come. See chapter 10  for information on pen-
sion and annuity income from nonqualified 
plans.
Page 64 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 62 Chapter 7 Interest Income

State or Local
Government Obligations
Interest on a bond used to finance government 
operations generally isn't taxable if the bond is 
issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a 
possession of the United States, or any of their 
political subdivisions.
Bonds issued after 1982 (including tribal 
economic development bonds issued after Feb-
ruary 17, 2009) by an Indian tribal government 
are treated as issued by a state. Interest on 
these bonds is generally tax exempt if the 
bonds are part of an issue of which substantially 
all proceeds are to be used in the exercise of 
any essential government function.
For information on federally guaranteed 
bonds, mortgage revenue bonds, arbitrage 
bonds, private activity bonds, qualified tax 
credit bonds, and Build America bonds, see 
State or Local Government Obligations  in chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 550.
Information-reporting requirement.  If you 
file a tax return, you are required to show any 
tax-exempt interest you received on your return. 
This is an information-reporting requirement 
only. It doesn't change tax-exempt interest to 
taxable interest.
Original Issue Discount 
(OID)
Original issue discount (OID) is a form of inter-
est. You generally include OID in your income 
as it accrues over the term of the debt instru-
ment, whether or not you receive any payments 
from the issuer.
A debt instrument generally has OID when 
the instrument is issued for a price that is less 
than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID 
is the difference between the stated redemption 
price at maturity and the issue price.
All debt instruments that pay no interest be-
fore maturity are presumed to be issued at a 
discount. Zero coupon bonds are one example 
of these instruments.
The OID accrual rules generally don't apply 
to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-
turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). 
See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
De minimis OID. You can treat the discount as 
zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (0.0025) 
of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-
plied by the number of full years from the date 
of original issue to maturity. This small discount 
is known as “de minimis” OID.
Example 1.  You bought a 10-year bond 
with a stated redemption price at maturity of 
$1,000, issued at $980 with OID of $20. 
One-fourth of 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption 
price) times 10 (the number of full years from 
the date of original issue to maturity) equals 
$25. Because the $20 discount is less than $25, 
the OID is treated as zero. (If you hold the bond 
at maturity, you will recognize $20 ($1,000 − 
$980) of capital gain.)
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that the bond was issued at 
$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 dis-
count is more than the $25 figured in Exam-
ple 1, you must include the OID in income as it 
accrues over the term of the bond.
Debt instrument bought after original is-
sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de mini-
mis OID at a premium, the discount isn't includi-
ble in income. If you buy a debt instrument with 
de minimis OID at a discount, the discount is re-
ported under the market discount rules. See 
Market Discount Bonds  in chapter 1 of Pub. 
550.
Exceptions to reporting OID as current in-
come. The OID rules discussed in this chapter 
don't apply to the following debt instruments.
1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see 
Stripped tax-exempt obligations under 
Stripped Bonds and Coupons in chapter 1 
of Pub. 550).
2. U.S. savings bonds.
3. Short-term debt instruments (those with a 
fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year 
from the date of issue).
4. Obligations issued by an individual before 
March 2, 1984.
5. Loans between individuals if all the follow-
ing are true.
a. The lender isn't in the business of 
lending money.
b. The amount of the loan, plus the 
amount of any outstanding prior loans 
between the same individuals, is 
$10,000 or less.
c. Avoiding any federal tax isn't one of 
the principal purposes of the loan.
Form 1099-OID. The issuer of the debt instru-
ment (or your broker if you held the instrument 
through a broker) should give you Form 
1099-OID, or a similar statement, if the total 
OID for the calendar year is $10 or more. Form 
1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of 
OID for the part of the year that you held the 
bond. It also will show, in box 2, the stated inter-
est you must include in your income. Box 8 
shows OID on a U.S. Treasury obligation for the 
part of the year you owned it and isn't included 
in box 1. A copy of Form 1099-OID will be sent 
to the IRS. Don't file your copy with your return. 
Keep it for your records.
In most cases, you must report the entire 
amount in boxes 1, 2, and 8 of Form 1099-OID 
as interest income. But see Refiguring OID 
shown on Form 1099-OID , later in this discus-
sion, for more information.
Form 1099-OID not received.  If you had OID 
for the year but didn't receive a Form 1099-OID, 
you may have to figure the correct amount of 
OID to report on your return. See Pub. 1212 for 
details on how to figure the correct OID.
Nominee. If someone else is the holder of 
record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-
ment belonging to you and receives a Form 
1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give 
you a Form 1099-OID.
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID. 
You may need to refigure the OID shown in 
box 1 or box 8 of Form 1099-OID if either of the 
following apply.
You bought the debt instrument after its 
original issue and paid a premium or an ac-
quisition premium.
The debt instrument is a stripped bond or a 
stripped coupon (including certain zero 
coupon instruments).
For information about figuring the correct 
amount of OID to include in your income, see 
Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt Instruments  in 
Pub. 1212 and the instructions for Form 
1099-OID.
Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form 
1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument 
or acquired it from another holder during the 
year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates , 
earlier, for information about the treatment of 
periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of 
Form 1099-OID for that instrument.
Certificates of deposit (CDs).  If you buy a 
CD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you 
must include in income each year a part of the 
total interest due and report it in the same man-
ner as other OID.
This also applies to similar deposit arrange-
ments with banks, building and loan associa-
tions, etc., including:
Time deposits,
Bonus plans,
Savings certificates,
Deferred income certificates,
Bonus savings certificates, and
Growth savings certificates.
Bearer CDs.  CDs issued after 1982 gener-
ally must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are 
CDs not in registered form. They aren't issued 
in the depositor's name and are transferable 
from one individual to another.
Banks must provide the IRS and the person 
redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.
More information. See chapter 1 of Pub. 550 
for more information about OID and related top-
ics, such as market discount bonds.
When To Report 
Interest Income
When to report your interest income depends 
on whether you use the cash method or an ac-
crual method to report income.
Cash method.  Most individual taxpayers use 
the cash method. If you use this method, you 
generally report your interest income in the year 
in which you actually or constructively receive it. 
However, there are special rules for reporting 
the discount on certain debt instruments. See 
U.S. Savings Bonds  and Original Issue Dis-
count (OID), earlier.
Example. On September 1, 2015, you 
loaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com-
pounded annually. You aren't in the business of 
lending money. The note stated that principal 
and interest would be due on August 31, 2017. 
In 2017, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 
principal and $508.80 interest). If you use the 
Page 65 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 63

cash method, you must include in income on 
your 2017 return the $508.80 interest you re-
ceived in that year.
Constructive receipt.  You constructively 
receive income when it is credited to your ac-
count or made available to you. You don't need 
to have physical possession of it. For example, 
you are considered to receive interest, divi-
dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-
count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar fi-
nancial institution, or interest on life insurance 
policy dividends left to accumulate, when they 
are credited to your account and subject to your 
withdrawal. This is true even if they aren't yet 
entered in your passbook.
You constructively receive income on the 
deposit or account even if you must:
Make withdrawals in multiples of even 
amounts,
Give a notice to withdraw before making 
the withdrawal,
Withdraw all or part of the account to with-
draw the earnings, or
Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless 
the interest you are to receive on an early 
withdrawal or redemption is substantially 
less than the interest payable at maturity.
Accrual method.  If you use an accrual 
method, you report your interest income when 
you earn it, whether or not you have received it. 
Interest is earned over the term of the debt in-
strument.
Example. If, in the previous example, you 
use an accrual method, you must include the in-
terest in your income as you earn it. You would 
report the interest as follows: 2015, $80; 2016, 
$249.60; and 2017, $179.20.
Coupon bonds. Interest on bearer bonds with 
detachable coupons is generally taxable in the 
year the coupon becomes due and payable. It 
doesn't matter when you mail the coupon for 
payment.
How To Report
Interest Income
Generally, you report all your taxable interest in-
come on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, 
line 8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.
You can't use Form 1040EZ if your taxable 
interest income is more than $1,500. Instead, 
you must use Form 1040A or Form 1040.
Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule B 
(Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, if you file Form 
1040A and any of the following are true.
1. Your taxable interest income is more than 
$1,500.
2. You are claiming the interest exclusion un-
der the Education Savings Bond Program 
(discussed earlier).
3. You received interest from a seller-fi-
nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the 
property as a home.
4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. 
savings bond interest that includes 
amounts you reported in a previous tax 
year.
5. You received, as a nominee, interest that 
actually belongs to someone else.
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on frozen deposits.
7. You are reporting OID in an amount less 
than the amount shown on Form 
1099-OID.
8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on a bond you bought between interest 
payment dates.
9. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 
and choose to reduce interest income 
from the bonds by any amortizable bond 
premium (see Bond Premium Amortization 
in chapter 3 of Pub. 550).
List each payer's name and the amount of inter-
est income received from each payer on line 1. 
If you received a Form 1099-INT or Form 
1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-
age firm as the payer.
You can't use Form 1040A if you must use 
Form 1040, as described next.
Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead 
of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:
1. You forfeited interest income because of 
the early withdrawal of a time deposit;
2. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987, 
you choose to reduce interest income from 
the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-
mium, and you are deducting the excess 
of bond premium amortization for the ac-
crual period over the qualified stated inter-
est for the period (see Bond Premium Am-
ortization in chapter 3 of Pub. 550); or
3. You received tax-exempt interest from pri-
vate activity bonds issued after August 7, 
1986.
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040).  You 
must complete Schedule B (Form 1040A or 
1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 and any of 
the following apply.
1. Your taxable interest income is more than 
$1,500.
2. You are claiming the interest exclusion un-
der the Education Savings Bond Program 
(discussed earlier).
3. You received interest from a seller-fi-
nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the 
property as a home.
4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. 
savings bond interest that includes 
amounts you reported in a previous tax 
year.
5. You received, as a nominee, interest that 
actually belongs to someone else.
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on frozen deposits.
7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on a bond you bought between interest 
payment dates.
8. You are reporting OID in an amount less 
than the amount shown on Form 
1099-OID.
9. Statement (2) in the preceding list under 
Form 1040 is true.
In Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the 
amount received from each. If you received a 
Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-
kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.
Reporting tax-exempt interest.  Total your 
tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accrued 
OID on certain state and municipal bonds, in-
cluding zero coupon municipal bonds) reported 
on Form 1099-INT, box 8, and exempt-interest 
dividends from a mutual fund or other regulated 
investment company reported on Form 
1099-DIV, box 10. Add these amounts to any 
other tax-exempt interest you received. Report 
the total on line 8b of Form 1040A or Form 
1040.
If you file Form 1040EZ, enter “TEI” and the 
amount in the space to the left of line 2. Don't 
add tax-exempt interest in the total on Form 
1040EZ, line 2.
Form 1099-INT, box 9, and Form 1099-DIV, 
box 11, show the tax-exempt interest subject to 
the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251. 
These amounts are already included in the 
amounts on Form 1099-INT, box 8, and Form 
1099-DIV, box 10. Don't add the amounts in 
Form 1099-INT, box 9, and Form 1099-DIV, 
box 11, to, or subtract them from, the amounts 
on Form 1099-INT, box 8, and Form 1099-DIV, 
box 10.
Don't report interest from an individual 
retirement account (IRA) as tax-exempt 
interest.
Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income, 
except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and 
Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Form 
1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxable 
interest income you received. See the instruc-
tions for Form 1099-INT if you have interest 
from a security acquired at a premium. You 
must report all of your taxable interest income 
even if you don't receive a Form 1099-INT. 
Contact your financial institution if you don't re-
ceive a Form 1099-INT by February 15. Your 
identifying number may be truncated on any pa-
per Form 1099-INT you receive.
If you forfeited interest income because of 
the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
ductible amount will be shown on Form 
1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with-
drawal of savings in chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the interest 
income you received from U.S. savings bonds, 
Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and Treasury 
bonds. Generally, add the amount shown in 
box 3 to any other taxable interest income you 
received. If part of the amount shown in box 3 
was previously included in your interest income, 
see U.S. savings bond interest previously re-
ported, later. If you acquired the security at a 
premium, see the instructions for Form 
1099-INT.
Box 4 of Form 1099-INT will contain an 
amount if you were subject to backup withhold-
ing. Include the amount from box 4 on Form 
1040EZ, line 7; Form 1040A, line 40; or Form 
1040, line 64 (federal income tax withheld).
Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment 
expenses you may be able to deduct as an 
CAUTION
!
Page 66 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 64 Chapter 7 Interest Income

itemized deduction. See chapter 28 for more in-
formation about investment expenses.
If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Form 
1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be 
able to take a credit for the amount shown in 
box 6 unless you deduct this amount on line 8 
of Schedule A (Form 1040). To take the credit, 
you may have to file Form 1116, Foreign Tax 
Credit. For more information, see Pub. 514, 
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals.
U.S. savings bond interest previously re-
ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for 
U.S. savings bond interest, the form may show 
interest you don't have to report. See Form 
1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds interest , ear-
lier.
On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part 
I, line 1, report all the interest shown on your 
Form 1099-INT. Then follow these steps.
1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal 
of all interest listed on line 1.
2. Below the subtotal, enter “U.S. Savings 
Bond Interest Previously Reported” and 
enter amounts previously reported or inter-
est accrued before you received the bond.
3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal 
and enter the result on line 2.
More information. For more information about 
how to report interest income, see chapter 1 of 
Pub. 550 or the instructions for the form you 
must file.
8.
Dividends and 
Other 
Distributions
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as California 
wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted, 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
CAUTION
!
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Reminder
Foreign-source income. If you are a U.S. citi-
zen with dividend income from sources outside 
the United States (foreign-source income), you 
must report that income on your tax return un-
less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true 
whether you reside inside or outside the United 
States and whether or not you receive a Form 
1099 from the foreign payer.
 
Automatic 6-month extension.  If you receive 
your Form 1099 reporting dividends or other 
distributions late and you need more time to file 
your tax return, you can request a 6-month ex-
tension of time to file. See Automatic Extension 
in chapter 1.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of:
Ordinary dividends,
Capital gain distributions,
Nondividend distributions, and
Other distributions you may receive from a 
corporation or a mutual fund.
This chapter also explains how to report div-
idend income on your tax return.
Dividends are distributions of money, stock, 
or other property paid to you by a corporation or 
by a mutual fund. You also may receive divi-
dends through a partnership, an estate, a trust, 
or an association that is taxed as a corporation. 
However, some amounts you receive that are 
called dividends are actually interest income. 
(See Dividends that are actually interest  in 
chapter 7.)
Most distributions are paid in cash (or 
check). However, distributions can consist of 
more stock, stock rights, other property, or serv-
ices.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
Investment Income and Expenses
Form (and Instructions)
Interest and Ordinary Dividends
General Information
This section discusses general rules for divi-
dend income.
Tax on unearned income of certain chil-
dren. Part of a child's 2017 unearned income 
may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. If it is, 
Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children Who Have 
Unearned Income, must be completed and at-
tached to the child's tax return. If not, Form 
  514 
  550 
  Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) 
8615 isn't required and the child's income is 
taxed at his or her own tax rate.
Some parents can choose to include the 
child's interest and dividends on the parent's re-
turn if certain requirements are met. Use Form 
8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter-
est and Dividends, for this purpose.
For more information about the tax on un-
earned income of children and the parents' 
election, see chapter 31.
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.  Dividends 
and other distributions you receive as a benefi-
ciary of an estate or trust are generally taxable 
income. You should receive a Schedule K-1 
(Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share of Income, 
Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fiduciary. 
Your copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) and its 
instructions will tell you where to report the in-
come on your Form 1040.
Social security number (SSN) or individual 
taxpayer identification number (ITIN).  You 
must give your SSN or ITIN to any person re-
quired by federal tax law to make a return, 
statement, or other document that relates to 
you. This includes payers of dividends. If you 
don't give your SSN or ITIN to the payer of divi-
dends, you may have to pay a penalty.
For more information on SSNs and ITINs, 
see Social Security Number (SSN) in chapter 1.
Backup withholding. Your dividend income is 
generally not subject to regular withholding. 
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the 
income. Under backup withholding, the payer of 
dividends must withhold income tax on the 
amount you are paid, by applying the appropri-
ate withholding rate.
Backup withholding may also be required if 
the IRS has determined that you underreported 
your interest or dividend income. For more in-
formation, see Backup Withholding  in chap-
ter 4.
Stock certificate in two or more names.  If 
two or more persons hold stock as joint tenants, 
tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common, 
each person's share of any dividends from the 
stock is determined by local law.
Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations and mutual 
funds use Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distri-
butions, to report the distributions you received 
from them during the year. Keep this form with 
your records. You don't have to attach it to your 
tax return.
Dividends not reported on Form 
1099-DIV. Even if you don't receive a Form 
1099-DIV, you must still report all your taxable 
dividend income. For example, you may receive 
distributive shares of dividends from partner-
ships or S corporations. These dividends are 
reported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), 
Partner's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, 
etc., and Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S), Share-
holder's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, 
etc.
Reporting tax withheld.  If tax is withheld 
from your dividend income, the payer must give 
you a Form 1099-DIV that indicates the amount 
withheld.
Page 67 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Distributions Page 65

Nominees. If someone receives distribu-
tions as a nominee for you, that person should 
give you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show dis-
tributions received on your behalf.
Form 1099-MISC.  Certain substitute pay-
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest 
received by a broker on your behalf must be re-
ported to you on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellane-
ous Income, or a similar statement. See Report-
ing Substitute Payments  under Short Sales  in 
chapter 4 of Pub. 550 for more information 
about reporting these payments.
Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.  If 
you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incor-
rect amount or other incorrect information, you 
should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The 
new Form 1099 you receive will have the “COR-
RECTED” box checked.
Dividends on stock sold.  If stock is sold, ex-
changed, or otherwise disposed of after a divi-
dend is declared but before it is paid, the owner 
of record (usually the payee shown on the divi-
dend check) must include the dividend in in-
come.
Dividends received in January.  If a mutual 
fund (or other regulated investment company) 
or real estate investment trust (REIT) declares a 
dividend (including any exempt-interest divi-
dend or capital gain distribution) in October, 
November, or December payable to sharehold-
ers of record on a date in one of those months 
but actually pays the dividend during January of 
the next calendar year, you are considered to 
have received the dividend on December 31. 
You report the dividend in the year it was de-
clared.
Ordinary Dividends
Ordinary dividends are the most common type 
of distribution from a corporation or a mutual 
fund and are taxable. They are paid out of earn-
ings and profits and are ordinary income to you. 
This means they aren't capital gains. You can 
assume that any dividend you receive on com-
mon or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend 
unless the paying corporation or mutual fund 
tells you otherwise. Ordinary dividends will be 
shown in box 1a of the Form 1099-DIV you re-
ceive.
Qualified Dividends
Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividends 
subject to the same 0%, 15%, or 20% maximum 
tax rate that applies to net capital gain. They 
should be shown in box 1b of the Form 
1099-DIV you receive.
The maximum rate of tax on qualified divi-
dends is the following.
0% on any amount that otherwise would be 
taxed at a 10% or 15% rate.
15% on any amount that otherwise would 
be taxed at rates greater than 15% but less 
than 39.6%.
20% on any amount that otherwise would 
be taxed at a 39.6% rate.
To qualify for the maximum rate, all of the 
following requirements must be met.
The dividends must have been paid by a 
U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor-
poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora-
tion, later.)
The dividends aren't of the type listed later 
under Dividends that aren't qualified divi-
dends, later.
You meet the holding period (discussed 
next).
Holding period.  You must have held the 
stock for more than 60 days during the 121-day 
period that begins 60 days before the ex-divi-
dend date. The ex-dividend date is the first date 
following the declaration of a dividend on which 
the buyer of a stock isn't entitled to receive the 
next dividend payment. Instead, the seller will 
get the dividend.
When counting the number of days you held 
the stock, include the day you disposed of the 
stock, but not the day you acquired it. See the 
examples later.
Exception for preferred stock.  In the 
case of preferred stock, you must have held the 
stock more than 90 days during the 181-day pe-
riod that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend 
date if the dividends are due to periods totaling 
more than 366 days. If the preferred dividends 
are due to periods totaling less than 367 days, 
the holding period in the previous paragraph 
applies.
Example 1.  You bought 5,000 shares of 
XYZ Corp. common stock on July 9, 2017. XYZ 
Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per 
share. The ex-dividend date was July 16, 2017. 
Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. shows 
$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in 
box 1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold 
the 5,000 shares on August 12, 2017. You held 
your shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of 
the 121-day period (from July 10, 2017, through 
August 12, 2017). The 121-day period began 
on May 17, 2017 (60 days before the ex-divi-
dend date), and ended on September 14, 2017. 
You have no qualified dividends from XYZ 
Corp. because you held the XYZ stock for less 
than 61 days.
Example 2.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1, except that you bought the stock on 
July 15, 2017 (the day before the ex-dividend 
date), and you sold the stock on September 16, 
2017. You held the stock for 63 days (from July 
16, 2017, through September 16, 2017). The 
$500 of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of 
your Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends 
because you held the stock for 61 days of the 
121-day period (from July 16, 2017, through 
September 14, 2017).
Example 3.  You bought 10,000 shares of 
ABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 9, 
2017. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of 
10 cents a share. The ex-dividend date was 
July 16, 2017. The ABC Mutual Fund advises 
you that the portion of the dividend eligible to be 
treated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents 
per share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mu-
tual Fund shows total ordinary dividends of 
$1,000 and qualified dividends of $200. How-
ever, you sold the 10,000 shares on August 12, 
2017. You have no qualified dividends from 
ABC Mutual Fund because you held the ABC 
Mutual Fund stock for less than 61 days.
Holding period reduced where risk of 
loss is diminished.  When determining 
whether you met the minimum holding period 
discussed earlier, you cannot count any day 
during which you meet any of the following con-
ditions.
1. You had an option to sell, were under a 
contractual obligation to sell, or had made 
(and not closed) a short sale of substan-
tially identical stock or securities.
2. You were the grantor (writer) of an option 
to buy substantially identical stock or se-
curities.
3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holding 
one or more other positions in substan-
tially similar or related property.
For information about how to apply condition 
(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.
Qualified foreign corporation.  A foreign cor-
poration is a qualified foreign corporation if it 
meets any of the following conditions.
1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S. 
possession.
2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits 
of a comprehensive income tax treaty with 
the United States that the Department of 
the Treasury determines is satisfactory for 
this purpose and that includes an ex-
change of information program. For a list 
of those treaties, see Table 8-1.
3. The corporation doesn't meet (1) or (2) 
above, but the stock for which the divi-
dend is paid is readily tradable on an es-
tablished securities market in the United 
States. See Readily tradable stock, later.
Exception.  A corporation isn't a qualified 
foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-
vestment company during its tax year in which 
the dividends are paid or during its previous tax 
year.
Readily tradable stock.  Any stock (such 
as common, ordinary, or preferred) or an Ameri-
can depositary receipt in respect of that stock is 
considered to satisfy requirement 3 under 
Qualified foreign corporation , earlier, if it is lis-
ted on a national securities exchange that is 
registered under section 6 of the Securities Ex-
change Act of 1934 or on the Nasdaq Stock 
Market. For a list of the exchanges that meet 
these requirements, see www.sec.gov/
divisions/marketreg/mrexchanges.shtml.
Dividends that aren't qualified dividends. 
The following dividends aren't qualified divi-
dends. They aren't qualified dividends even if 
they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.
Capital gain distributions.
Dividends paid on deposits with mutual 
savings banks, cooperative banks, credit 
unions, U.S. building and loan associa-
tions, U.S. savings and loan associations, 
federal savings and loan associations, and 
Page 68 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 66 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Distributions

similar financial institutions. (Report these 
amounts as interest income.)
Dividends from a corporation that is a 
tax-exempt organization or farmer's coop-
erative during the corporation's tax year in 
which the dividends were paid or during 
the corporation's previous tax year.
Dividends paid by a corporation on em-
ployer securities held on the date of record 
by an employee stock ownership plan 
(ESOP) maintained by that corporation.
Dividends on any share of stock to the ex-
tent you are obligated (whether under a 
short sale or otherwise) to make related 
payments for positions in substantially sim-
ilar or related property.
Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if 
you know or have reason to know the pay-
ments aren't qualified dividends.
Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, 
box 1b, from a foreign corporation to the 
extent you know or have reason to know 
the payments aren't qualified dividends.
Table 8-1. Income Tax Treaties
Income tax treaties the United States has 
with the following countries satisfy 
requirement 2 under Qualified foreign 
corporation, earlier.
Australia Indonesia Portugal
Austria Ireland Romania
Bangladesh Israel Russian 
Barbados Italy Federation
Belgium Jamaica Slovak 
Bulgaria Japan Republic
Canada Kazakhstan Slovenia
China Korea, South Africa
Cyprus Republic of Spain
Czech Latvia Sri Lanka
Republic Lithuania Sweden
Denmark Luxembourg Switzerland
Egypt Malta Thailand
Estonia Mexico Trinidad and
Finland Morocco Tobago
France Netherlands Tunisia
Germany New Zealand Turkey
Greece Norway Ukraine
Hungary Pakistan United 
Iceland Philippines Kingdom
India Poland Venezuela
Dividends Used To Buy 
More Stock
The corporation in which you own stock may 
have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan 
lets you choose to use your dividends to buy 
(through an agent) more shares of stock in the 
corporation instead of receiving the dividends in 
cash. Most mutual funds also permit sharehold-
ers to automatically reinvest distributions in 
more shares in the fund, instead of receiving 
cash. If you use your dividends to buy more 
stock at a price equal to its fair market value, 
you still must report the dividends as income.
If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-
ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a 
price less than its fair market value, you must 
report as dividend income the fair market value 
of the additional stock on the dividend payment 
date.
You also must report as dividend income 
any service charge subtracted from your cash 
dividends before the dividends are used to buy 
the additional stock. But you may be able to de-
duct the service charge. See chapter 28  for 
more information about deducting expenses of 
producing income.
In some dividend reinvestment plans, you 
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at 
a price less than fair market value. If you 
choose to do this, you must report as dividend 
income the difference between the cash you in-
vest and the fair market value of the stock you 
buy. When figuring this amount, use the fair 
market value of the stock on the dividend pay-
ment date.
Money Market Funds
Report amounts you receive from money mar-
ket funds as dividend income. Money market 
funds are a type of mutual fund and shouldn’t 
be confused with bank money market accounts 
that pay interest. 
Capital Gain 
Distributions
Capital gain distributions (also called capital 
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to 
your account by mutual funds (or other regula-
ted investment companies) and real estate in-
vestment trusts (REITs). They will be shown in 
box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from 
the mutual fund or REIT.
Report capital gain distributions as 
long-term capital gains, regardless of how long 
you owned your shares in the mutual fund or 
REIT.
Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds 
and REITs.  Some mutual funds and REITs 
keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax 
on them. You must treat your share of these 
gains as distributions, even though you didn't 
actually receive them. However, they aren't in-
cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are re-
ported to you in box 1a of Form 2439.
Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a of 
Form 2439) as long-term capital gains on 
Schedule D (Form 1040), line 11, column (h).
The tax paid on these gains by the mutual 
fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439. 
You take credit for this tax by including it on 
Form 1040, line 73, and following the instruc-
tions there.
Basis adjustment.  Increase your basis in 
your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, by 
the difference between the gain you report and 
the credit you claim for the tax paid.
Additional information.  For more information 
on the treatment of distributions from mutual 
funds, see Pub. 550.
Nondividend
Distributions
A nondividend distribution is a distribution that 
isn't paid out of the earnings and profits of a 
corporation or a mutual fund. You should re-
ceive a Form 1099-DIV or other statement 
showing the nondividend distribution. On Form 
1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution will be 
shown in box 3. If you don't receive such a 
statement, you report the distribution as an ordi-
nary dividend.
Basis adjustment.  A nondividend distribution 
reduces the basis of your stock. It isn't taxed 
until your basis in the stock is fully recovered. 
This nontaxable portion is also called a return of 
capital; it is a return of your investment in the 
stock of the company. If you buy stock in a cor-
poration in different lots at different times, and 
you cannot definitely identify the shares subject 
to the nondividend distribution, reduce the basis 
of your earliest purchases first.
When the basis of your stock has been re-
duced to zero, report any additional nondivi-
dend distribution you receive as a capital gain. 
Whether you report it as a long-term or 
short-term capital gain depends on how long 
you have held the stock. See Holding Period in 
chapter 14.
Example.  You bought stock in 2004 for 
$100. In 2007, you received a nondividend dis-
tribution of $80. You didn't include this amount 
in your income, but you reduced the basis of 
your stock to $20. You received a nondividend 
distribution of $30 in 2017. The first $20 of this 
amount reduced your basis to zero. You report 
the other $10 as a long-term capital gain for 
2017. You must report as a long-term capital 
gain any nondividend distribution you receive 
on this stock in later years.
Liquidating Distributions
Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui-
dating dividends, are distributions you receive 
during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-
poration. These distributions are, at least in 
part, one form of a return of capital. They may 
be paid in one or more installments. You will re-
ceive Form 1099-DIV from the corporation 
showing you the amount of the liquidating distri-
bution in box 8 or 9.
For more information on liquidating distribu-
tions, see chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
Distributions of Stock
and Stock Rights
Distributions by a corporation of its own stock 
are commonly known as stock dividends. Stock 
rights (also known as stock options) are distri-
butions by a corporation of rights to acquire the 
corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividends 
and stock rights aren't taxable to you, and you 
don't report them on your return.
Taxable stock dividends and stock rights. 
Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights 
are taxable to you if any of the following apply.
Page 69 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Distributions Page 67

1. You or any other shareholder have the 
choice to receive cash or other property 
instead of stock or stock rights.
2. The distribution gives cash or other prop-
erty to some shareholders and an in-
crease in the percentage interest in the 
corporation's assets or earnings and prof-
its to other shareholders.
3. The distribution is in convertible preferred 
stock and has the same result as in (2).
4. The distribution gives preferred stock to 
some common stock shareholders and 
common stock to other common stock 
shareholders.
5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The 
distribution, however, isn't taxable if it is an 
increase in the conversion ratio of conver-
tible preferred stock made solely to take 
into account a stock dividend, stock split, 
or similar event that would otherwise result 
in reducing the conversion right.)
The term “stock” includes rights to acquire 
stock, and the term “shareholder” includes a 
holder of rights or of convertible securities.
If you receive taxable stock dividends or 
stock rights, include their fair market value at 
the time of distribution in your income.
Preferred stock redeemable at a pre-
mium.  If you receive preferred stock having a 
redemption price higher than its issue price, the 
difference (the redemption premium) generally 
is taxable as a constructive distribution of addi-
tional stock on the preferred stock. For more in-
formation, see chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
Basis.  Your basis in stock or stock rights re-
ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair mar-
ket value when distributed. If you receive stock 
or stock rights that aren't taxable to you, see 
Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investment 
Property in chapter 4 of Pub. 550 for information 
on how to figure their basis.
Fractional shares.  You may not own enough 
stock in a corporation to receive a full share of 
stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-
dend. However, with the approval of the share-
holders, the corporation may set up a plan in 
which fractional shares aren't issued but in-
stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are 
given to the shareholders. Any cash you receive 
for fractional shares under such a plan is trea-
ted as an amount realized on the sale of the 
fractional shares. Report this transaction on 
Form 8949, Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Capital Assets. Enter your gain or loss (the dif-
ference between the cash you receive and the 
basis of the fractional shares sold) in column (h) 
of Schedule D (Form 1040) in Part I or Part II, 
whichever is appropriate.
Report these transactions on Form 
8949. Also, check the correct box to 
show how the transaction was reported 
on Form 1099-B.
For more information on Form 8949 and 
Schedule D (Form 1040), see chapter 4 of Pub. 
550. Also see the Instructions for Form 8949 
and the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 
1040).
CAUTION
!
Example.  You own one share of common 
stock that you bought on January 3, 2008, for 
$100. The corporation declared a common 
stock dividend of 5% on June 30, 2017. The fair 
market value of the stock at the time the stock 
dividend was declared was $200. You were 
paid $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend 
under a plan described in the discussion above. 
You figure your gain or loss as follows:
Fair market value of old stock ........ $200.00 
Fair market value of stock dividend (cash 
received) ..................  +10.00
Fair market value of old stock and stock 
dividend .................. $210.00
Basis (cost) of old stock after the stock 
dividend (($200 ÷ $210) × $100) ....... $95.24
Basis (cost) of stock dividend (($10 ÷ $210) × 
$100) .................... + 4.76
Total .................... $100.00
Cash received ................ $10.00
Basis (cost) of stock dividend ........ − 4.76
Gain $5.24
Because you had held the share of stock for 
more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend 
was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is 
a long-term capital gain.
Scrip dividends.  A corporation that de-
clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip 
certificate that entitles you to a fractional share. 
The certificate is generally nontaxable when 
you receive it. If you choose to have the corpo-
ration sell the certificate for you and give you 
the proceeds, your gain or loss is the difference 
between the proceeds and the portion of your 
basis in the corporation's stock allocated to the 
certificate.
However, if you receive a scrip certificate 
that you can choose to redeem for cash instead 
of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-
ceive it. You must include its fair market value in 
income on the date you receive it.
Other Distributions
You may receive any of the following distribu-
tions during the year.
Exempt-interest dividends.  Exempt-interest 
dividends you receive from a mutual fund or 
other regulated investment company, including 
those received from a qualified fund of funds in 
any tax year beginning after December 22, 
2010, aren't included in your taxable income. 
Exempt-interest dividends should be shown in 
box 10 of Form 1099-DIV.
Information-reporting requirement.  Al-
though exempt-interest dividends aren't taxa-
ble, you must show them on your tax return if 
you have to file a return. This is an informa-
tion-reporting requirement and doesn’t change 
the exempt-interest dividends to taxable in-
come.
Alternative minimum tax treatment.  Ex-
empt-interest dividends paid from specified pri-
vate activity bonds may be subject to the alter-
native minimum tax. See Alternative Minimum 
Tax (AMT) in chapter 30 for more information.
Dividends on insurance policies.  Insurance 
policy dividends the insurer keeps and uses to 
pay your premiums aren't taxable. However, 
you must report as taxable interest income the 
interest that is paid or credited on dividends left 
with the insurance company.
If dividends on an insurance contract (other 
than a modified endowment contract) are dis-
tributed to you, they are a partial return of the 
premiums you paid. Don’t include them in your 
gross income until they are more than the total 
of all net premiums you paid for the contract. 
Report any taxable distributions on insurance 
policies on Form 1040, line 21.
Dividends on veterans' insurance.  Divi-
dends you receive on veterans' insurance poli-
cies aren't taxable. In addition, interest on divi-
dends left with the Department of Veterans 
Affairs isn't taxable.
Patronage dividends.  Generally, patronage 
dividends you receive in money from a cooper-
ative organization are included in your income.
Don’t include in your income patronage divi-
dends you receive on:
Property bought for your personal use, or
Capital assets or depreciable property 
bought for use in your business. But you 
must reduce the basis (cost) of the items 
bought. If the dividend is more than the ad-
justed basis of the assets, you must report 
the excess as income.
These rules are the same whether the coop-
erative paying the dividend is a taxable or 
tax-exempt cooperative.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.  Don’t 
report these amounts as dividends. Instead, in-
clude these amounts on Form 1040, line 21; 
Form 1040A, line 13; or Form 1040EZ, line 3.
How To Report 
Dividend Income
Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or 
Form 1040A to report your dividend income. 
Report the total of your ordinary dividends on 
line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report 
qualified dividends on line 9b of Form 1040 or 
Form 1040A.
If you receive capital gain distributions, you 
may be able to use Form 1040A or you may 
have to use Form 1040. See Exceptions to filing 
Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040)  in 
chapter 16. If you receive nondividend distribu-
tions required to be reported as capital gains, 
you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form 
1040EZ if you receive any dividend income 
other than Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.
Form 1099-DIV.  If you owned stock on which 
you received $10 or more in dividends and 
other distributions, you should receive a Form 
1099-DIV. Even if you don't receive Form 
1099-DIV, you must report all your dividend in-
come.
See Form 1099-DIV for more information on 
how to report dividend income.
Form 1040A or 1040.  You must complete 
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part II, and 
attach it to your Form 1040A or 1040 if:
Your ordinary dividends, which are repor-
ted on Form 1099-DIV, box 1a, are more 
than $1,500; or
Page 70 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 68 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Distributions

You received, as a nominee, dividends 
that actually belong to someone else.
If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500, 
you must also complete Schedule B (Form 
1040A or 1040), Part III.
List on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), 
Part II, line 5, each payer's name and the ordi-
nary dividends you received. If your securities 
are held by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), 
list the name of the brokerage firm shown on 
Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock is 
held by a nominee who is the owner of record, 
and the nominee credited or paid you dividends 
on the stock, show the name of the nominee 
and the dividends you received or for which you 
were credited.
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed 
on line 5. Also enter this total on line 9a of Form 
1040A or 1040.
Qualified dividends.  Report qualified divi-
dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b of 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in 
box 1b is already included in box 1a. Don’t add 
the amount in box 1b to, or subtract it from, the 
amount in box 1a.
Don’t include any of the following on line 9b.
Qualified dividends you received as a 
nominee. See Nominees under How To 
Report Dividend Income in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 550.
Dividends on stock for which you didn't 
meet the holding period. See Holding pe-
riod, earlier, under Qualified Dividends.
Dividends on any share of stock to the ex-
tent you are obligated (whether under a 
short sale or otherwise) to make related 
payments for positions in substantially sim-
ilar or related property.
Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if 
you know or have reason to know the pay-
ments aren't qualified dividends.
Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, 
box 1b, from a foreign corporation to the 
extent you know or have reason to know 
the payments aren't qualified dividends.
If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-
ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-
dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the 
Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched-
ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D (Form 
1040) instructions, whichever applies. Enter 
qualified dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.
Investment interest deducted.  If you 
claim a deduction for investment interest, you 
may have to reduce the amount of your quali-
fied dividends that are eligible for the 0%, 15%, 
or 20% tax rate. Reduce it by the qualified divi-
dends you choose to include in investment in-
come when figuring the limit on your investment 
interest deduction. This is done on the Qualified 
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or 
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor-
mation about the limit on investment interest, 
see Investment expenses in chapter 23.
Expenses related to dividend income.  You 
may be able to deduct expenses related to divi-
dend income if you itemize your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28  for 
general information about deducting expenses 
of producing income.
More information.  For more information 
about how to report dividend income, see chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 550 or the instructions for the form 
you must file.
9.
Rental Income 
and Expenses
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Disaster tax relief. Disaster relief was enacted 
for those impacted by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, 
or Maria, including a provision that modified the 
calculation of casualty and theft losses. See 
Publication 976, Disaster Relief, for more infor-
mation.
Introduction
This chapter discusses rental income and ex-
penses. It also covers the following topics.
Personal use of dwelling unit (including va-
cation home).
Depreciation.
Limits on rental losses.
How to report your rental income and ex-
penses.
If you sell or otherwise dispose of your rental 
property, see Pub. 544, Sales and Other Dispo-
sitions of Assets.
If you have a loss from damage to, or theft 
of, rental property, see Pub. 547, Casualties, 
Disasters, and Thefts.
If you rent a condominium or a cooperative 
apartment, some special rules apply to you 
even though you receive the same tax treat-
ment as other owners of rental property. See 
CAUTION
!
Pub. 527, Residential Rental Property, for more 
information.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Residential Rental Property
Depreciating Property Placed in 
Service Before 1987
Business Expenses
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
Depreciation and Amortization
Alternative Minimum 
Tax—Individuals
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
Supplemental 
Income and Loss
Rental Income
In most cases, you must include in your gross 
income all amounts you receive as rent. Rental 
income is any payment you receive for the use 
or occupation of property. It isn’t limited to 
amounts you receive as normal rental pay-
ments. 
When to report.  If you are a cash-basis tax-
payer, you report rental income on your return 
for the year you actually or constructively re-
ceive it. You are a cash-basis taxpayer if you re-
port income in the year you receive it, regard-
less of when it was earned. You constructively 
receive income when it is made available to 
you, for example, by being credited to your 
bank account.
For more information about when you con-
structively receive income, see Accounting 
Methods in chapter 1.
Advance rent.  Advance rent is any amount 
you receive before the period that it covers. In-
clude advance rent in your rental income in the 
year you receive it regardless of the period cov-
ered or the method of accounting you use.
Example. You sign a 10-year lease to rent 
your property. In the first year, you receive 
$5,000 for the first year’s rent and $5,000 as 
rent for the last year of the lease. You must in-
clude $10,000 in your income in the first year.
Canceling a lease.  If your tenant pays you to 
cancel a lease, the amount you receive is rent. 
Include the payment in your income in the year 
you receive it regardless of your method of ac-
counting.
Expenses paid by tenant.  If your tenant pays 
any of your expenses, those payments are 
rental income. Because you must include this 
amount in income, you can deduct the expen-
ses if they are deductible rental expenses. See 
Rental Expenses, later, for more information.
Property or services.  If you receive property 
or services, instead of money, as rent, include 
  527
  534
  535
  925
  946
  4562
  6251
  8582
  Schedule E (Form 1040) 
Page 71 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

the fair market value of the property or services 
in your rental income.
If the services are provided at an agreed 
upon or specified price, that price is the fair 
market value unless there is evidence to the 
contrary.
Security deposits.  Don’t include a security 
deposit in your income when you receive it if 
you plan to return it to your tenant at the end of 
the lease. But if you keep part or all of the se-
curity deposit during any year because your 
tenant doesn’t live up to the terms of the lease, 
include the amount you keep in your income in 
that year.
If an amount called a security deposit is to 
be used as a final payment of rent, it is advance 
rent. Include it in your income when you receive 
it.
Part interest.  If you own a part interest in 
rental property, you must report your part of the 
rental income from the property.
Rental of property also used as your home.
If you rent property that you also use as your 
home and you rent it less than 15 days during 
the tax year, don’t include the rent you receive 
in your income and don’t deduct rental expen-
ses. However, you can deduct on Schedule A 
(Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualty 
and theft losses that are allowed for nonrental 
property. See Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (In-
cluding Vacation Home), later.
Rental Expenses
This part discusses expenses of renting prop-
erty that you ordinarily can deduct from your 
rental income. It includes information on the ex-
penses you can deduct if you rent part of your 
property, or if you change your property to 
rental use. Depreciation, which you can also 
deduct from your rental income, is discussed 
later under Depreciation of Rental Property.
Personal use of rental property.  If you 
sometimes use your rental property for personal 
purposes, you must divide your expenses be-
tween rental and personal use. Also, your rental 
expense deductions may be limited. See Per-
sonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation 
Home), later.
Part interest.  If you own a part interest in 
rental property, you can deduct expenses that 
you paid according to your percentage of own-
ership.
When to deduct.  If you are a cash-basis tax-
payer, you generally deduct your rental expen-
ses in the year you pay them.
Depreciation. You can begin to depreciate 
rental property when it is ready and available for 
rent. See Placed in Service under When Does 
Depreciation Begin and End  in chapter 2 of 
Pub. 527.
Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct your or-
dinary and necessary expenses for managing, 
conserving, or maintaining rental property from 
the time you make it available for rent.
Uncollected rent. If you are a cash-basis tax-
payer, don’t deduct uncollected rent. Because 
you haven’t included it in your income, it isn’t 
deductible.
Vacant rental property.  If you hold property 
for rental purposes, you may be able to deduct 
your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-
ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or 
maintaining the property while the property is 
vacant. However, you can’t deduct any loss of 
rental income for the period the property is va-
cant.
Vacant while listed for sale.  If you sell 
property you held for rental purposes, you can 
deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses 
for managing, conserving, or maintaining the 
property until it is sold. If the property isn’t held 
out and available for rent while listed for sale, 
the expenses aren’t deductible rental expenses.
Repairs and 
Improvements
Generally, an expense for repairing or maintain-
ing your rental property may be deducted if you 
aren’t required to capitalize the expense.
Improvements. You must capitalize any ex-
pense you pay to improve your rental property. 
An expense is for an improvement if it results in 
a betterment to your property, restores your 
property, or adapts your property to a new or 
different use.
Betterments. Expenses that may result in a 
betterment to your property include expenses 
for fixing a pre-existing defect or condition, en-
larging or expanding your property, or increas-
ing the capacity, strength, or quality of your 
property.
Restoration. Expenses that may be for re-
storation include expenses for replacing a sub-
stantial structural part of your property, repairing 
damage to your property after you properly ad-
justed the basis of your property as a result of a 
casualty loss, or rebuilding your property to a 
like-new condition.
Adaptation. Expenses that may be for 
adaptation include expenses for altering your 
property to a use that isn’t consistent with the 
intended ordinary use of your property when 
you began renting the property.
Safe harbor for routine maintenance.  If 
you determine that your cost was for an im-
provement to a building or equipment, you may 
still be able to deduct your cost under the rou-
tine maintenance safe harbor. See Pub. 535 for 
more information.
Separate the costs of repairs and im-
provements, and keep accurate re-
cords. You will need to know the cost 
of improvements when you sell or depreciate 
your property. The expenses you capitalize for 
improving your property can generally be de-
preciated as if the improvement were separate 
property.
Other Expenses
Other expenses you can deduct from your 
rental income include advertising, cleaning and 
maintenance, utilities, fire and liability insur-
ance, taxes, interest, commissions for the col-
lection of rent, ordinary and necessary travel 
RECORDS
and transportation, and other expenses, dis-
cussed next.
Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you 
pay an insurance premium for more than 1 year 
in advance, you can’t deduct the total premium 
in the year you pay it. For each year of cover-
age, you deduct only the part of the premium 
payment that applies to that year.
Legal and other professional fees.  You can 
deduct, as a rental expense, legal and other 
professional expenses, such as tax return prep-
aration fees you paid to prepare Schedule E 
(Form 1040), Part I. For example, on your 2017 
Schedule E, you can deduct fees paid in 2017 
to prepare your 2016 Schedule E, Part I. You 
can also deduct, as a rental expense, any ex-
pense (other than federal taxes and penalties) 
you paid to resolve a tax underpayment related 
to your rental activities.
Local benefits taxes. In most cases, you can’t 
deduct charges for local benefits that increase 
the value of your property, such as charges for 
putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and 
sewer systems. These charges are nondepreci-
able capital expenditures, and must be added 
to the basis of your property. However, you can 
deduct local benefit taxes that are for maintain-
ing, repairing, or paying interest charges for the 
benefits.
Local transportation expenses.  You may be 
able to deduct your ordinary and necessary lo-
cal transportation expenses if you incur them to 
collect rental income or to manage, conserve, 
or maintain your rental property. However, 
transportation expenses incurred to travel be-
tween your home and a rental property gener-
ally constitute nondeductible commuting costs 
unless you use your home as your principal 
place of business. See Pub. 587, Business Use 
of Your Home, for information on determining if 
your home office qualifies as a principal place of 
business.
Generally, if you use your personal car, 
pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you 
can deduct the expenses using one of two 
methods: actual expenses or the standard mile-
age rate. For 2017, the standard mileage rate 
for business use is 53.5 cents per mile. For 
more information, see chapter 26.
To deduct car expenses under either 
method, you must keep records that 
follow the rules in chapter 26 . In addi-
tion, you must complete Form 4562, Part V, and 
attach it to your tax return.
Rental of equipment. You can deduct the rent 
you pay for equipment that you use for rental 
purposes. However, in some cases, lease con-
tracts are actually purchase contracts. If so, you 
can’t deduct these payments. You can recover 
the cost of purchased equipment through de-
preciation.
Rental of property.  You can deduct the rent 
you pay for property that you use for rental pur-
poses. If you buy a leasehold for rental purpo-
ses, you can deduct an equal part of the cost 
each year over the term of the lease.
Travel expenses.  You can deduct the ordi-
nary and necessary expenses of traveling away 
from home if the primary purpose of the trip is to 
RECORDS
Page 72 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 70 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

collect rental income or to manage, conserve, 
or maintain your rental property. You must prop-
erly allocate your expenses between rental and 
nonrental activities. You can’t deduct the cost of 
traveling away from home if the primary pur-
pose of the trip was to improve your property. 
You recover the cost of improvements by taking 
depreciation. For information on travel expen-
ses, see chapter 26.
To deduct travel expenses, you must 
keep records that follow the rules in 
chapter 26.
See Rental Expenses  in Pub. 527 for more 
information.
Property Changed
to Rental Use
If you change your home or other property (or a 
part of it) to rental use at any time other than the 
beginning of your tax year, you must divide 
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance, 
between rental use and personal use.
You can deduct as rental expenses only the 
part of the expense that is for the part of the 
year the property was used or held for rental 
purposes.
You can’t deduct depreciation or insurance 
for the part of the year the property was held for 
personal use. However, you can include the 
home mortgage interest and real estate tax ex-
penses for the part of the year the property was 
held for personal use as an itemized deduction 
on Schedule A (Form 1040).
At the time this publication was pre-
pared for printing, Congress was con-
sidering legislation that would extend 
the separate deduction for qualified mortgage 
insurance premiums, which expired at the end 
of 2016. If extended, your qualified mortgage in-
surance premiums may be deductible for 2017. 
To see if the legislation was enacted, go to Re-
cent Developments at IRS.gov/Pub17.
Example. Your tax year is the calendar 
year. You moved from your home in May and 
started renting it out on June 1. You can deduct 
as rental expenses seven-twelfths of your 
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance.
Starting with June, you can deduct as rental 
expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-
ally billed monthly, such as utilities.
Renting Part of
Property
If you rent part of your property, you must divide 
certain expenses between the part of the prop-
erty used for rental purposes and the part of the 
property used for personal purposes, as though 
you actually had two separate pieces of prop-
erty.
You can deduct the expenses related to the 
part of the property used for rental purposes, 
such as home mortgage interest and real estate 
taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Form 
1040). You can also deduct as rental expenses 
a portion of other expenses that normally are 
RECORDS
CAUTION
!
nondeductible personal expenses, such as ex-
penses for electricity or painting the outside of 
your house.
There is no change in the types of expenses 
deductible for the personal-use part of your 
property. Generally, these expenses may be 
deducted only if you itemize your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
You can’t deduct any part of the cost of the 
first phone line even if your tenants have unlimi-
ted use of it.
You don’t have to divide the expenses that 
belong only to the rental part of your property. 
For example, if you paint a room that you rent, 
or if you pay premiums for liability insurance in 
connection with renting a room in your home, 
your entire cost is a rental expense. If you install 
a second phone line strictly for your tenants' 
use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-
ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-
ciation, discussed later, on the part of the house 
used for rental purposes as well as on the furni-
ture and equipment you use for rental purposes.
How to divide expenses.  If an expense is for 
both rental use and personal use, such as mort-
gage interest or heat for the entire house, you 
must divide the expense between the rental use 
and the personal use. You can use any reason-
able method for dividing the expense. It may be 
reasonable to divide the cost of some items (for 
example, water) based on the number of people 
using them. The two most common methods for 
dividing an expense are based on (1) the num-
ber of rooms in your home, and (2) the square 
footage of your home.
Not Rented for Profit
If you don’t rent your property to make a profit, 
you can deduct your rental expenses only up to 
the amount of your rental income. You can’t de-
duct a loss or carry forward to the next year any 
rental expenses that are more than your rental 
income for the year. For more information about 
the rules for an activity not engaged in for profit, 
see Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Pub. 
535.
Where to report.  Report your not-for-profit 
rental income on Form 1040, line 21. For exam-
ple, you can include your mortgage interest (if 
you use the property as your main home or sec-
ond home), real estate taxes, and casualty los-
ses on the appropriate lines of Schedule A 
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions.
If you itemize your deductions, claim your 
other rental expenses, subject to the rules ex-
plained in chapter 1 of Pub. 535, as miscellane-
ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040). You can deduct these expenses only if 
they, together with certain other miscellaneous 
itemized deductions, total more than 2% of your 
adjusted gross income.
Personal Use of
Dwelling Unit
(Including Vacation 
Home)
If you have any personal use of a dwelling unit 
(including a vacation home) that you rent, you 
must divide your expenses between rental use 
and personal use. In general, your rental expen-
ses will be no more than your total expenses 
multiplied by a fraction, the denominator of 
which is the total number of days the dwelling 
unit is used and the numerator of which is the 
total number of days actually rented at a fair 
rental price. Only your rental expenses may be 
deducted on Schedule E (Form 1040). Some of 
your personal expenses may be deductible if 
you itemize your deductions on Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
You must also determine if the dwelling unit 
is considered a home. The amount of rental ex-
penses that you can deduct may be limited if 
the dwelling unit is considered a home. 
Whether a dwelling unit is considered a home 
depends on how many days during the year are 
considered to be days of personal use. There is 
a special rule if you used the dwelling unit as a 
home and you rented it for less than 15 days 
during the year.
Dwelling unit.  A dwelling unit includes a 
house, apartment, condominium, mobile home, 
boat, vacation home, or similar property. It also 
includes all structures or other property belong-
ing to the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit has ba-
sic living accommodations, such as sleeping 
space, a toilet, and cooking facilities.
A dwelling unit doesn’t include property (or 
part of the property) used solely as a hotel, mo-
tel, inn, or similar establishment. Property is 
used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar es-
tablishment if it is regularly available for occu-
pancy by paying customers and isn’t used by 
an owner as a home during the year.
Example. You rent a room in your home that 
is always available for short-term occupancy by 
paying customers. You don’t use the room your-
self, and you allow only paying customers to 
use the room. The room is used solely as a ho-
tel, motel, inn, or similar establishment and isn’t 
a dwelling unit.
Dividing Expenses
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and per-
sonal purposes, divide your expenses between 
the rental use and the personal use based on 
the number of days used for each purpose.
When dividing your expenses, follow these 
rules.
Any day that the unit is rented at a fair 
rental price is a day of rental use even if 
you used the unit for personal purposes 
that day. (This rule doesn’t apply when de-
termining whether you used the unit as a 
home.)
Any day that the unit is available for rent 
but not actually rented isn’t a day of rental 
use.
Page 73 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 71

Example. Your beach cottage was availa-
ble for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92 
days). During that time, except for the first week 
in August (7 days) when you were unable to find 
a renter, you rented the cottage at a fair rental 
price. The person who rented the cottage for 
July allowed you to use it over the weekend (2 
days) without any reduction in or refund of rent. 
Your family also used the cottage during the 
last 2 weeks of May (14 days). The cottage 
wasn’t used at all before May 17 or after August 
31.
You figure the part of the cottage expenses 
to treat as rental expenses as follows.
The cottage was used for rental purposes 
for a total of 85 days (92 − 7). The days it 
was available for rent but not rented (7 
days) aren’t days of rental use. The July 
weekend (2 days) you used it is rental use 
because you received a fair rental price for 
the weekend.
You used the cottage for personal purpo-
ses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in May).
The total use of the cottage was 99 days 
(14 days personal use + 85 days rental 
use).
Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) of 
the cottage expenses.
Note. When determining whether you used 
the cottage as a home, the July weekend (2 
days) you used it is considered personal use 
even though you received a fair rental price for 
the weekend. Therefore, you had 16 days of 
personal use and 83 days of rental use for this 
purpose. Because you used the cottage for per-
sonal purposes more than 14 days and more 
than 10% of the days of rental use (8 days), you 
used it as a home. If you have a net loss, you 
may not be able to deduct all of the rental ex-
penses. See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home 
next.
Dwelling Unit Used as a 
Home
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and per-
sonal purposes, the tax treatment of the rental 
expenses you figured earlier under Dividing Ex-
penses and rental income depends on whether 
you are considered to be using the dwelling unit 
as a home.
You use a dwelling unit as a home during 
the tax year if you use it for personal purposes 
more than the greater of:
1. 14 days, or
2. 10% of the total days it is rented to others 
at a fair rental price.
See What is a day of personal use, later.
Fair rental price.  A fair rental price for your 
property generally is the amount of rent that a 
person who isn’t related to you would be willing 
to pay. The rent you charge isn’t a fair rental 
price if it is substantially less than the rents 
charged for other properties that are similar to 
your property in your area.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal purpo-
ses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price, 
don’t count that day as a day of rental use in 
applying (2) just described. Instead, count it as 
a day of personal use in applying both (1) and 
(2) just described.
What is a day of personal use? A day of per-
sonal use of a dwelling unit is any day that the 
unit is used by any of the following persons.
1. You or any other person who owns an in-
terest in the unit, unless you rent it to an-
other owner as his or her main home un-
der a shared equity financing agreement 
(defined later). However, see Days used 
as a main home before or after renting, 
later.
2. A member of your family or a member of 
the family of any other person who owns 
an interest in the unit, unless the family 
member uses the dwelling unit as his or 
her main home and pays a fair rental price. 
Family includes only your spouse, broth-
ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sis-
ters, ancestors (parents, grandparents, 
etc.), and lineal descendants (children, 
grandchildren, etc.).
3. Anyone under an arrangement that lets 
you use some other dwelling unit.
4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.
Main home.  If the other person or member 
of the family in (1) or (2) just described has 
more than one home, his or her main home is 
ordinarily the one he or she lived in most of the 
time.
Shared equity financing agreement.  This 
is an agreement under which two or more per-
sons acquire undivided interests for more than 
50 years in an entire dwelling unit, including the 
land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-
tled to occupy the unit as his or her main home 
upon payment of rent to the other co-owner or 
owners.
Donation of use of property.  You use a 
dwelling unit for personal purposes if:
You donate the use of the unit to a charita-
ble organization,
The organization sells the use of the unit at 
a fundraising event, and
The “purchaser” uses the unit.
Examples. The following examples show 
how to determine days of personal use.
Example 1.  You and your neighbor are 
co-owners of a condominium at the beach. Last 
year, you rented the unit to vacationers when-
ever possible. The unit wasn’t used as a main 
home by anyone. Your neighbor used the unit 
for 2 weeks last year; you didn’t use it at all.
Because your neighbor has an interest in 
the unit, both of you are considered to have 
used the unit for personal purposes during 
those 2 weeks.
Example 2.  You and your neighbors are 
co-owners of a house under a shared equity fi-
nancing agreement. Your neighbors live in the 
house and pay you a fair rental price.
Even though your neighbors have an inter-
est in the house, the days your neighbors live 
there aren’t counted as days of personal use by 
you. This is because your neighbors rent the 
house as their main home under a shared 
equity financing agreement.
Example 3. You own a rental property that 
you rent to your son. Your son doesn’t own any 
interest in this property. He uses it as his main 
home and pays you a fair rental price.
Your son’s use of the property isn’t personal 
use by you because your son is using it as his 
main home, he owns no interest in the property, 
and he is paying you a fair rental price.
Example 4.  You rent your beach house to 
Joshua. Joshua rents his cabin in the moun-
tains to you. You each pay a fair rental price.
You are using your beach house for per-
sonal purposes on the days that Joshua uses it 
because your house is used by Joshua under 
an arrangement that allows you to use his 
cabin.
Days used for repairs and maintenance.
Any day that you spend working substantially 
full time repairing and maintaining (not improv-
ing) your property isn’t counted as a day of per-
sonal use. Don’t count such a day as a day of 
personal use even if family members use the 
property for recreational purposes on the same 
day.
Days used as a main home before or af-
ter renting.  For purposes of determining 
whether a dwelling unit was used as a home, 
you may not have to count days you used the 
property as your main home before or after rent-
ing it or offering it for rent as days of personal 
use. Don’t count them as days of personal use 
if:
You rented or tried to rent the property for 
12 or more consecutive months.
You rented or tried to rent the property for 
a period of less than 12 consecutive 
months and the period ended because you 
sold or exchanged the property.
However, this special rule doesn’t apply when 
dividing expenses between rental and personal 
use.
Examples. The following examples show 
how to determine whether you used your rental 
property as a home.
Example 1.  You converted the basement 
of your home into an apartment with a bedroom, 
a bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the 
basement apartment at a fair rental price to col-
lege students during the regular school year. 
You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273 
days). You figured 10% of the total days rented 
to others at a fair rental price is 27 days.
During June (30 days), your brothers stayed 
with you and lived in the basement apartment 
rent free.
Your basement apartment was used as a 
home because you used it for personal purpo-
ses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your brothers 
is considered personal use. Your personal use 
(30 days) is more than the greater of 14 days or 
10% of the total days it was rented (27 days).
Example 2. You rented the guest bedroom 
in your home at a fair rental price during the lo-
cal college's homecoming, commencement, 
and football weekends (a total of 27 days). Your 
Page 74 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 72 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for 
the last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 
10% of the total days rented to others at a fair 
rental price is 3 days.
The room was used as a home because you 
used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That 
is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of 
the 27 days it was rented (3 days).
Example 3. You own a condominium apart-
ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair 
rental price for a total of 170 days during the 
year. For 12 of those days, the tenant wasn’t 
able to use the apartment and allowed you to 
use it even though you didn’t refund any of the 
rent. Your family actually used the apartment for 
10 of those days. Therefore, the apartment is 
treated as having been rented for 160 (170 − 
10) days. You figured 10% of the total days ren-
ted to others at a fair rental price is 16 days. 
Your family also used the apartment for 7 other 
days during the year.
You used the apartment as a home because 
you used it for personal purposes for 17 days. 
That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% 
of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).
Minimal rental use.  If you use the dwelling 
unit as a home and you rent it less than 15 days 
during the year, that period isn’t treated as 
rental activity. See Used as a home but rented 
less than 15 days, later, for more information.
Limit on deductions.  Renting a dwelling unit 
that is considered a home isn’t a passive activ-
ity. Instead, if your rental expenses are more 
than your rental income, some or all of the ex-
cess expenses can’t be used to offset income 
from other sources. The excess expenses that 
can’t be used to offset income from other sour-
ces are carried forward to the next year and 
treated as rental expenses for the same prop-
erty. Any expenses carried forward to the next 
year will be subject to any limits that apply for 
that year. This limitation will apply to expenses 
carried forward to another year even if you don’t 
use the property as your home for that subse-
quent year.
To figure your deductible rental expenses 
for this year and any carryover to next year, use 
Worksheet 9-1.
Reporting Income and 
Deductions
Property not used for personal purposes.  If 
you don’t use a dwelling unit for personal purpo-
ses, see How To Report Rental Income and Ex-
penses, later, for how to report your rental in-
come and expenses.
Property used for personal purposes. If you 
do use a dwelling unit for personal purposes, 
then how you report your rental income and ex-
penses depends on whether you used the 
dwelling unit as a home.
Not used as a home.  If you use a dwelling 
unit for personal purposes, but not as a home, 
report all the rental income in your income. Be-
cause you used the dwelling unit for personal 
purposes, you must divide your expenses be-
tween the rental use and the personal use, as 
described earlier in Dividing Expenses. The ex-
penses for personal use aren’t deductible as 
rental expenses.
Your deductible rental expenses can be 
more than your gross rental income; however, 
see Limits on Rental Losses, later.
Used as a home but rented less than 15 
days. If you use a dwelling unit as a home and 
you rent it less than 15 days during the year, its 
primary function isn’t considered to be rental 
and it shouldn't be reported on Schedule E 
(Form 1040). You aren’t required to report the 
rental income and rental expenses from this ac-
tivity. The expenses, including mortgage inter-
est, property taxes, and any qualified casualty 
loss, will be reported as normally allowed on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). See the Instructions 
for Schedule A (Form 1040) for more informa-
tion on deducting these expenses.
Used as a home and rented 15 days or 
more. If you use a dwelling unit as a home and 
rent it 15 days or more during the year, include 
all your rental income in your income. Since you 
used the dwelling unit for personal purposes, 
you must divide your expenses between the 
rental use and the personal use, as described 
earlier in Dividing Expenses. The expenses for 
personal use aren’t deductible as rental expen-
ses.
If you had a net profit from renting the dwell-
ing unit for the year (that is, if your rental income 
is more than the total of your rental expenses, 
including depreciation), deduct all of your rental 
expenses. You don’t need to use Worksheet 
9-1.
However, if you had a net loss from renting 
the dwelling unit for the year, your deduction for 
certain rental expenses is limited. To figure your 
deductible rental expenses and any carryover 
to next year, use Worksheet 9-1.
Depreciation of Rental 
Property
You recover the cost of income-producing prop-
erty through yearly tax deductions. You do this 
by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-
ing some of the cost each year on your tax re-
turn.
Three factors determine how much depreci-
ation you can deduct each year: (1) your basis 
in the property, (2) the recovery period for the 
property, and (3) the depreciation method used. 
You can’t simply deduct your mortgage or prin-
cipal payments, or the cost of furniture, fixtures, 
and equipment, as an expense.
You can deduct depreciation only on the 
part of your property used for rental purposes. 
Depreciation reduces your basis for figuring 
gain or loss on a later sale or exchange. 
You may have to use Form 4562 to figure 
and report your depreciation. See How To Re-
port Rental Income and Expenses, later.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).  If you use 
accelerated depreciation, you may be subject to 
the AMT. Accelerated depreciation allows you 
to deduct more depreciation earlier in the recov-
ery period than you could deduct using a 
straight line method (same deduction each 
year).
Claiming the correct amount of deprecia-
tion. You should claim the correct amount of 
depreciation each tax year. If you didn’t claim all 
the depreciation you were entitled to deduct, 
you must still reduce your basis in the property 
by the full amount of depreciation that you could 
have deducted.
If you deducted an incorrect amount of de-
preciation for property in any year, you may be 
able to make a correction by filing Form 1040X, 
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. If 
you aren’t allowed to make the correction on an 
amended return, you can change your account-
ing method to claim the correct amount of de-
preciation. See Claiming the Correct Amount of 
Depreciation in chapter 2 of Pub. 527 for more 
information.
Changing your accounting method to de-
duct unclaimed depreciation.  To change 
your accounting method, you generally must file 
Form 3115 to get the consent of the IRS. In 
some instances, that consent is automatic. For 
more information, see chapter 1 of Pub. 946.
Land. You can’t depreciate the cost of land be-
cause land generally doesn’t wear out, become 
obsolete, or get used up. The costs of clearing, 
grading, planting, and landscaping are usually 
all part of the cost of land and can’t be depreci-
ated.
More information. See Pub. 527 for more in-
formation about depreciating rental property 
and see Pub. 946 for more information about 
depreciation.
Limits on
Rental Losses
If you have a loss from your rental real estate 
activity, two sets of rules may limit the amount 
of loss you can deduct. You must consider 
these rules in the order shown below.
1. At-risk rules. These rules are applied first if 
there is investment in your rental real es-
tate activity for which you aren’t at risk. 
This applies only if the real property was 
placed in service after 1986.
2. Passive activity limits. Generally, rental 
real estate activities are considered pas-
sive activities and losses aren’t deductible 
unless you have income from other pas-
sive activities to offset them. However, 
there are exceptions.
At-Risk Rules
You may be subject to the at-risk rules if you 
have:
A loss from an activity carried on as a trade 
or business or for the production of in-
come, and
Amounts invested in the activity for which 
you aren’t fully at risk.
Losses from holding real property (other 
than mineral property) placed in service before 
1987 aren’t subject to the at-risk rules.
In most cases, any loss from an activity sub-
ject to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the ex-
tent of the total amount you have at risk in the 
Page 75 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 73

activity at the end of the tax year. You are con-
sidered at risk in an activity to the extent of cash 
and the adjusted basis of other property you 
contributed to the activity and certain amounts 
borrowed for use in the activity. See Pub. 925 
for more information.
Passive Activity Limits
In most cases, all rental real estate activities 
(except those of certain real estate professio-
nals, discussed later) are passive activities. For 
this purpose, a rental activity is an activity from 
which you receive income mainly for the use of 
tangible property, rather than for services.
Limits on passive activity deductions and 
credits. Deductions or losses from passive ac-
tivities are limited. You generally can’t offset in-
come, other than passive income, with losses 
from passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes 
on income, other than passive income, with 
credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex-
cess loss or credit is carried forward to the next 
tax year.
For a detailed discussion of these rules, see 
Pub. 925.
You may have to complete Form 8582 to fig-
ure the amount of any passive activity loss for 
the current tax year for all activities and the 
amount of the passive activity loss allowed on 
your tax return.
Real estate professionals. Rental activities in 
which you materially participated during the 
year aren’t passive activities if, for that year, you 
were a real estate professional. For a detailed 
discussion of the requirements, see Pub. 527. 
For a detailed discussion of material participa-
tion, see Pub. 925.
Exception for Personal Use of 
Dwelling Unit
If you used the rental property as a home during 
the year, any income, deductions, gain, or loss 
allocable to such use is not taken into account 
for purposes of the passive activity loss limita-
tion. Instead, follow the rules explained in Per-
sonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation 
Home), earlier.
Exception for Rental Real Estate 
Activities With Active Participation
If you or your spouse actively participated in a 
passive rental real estate activity, you may be 
able to deduct up to $25,000 of loss from the 
activity from your nonpassive income. This spe-
cial allowance is an exception to the general 
rule disallowing losses in excess of income 
from passive activities. Similarly, you may be 
able to offset credits from the activity against 
the tax on up to $25,000 of nonpassive income 
after taking into account any losses allowed un-
der this exception.
Active participation. You actively participated 
in a rental real estate activity if you (and your 
spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental prop-
erty and you made management decisions or 
arranged for others to provide services (such as 
repairs) in a significant and bona fide sense. 
Management decisions that may count as ac-
tive participation include approving new ten-
ants, deciding on rental terms, approving ex-
penditures, and similar decisions.
Maximum special allowance.  The maximum 
special allowance is:
$25,000 for single individuals and married 
individuals filing a joint return for the tax 
year,
$12,500 for married individuals who file 
separate returns for the tax year and lived 
apart from their spouses at all times during 
the tax year, and
$25,000 for a qualifying estate reduced by 
the special allowance for which the surviv-
ing spouse qualified.
If your modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if 
married filing separately), you can deduct your 
loss up to the amount specified above. If your 
MAGI is more than $100,000 (more than 
$50,000 if married filing separately), your spe-
cial allowance is limited to 50% of the difference 
between $150,000 ($75,000 if married filing 
separately) and your MAGI.
Generally, if your MAGI is $150,000 or more 
($75,000 or more if you are married filing sepa-
rately), there is no special allowance.
More information. See Pub. 925 for more in-
formation on the passive loss limits, including 
information on the treatment of unused disal-
lowed passive losses and credits and the treat-
ment of gains and losses realized on the dispo-
sition of a passive activity.
How To Report
Rental Income
and Expenses
The basic form for reporting residential rental in-
come and expenses is Schedule E (Form 
1040). However, don’t use that schedule to re-
port a not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented for 
Profit, earlier. 
Providing substantial services.  If you pro-
vide substantial services that are primarily for 
your tenant’s convenience, such as regular 
cleaning, changing linen, or maid service, report 
your rental income and expenses on Sched-
ule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi-
ness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit 
From Business (Sole Proprietorship). Substan-
tial services don’t include the furnishing of heat 
and light, cleaning of public areas, trash collec-
tion, etc. For information, see Pub. 334, Tax 
Guide for Small Business. You also may have 
to pay self-employment tax on your rental in-
come using Schedule SE (Form 1040), 
Self-Employment Tax.
Use Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership 
Income, if your rental activity is a partnership 
(including a partnership with your spouse un-
less it is a qualified joint venture).
Qualified joint venture.  If you and your 
spouse each materially participate as the only 
members of a jointly owned and operated real 
estate business, and you file a joint return for 
the tax year, you can make a joint election to be 
treated as a qualified joint venture instead of a 
partnership. This election, in most cases, won’t 
increase the total tax owed on the joint return, 
but it does give each of you credit for social se-
curity earnings on which retirement benefits are 
based and for Medicare coverage if your rental 
income is subject to self-employment tax. For 
more information, see Pub. 527.
Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement.  If 
you paid $600 or more of mortgage interest on 
your rental property to any one person, you 
should receive a Form 1098, or a similar state-
ment showing the interest you paid for the year. 
If you and at least one other person (other than 
your spouse if you file a joint return) were liable 
for and paid interest on the mortgage, and the 
other person received the Form 1098, report 
your share of the interest on Schedule E (Form 
1040), line 13. Attach a statement to your return 
showing the name and address of the other per-
son. See the Instructions for Schedule E (Form 
1040) for more information.
Schedule E (Form 1040)
If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and 
provide basic services such as heat and light, 
trash collection, etc., you normally report your 
rental income and expenses on Schedule E 
(Form 1040), Part I.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in-
come or loss from partnerships, S corporations, 
estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-
ment conduits. If you need to use page 2 of 
Schedule E, be sure to use page 2 of the same 
Schedule E you used to enter your rental activ-
ity on page 1. See the Instructions for Sched-
ule E (Form 1040).
Page 76 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 74 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling 
Unit Used as a Home
Worksheet 9-1.
Keep for Your Records
If you suffered a loss due to a federally declared disaster after August 22, use the worksheet in Pub. 527 instead of this 
worksheet. Otherwise, use this worksheet only if you answer “Yes” to all of the following questions.
Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home, earlier.)
Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price .................................... A.  
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ................................ B.  
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A .............................. C.  
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ........ D.  
E. Total days of rental and personal use. Add lines C and D ........................ E.  
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E ................. F.   
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ......................................................................... 1.  
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest. See instructions .......... 2a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes ...................................... b.  
 c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses. See instructions ......... c.  
 d. Enter direct rental expenses. See instructions .................................... d.  
 e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E. See instructions ............................................ 2e.  
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ................................................ 3.  
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) .......................... 4a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest. See instructions ................. b.  
 c. Carryover of operating expenses from 2016 worksheet ............................. c.  
 d. Add lines 4a–4c ........................................................... d.  
 e. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4d. See instructions ............................ 4e.  
5. Subtract line 4e from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ................................................ 5.  
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses. See instructions ............ 6a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit .......................... b.  
 c. Carryover of excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation from 2016 worksheet ..... c.  
 d. Add lines 6a–6c ........................................................... d.  
 e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d. See instructions ............................................................... 6e.  
PART III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4e from line 4d ...................... 7a.  
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year.
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .................................................................. b.  
Page 77 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 75

Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a 
Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
Worksheet 9-1 Instructions.
Keep for Your Records
Caution. Use the percentage determined in Part I, line F, to figure the rental portions to enter on lines 2a–2c, 4a–4b, and 6a–6b of 
Part II.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A as if you had not rented the unit. Don’t 
include interest on a loan that didn’t benefit the dwelling unit. For example, don’t include interest on a home equity loan used to 
pay off credit cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or pay college tuition. Include interest on a loan used to buy, build, or 
improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such a loan. Include the rental portion of this interest in the total you enter on line 2a of 
the worksheet.
Caution. At the time this publication was prepared for printing, Congress was considering legislation that would extend the 
separate deduction for qualified mortgage insurance premiums, which expired at the end of 2016. If extended, your qualified 
mortgage insurance premiums may be deductible for 2017. To see if the legislation was enacted, go to Recent Developments at 
IRS.gov/Pub17.
Note. Don’t file this Schedule A or use it to figure the amount to deduct on line 13 of that schedule. Instead, figure the personal 
portion on a separate Schedule A. If you have deducted mortgage interest on the dwelling unit on other forms, such as 
Schedule C or F, remember to reduce your Schedule A deduction by that amount.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A as if you had not rented the 
dwelling unit. To do this, complete Section A of Form 4684 treating the losses as personal losses. Don’t use this worksheet if 
any of the loss is due to a federally declared disaster after August 22; instead, use the worksheet in Pub. 527. On Form 4684, 
line 17, enter 10% of your adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter 
the rental portion of the result from Form 4684, line 18, on line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Don’t file this Form 4684 or use it to figure your personal losses on Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal portion on a 
separate Form 4684.
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used for 
rental activities other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also include rental agency fees, advertising, office 
supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses on Schedule E even if your rental expenses are 
more than your rental income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental portion of the mortgage interest you could deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the 
dwelling unit. If you had additional mortgage interest that wouldn’t be deductible on Schedule A because of limits imposed on 
them, enter on line 4b of this worksheet the rental portion of those excess amounts. Don’t include interest on a loan that didn’t 
benefit the dwelling unit (as explained in the line 2a instructions).
Line 4e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a, 4b, and 4c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they aren’t more than 
the amount on line 4e.*
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684 you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A. Enter the amount from Form 4684, line 10 ....................................  
B. Enter the rental portion of line A ............................................  
C. Enter the amount from line 2c of this worksheet ...............................  
D. Subtract line C from line B. Enter the result here and on line 6a of this worksheet ......  
Line 6e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a, 6b, and 6c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they aren’t more than 
the amount on line 6e.*
*Allocating the limited deduction. If you can’t deduct all of the amount on line 4d or 6d this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you wish 
among the expenses included on line 4d or 6d. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
Page 78 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 76 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

10.
Retirement 
Plans, Pensions, 
and Annuities
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Reminders
Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT).  For pur-
poses of the NIIT, net investment income 
doesn’t include distributions from a qualified re-
tirement plan (for example, 401(a), 403(a), 
403(b), 408, 408A, or 457(b) plans). However, 
these distributions are taken into account when 
determining the modified adjusted gross in-
come threshold. Distributions from a nonquali-
fied retirement plan are included in net invest-
ment income. See Form 8960, Net Investment 
Income Tax—Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, 
and its instructions for more information.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of dis-
tributions you receive from:
An employee pension or annuity from a 
qualified plan,
A disability retirement, and
A purchased commercial annuity.
What isn’t covered in this chapter.  The fol-
lowing topics are not discussed in this chapter.
The General Rule.  This is the method gen-
erally used to determine the tax treatment of 
pension and annuity income from nonqualified 
plans (including commercial annuities). For a 
CAUTION
!
qualified plan, you generally can’t use the Gen-
eral Rule unless your annuity starting date is 
before November 19, 1996. For more informa-
tion about the General Rule, see Pub. 939, 
General Rule for Pensions and Annuities.
Individual retirement arrangements 
(IRAs). Information on the tax treatment of 
amounts you receive from an IRA is in chap-
ter 17.
Civil service retirement benefits.  If you 
are retired from the federal government (regu-
lar, phased, or disability retirement), see Pub. 
721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirement 
Benefits. Pub. 721 also covers the information 
that you need if you are the survivor or benefi-
ciary of a federal employee or retiree who died.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Retirement Plans for Small Business
Pension and Annuity Income
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service 
Retirement Benefits
General Rule for Pensions and 
Annuities
Form (and Instructions)
Withholding Certificate for Pension 
or Annuity Payments
Distributions From Pensions, 
Annuities, Retirement or 
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance 
Contracts, etc.
Tax on Lump-Sum Distributions
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans 
(Including IRAs) and Other 
Tax-Favored Accounts
General Information
Designated Roth accounts.  A designated 
Roth account is a separate account created un-
der a qualified Roth contribution program to 
which participants may elect to have part or all 
of their elective deferrals to a 401(k), 403(b), or 
457(b) plan designated as Roth contributions. 
Elective deferrals that are designated as Roth 
contributions are included in your income. How-
ever, qualified distributions aren’t included in 
your income. See Pub. 575 for more informa-
tion.
In-plan rollovers to designated Roth ac-
counts. If you are a participant in a 401(k), 
403(b), or 457(b) plan, your plan may permit 
you to roll over amounts in those plans to a des-
ignated Roth account within the same plan. The 
rollover of any untaxed amounts must be inclu-
ded in income in the year you receive the distri-
bution. See Pub. 575 for more information.
More than one program.  If you receive bene-
fits from more than one program under a single 
trust or plan of your employer, such as a pen-
sion plan and a profit-sharing plan, you may 
have to figure the taxable part of each pension 
or annuity contract separately. Your former em-
  560
  575
  721
  939
  W-4P
  1099-R
  4972
  5329
ployer or the plan administrator should be able 
to tell you if you have more than one pension or 
annuity contract.
Section 457 deferred compensation plans.  
If you work for a state or local government or for 
a tax-exempt organization, you may be able to 
participate in a section 457 deferred compensa-
tion plan. If your plan is an eligible plan, you 
aren’t taxed currently on pay that is deferred un-
der the plan or on any earnings from the plan's 
investment of the deferred pay. You are gener-
ally taxed on amounts deferred in an eligible 
state or local government plan only when they 
are distributed from the plan. You are taxed on 
amounts deferred in an eligible tax-exempt or-
ganization plan when they are distributed or 
otherwise made available to you.
Your 457(b) plan may have a designated 
Roth account option. If so, you may be able to 
roll over amounts to the designated Roth ac-
count or make contributions. Elective deferrals 
to a designated Roth account are included in 
your income. Qualified distributions from a des-
ignated Roth account aren’t subject to tax.
This chapter covers the tax treatment of 
benefits under eligible section 457 plans, but it 
doesn’t cover the treatment of deferrals. For in-
formation on deferrals under section 457 plans, 
see Retirement Plan Contributions under Em-
ployee Compensation in Pub. 525.
For general information on these deferred 
compensation plans, see Section 457 Deferred 
Compensation Plans in Pub. 575.
Disability pensions.  If you retired on disabil-
ity, you generally must include in income any 
disability pension you receive under a plan that 
is paid for by your employer. You must report 
your taxable disability payments as wages on 
line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A until you 
reach minimum retirement age. Minimum retire-
ment age generally is the age at which you can 
first receive a pension or annuity if you aren’t 
disabled.
You may be entitled to a tax credit if 
you were permanently and totally disa-
bled when you retired. For information 
on the credit for the elderly or the disabled, see 
chapter 33.
Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
mum retirement age, payments you receive are 
taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the pay-
ments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b, or on 
Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b.
Disability payments for injuries incurred 
as a direct result of a terrorist attack di-
rected against the United States (or its 
allies) aren’t included in income. For more infor-
mation about payments to survivors of terrorist 
attacks, see Pub. 3920.
For more information on how to report disa-
bility pensions, including military and certain 
government disability pensions, see chapter 5.
Retired public safety officers.  An eligible re-
tired public safety officer can elect to exclude 
from income distributions of up to $3,000 made 
directly from a government retirement plan to 
the provider of accident, health, or long-term 
disability insurance. See Insurance Premiums 
for Retired Public Safety Officers in Pub. 575 for 
more information.
TIP
TIP
Page 79 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 77

Railroad retirement benefits. Part of any rail-
road retirement benefits you receive is treated 
for tax purposes as social security benefits, and 
part is treated as an employee pension. For in-
formation about railroad retirement benefits 
treated as social security benefits, see Pub. 
915. For information about railroad retirement 
benefits treated as an employee pension, see 
Railroad Retirement Benefits in Pub. 575.
Withholding and estimated tax. The payer of 
your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, annu-
ity, or deferred compensation plan will withhold 
income tax on the taxable parts of amounts paid 
to you. You can tell the payer how much to with-
hold, or not to withhold, by filing Form W-4P. If 
you choose not to have tax withheld, or you 
don’t have enough tax withheld, you may have 
to pay estimated tax.
If you receive an eligible rollover distribution, 
you can’t choose not to have tax withheld. Gen-
erally, 20% will be withheld, but no tax will be 
withheld on a direct rollover of an eligible roll-
over distribution. See Direct rollover option  un-
der Rollovers, later.
For more information, see Pensions and An-
nuities under Tax Withholding for 2018  in chap-
ter 4.
Qualified plans for self-employed individu-
als. Qualified plans set up by self-employed in-
dividuals are sometimes called Keogh or H.R. 
10 plans. Qualified plans can be set up by sole 
proprietors, partnerships (but not a partner), 
and corporations. They can cover self-em-
ployed persons, such as the sole proprietor or 
partners, as well as regular (common-law) em-
ployees.
Distributions from a qualified plan are usu-
ally fully taxable because most recipients have 
no cost basis. If you have an investment (cost) 
in the plan, however, your pension or annuity 
payments from a qualified plan are taxed under 
the Simplified Method. For more information 
about qualified plans, see Pub. 560.
Purchased annuities.  If you receive pension 
or annuity payments from a privately purchased 
annuity contract from a commercial organiza-
tion, such as an insurance company, you gener-
ally must use the General Rule to figure the 
tax-free part of each annuity payment. For more 
information about the General Rule, see Pub. 
939. Also, see Variable Annuities in Pub. 575 
for the special provisions that apply to these an-
nuity contracts.
Loans. If you borrow money from your retire-
ment plan, you must treat the loan as a nonperi-
odic distribution from the plan unless certain ex-
ceptions apply. This treatment also applies to 
any loan under a contract purchased under 
your retirement plan, and to the value of any 
part of your interest in the plan or contract that 
you pledge or assign. This means that you must 
include in income all or part of the amount bor-
rowed. Even if you don’t have to treat the loan 
as a nonperiodic distribution, you may not be 
able to deduct the interest on the loan in some 
situations. For details, see Loans Treated as 
Distributions in Pub. 575. For information on the 
deductibility of interest, see chapter 23.
Tax-free exchange. No gain or loss is recog-
nized on an exchange of an annuity contract for 
another annuity contract if the insured or annui-
tant remains the same. However, if an annuity 
contract is exchanged for a life insurance or en-
dowment contract, any gain due to interest ac-
cumulated on the contract is ordinary income. 
See Transfers of Annuity Contracts in Pub. 575 
for more information about exchanges of annu-
ity contracts.
How To Report
If you file Form 1040, report your total annuity 
on line 16a and the taxable part on line 16b. If 
your pension or annuity is fully taxable, enter it 
on line 16b; don’t make an entry on line 16a.
If you file Form 1040A, report your total an-
nuity on line 12a and the taxable part on 
line 12b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxa-
ble, enter it on line 12b; don’t make an entry on 
line 12a.
More than one annuity.  If you receive more 
than one annuity and at least one of them isn’t 
fully taxable, enter the total amount received 
from all annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, or 
Form 1040A, line 12a, and enter the taxable 
part on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, 
line 12b. If all the annuities you receive are fully 
taxable, enter the total of all of them on Form 
1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.
Joint return.  If you file a joint return and you 
and your spouse each receive one or more pen-
sions or annuities, report the total of the pen-
sions and annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, or 
Form 1040A, line 12a, and report the taxable 
part on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, 
line 12b.
Cost (Investment in the 
Contract)
Before you can figure how much, if any, of a 
distribution from your pension or annuity plan is 
taxable, you must determine your cost (your in-
vestment in the contract) in the pension or an-
nuity. Your total cost in the plan includes the to-
tal premiums, contributions, or other amounts 
you paid. This includes the amounts your em-
ployer contributed that were taxable to you 
when paid. Cost doesn’t include any amounts 
you deducted or were excluded from your in-
come.
From this total cost, subtract any refunds of 
premiums, rebates, dividends, unrepaid loans 
that weren’t included in your income, or other 
tax-free amounts that you received by the later 
of the annuity starting date or the date on which 
you received your first payment.
Your annuity starting date is the later of the 
first day of the first period for which you re-
ceived a payment or the date the plan's obliga-
tions became fixed.
Designated Roth accounts.  Your cost in 
these accounts is your designated Roth contri-
butions that were included in your income as 
wages subject to applicable withholding re-
quirements. Your cost also will include any 
in-plan Roth rollovers you included in income.
Foreign employment contributions.  If you 
worked in a foreign country and contributions 
were made to your retirement plan, special 
rules apply in determining your cost. See For-
eign employment contributions  under Cost (In-
vestment in the Contract) in Pub. 575.
Taxation of Periodic 
Payments
Fully taxable payments.  Generally, if you 
didn’t pay any part of the cost of your employee 
pension or annuity and your employer didn’t 
withhold part of the cost from your pay while 
you worked, the amounts you receive each year 
are fully taxable. You must report them on your 
income tax return.
Partly taxable payments.  If you paid part of 
the cost of your pension or annuity, you aren’t 
taxed on the part of the pension or annuity you 
receive that represents a return of your cost. 
The rest of the amount you receive is generally 
taxable. You figure the tax-free part of the pay-
ment using either the Simplified Method or the 
General Rule. Your annuity starting date and 
whether or not your plan is qualified determine 
which method you must or may use.
If your annuity starting date is after Novem-
ber 18, 1996, and your payments are from a 
qualified plan, you must use the Simplified 
Method. Generally, you must use the General 
Rule if your annuity is paid under a nonqualified 
plan, and you can’t use this method if your an-
nuity is paid under a qualified plan.
If you had more than one partly taxable pen-
sion or annuity, figure the tax-free part and the 
taxable part of each separately.
If your annuity is paid under a qualified plan 
and your annuity starting date is after July 1, 
1986, and before November 19, 1996, you 
could have chosen to use either the General 
Rule or the Simplified Method.
Exclusion limit. Your annuity starting date de-
termines the total amount of annuity payments 
that you can exclude from your taxable income 
over the years. Once your annuity starting date 
is determined, it doesn’t change. If you calcu-
late the taxable portion of your annuity pay-
ments using the Simplified Method Worksheet, 
the annuity starting date determines the recov-
ery period for your cost. That recovery period 
begins on your annuity starting date and isn’t af-
fected by the date you first complete the work-
sheet.
Exclusion limited to cost.  If your annuity 
starting date is after 1986, the total amount of 
annuity income that you can exclude over the 
years as a recovery of the cost can’t exceed 
your total cost. Any unrecovered cost at your (or 
the last annuitant's) death is allowed as a mis-
cellaneous itemized deduction on the final re-
turn of the decedent. This deduction isn’t sub-
ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.
Exclusion not limited to cost.  If your an-
nuity starting date is before 1987, you can con-
tinue to take your monthly exclusion for as long 
as you receive your annuity. If you chose a joint 
and survivor annuity, your survivor can continue 
to take the survivor's exclusion figured as of the 
annuity starting date. The total exclusion may 
be more than your cost.
Page 80 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 78 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Simplified Method
Under the Simplified Method, you figure the 
tax-free part of each annuity payment by divid-
ing your cost by the total number of anticipated 
monthly payments. For an annuity that is paya-
ble for the lives of the annuitants, this number is 
based on the annuitants' ages on the annuity 
starting date and is determined from a table. 
For any other annuity, this number is the num-
ber of monthly annuity payments under the con-
tract.
Who must use the Simplified Method.  You 
must use the Simplified Method if your annuity 
starting date is after November 18, 1996, and 
you both:
1. Receive pension or annuity payments 
from a qualified employee plan, qualified 
employee annuity, or a tax-sheltered an-
nuity (403(b)) plan; and
2. On your annuity starting date, you were ei-
ther under age 75, or entitled to less than 
5 years of guaranteed payments.
Guaranteed payments. Your annuity contract 
provides guaranteed payments if a minimum 
number of payments or a minimum amount (for 
example, the amount of your investment) is 
payable even if you and any survivor annuitant 
don’t live to receive the minimum. If the mini-
mum amount is less than the total amount of the 
payments you are to receive, barring death, 
during the first 5 years after payments begin 
(figured by ignoring any payment increases), 
you are entitled to less than 5 years of guaran-
teed payments.
How to use the Simplified Method.  Com-
plete the Simplified Method Worksheet in Pub. 
575 to figure your taxable annuity for 2017.
Single-life annuity. If your annuity is paya-
ble for your life alone, use Table 1 at the bottom 
of the worksheet to determine the total number 
of expected monthly payments. Enter on line 3 
the number shown for your age at the annuity 
starting date.
Multiple-lives annuity.  If your annuity is 
payable for the lives of more than one annui-
tant, use Table 2 at the bottom of the worksheet 
to determine the total number of expected 
monthly payments. Enter on line 3 the number 
shown for the combined ages of you and the 
youngest survivor annuitant at the annuity start-
ing date.
However, if your annuity starting date is be-
fore 1998, don’t use Table 2 and don’t combine 
the annuitants' ages. Instead you must use Ta-
ble 1 and enter on line 3 the number shown for 
the primary annuitant's age on the annuity start-
ing date.
Be sure to keep a copy of the comple-
ted worksheet; it will help you figure 
your taxable annuity next year.
Example. Bill Smith, age 65, began receiv-
ing retirement benefits in 2017, under a joint 
RECORDS
and survivor annuity. Bill's annuity starting date 
is January 1, 2017. The benefits are to be paid 
for the joint lives of Bill and his wife Kathy, age 
65. Bill had contributed $31,000 to a qualified 
plan and had received no distributions before 
the annuity starting date. Bill is to receive a re-
tirement benefit of $1,200 a month, and Kathy is 
to receive a monthly survivor benefit of $600 
upon Bill's death.
Bill must use the Simplified Method to figure 
his taxable annuity because his payments are 
from a qualified plan and he is under age 75. 
Because his annuity is payable over the lives of 
more than one annuitant, he uses his and Ka-
thy's combined ages and Table 2 at the bottom 
of the worksheet in completing line 3 of the 
worksheet. His completed worksheet is shown 
in Worksheet 10-A.
Bill's tax-free monthly amount is $100 
($31,000 ÷ 310) as shown on line 4 of the work-
sheet. Upon Bill's death, if Bill hasn’t recovered 
the full $31,000 investment, Kathy also will ex-
clude $100 from her $600 monthly payment. 
The full amount of any annuity payments re-
ceived after 310 payments are paid must be in-
cluded in gross income.
If Bill and Kathy die before 310 payments 
are made, a miscellaneous itemized deduction 
will be allowed for the unrecovered cost on the 
final income tax return of the last to die. This de-
duction isn’t subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- 
gross-income limit.
Page 81 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 79

Who must use the General Rule.  You must 
use the General Rule if you receive pension or 
annuity payments from:
A nonqualified plan (such as a private an-
nuity, a purchased commercial annuity, or 
a nonqualified employee plan), or
A qualified plan if you are age 75 or older 
on your annuity starting date and your an-
nuity payments are guaranteed for at least 
5 years.
Annuity starting before November 19, 
1996. If your annuity starting date is after July 
1, 1986, and before November 19, 1996, you 
had to use the General Rule for either circum-
stance just described. You also had to use it for 
any fixed-period annuity. If you didn’t have to 
use the General Rule, you could have chosen 
to use it. If your annuity starting date is before 
July 2, 1986, you had to use the General Rule 
unless you could use the Three-Year Rule.
If you had to use the General Rule (or chose 
to use it), you must continue to use it each year 
that you recover your cost.
Who can’t use the General Rule.  You can’t 
use the General Rule if you receive your pen-
sion or annuity from a qualified plan and none of 
the circumstances described in the preceding 
discussions apply to you. See Who must use 
the Simplified Method, earlier.
More information.  For complete information 
on using the General Rule, including the actua-
rial tables you need, see Pub. 939.
Taxation of 
Nonperiodic Payments
Nonperiodic distributions are also known as 
amounts not received as an annuity. They in-
clude all payments other than periodic pay-
ments and corrective distributions. Examples of 
Worksheet 10-A. Simplified Method Worksheet for Bill Smith
Keep for Your Records
1. Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this year. Also, add this amount to the total for Form 
1040, line 16a, or Form 1040A, line 12a .................................................. 1. 14,400
2. Enter your cost in the plan (contract) at the annuity starting date plus any 
death benefit exclusion.* See Cost (Investment in the 
Contract), earlier ............................................ 2. 31,000
Note. If your annuity starting date was before this year and you 
completed this worksheet last year, skip line 3 and enter the amount from 
line 4 of last year's worksheet on line 4 below (even if the amount of your 
pension or annuity has changed). Otherwise, go to line 3.
3. Enter the appropriate number from Table 1 below. But if your annuity 
starting date was after 1997 and the payments are for your life and that of 
your beneficiary, enter the appropriate number from Table 2 below ..... 3. 310
4. Divide line 2 by the number on line 3 ............................. 4. 100
5. Multiply line 4 by the number of months for which this year's payments 
were made. If your annuity starting date was before 1987, enter this 
amount on line 8 below and skip lines 6, 7, 10, and 11. Otherwise, go to 
line 6 ..................................................... 5. 1,200
6. Enter any amounts previously recovered tax free in years after 1986. This 
is the amount shown on line 10 of your worksheet for last year ......... 6. -0-
7. Subtract line 6 from line 2 ...................................... 7. 31,000
8. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 7 ...................................................... 8. 1,200
9. Taxable amount for year. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter the result, but not less than zero. Also, add 
this amount to the total for Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b ......................... 9. 13,200
Note. If your Form 1099-R shows a larger taxable amount, use the amount figured on this line instead. If 
you are a retired public safety officer, see Insurance Premiums for Retired Public Safety Officers in Pub. 
575 before entering an amount on your tax return.
10. Was your annuity starting date before 1987?
 Yes. STOP. Don’t complete the rest of this worksheet.
 No. Add lines 6 and 8. This is the amount you have recovered tax free through 2017. You will need 
this number if you need to fill out this worksheet next year .................................... 10. 1,200
11. Balance of cost to be recovered. Subtract line 10 from line 2. If zero, you won’t have to complete this 
worksheet next year. The payments you receive next year will generally be fully taxable ............. 11. 29,800
* A death benefit exclusion (up to $5,000) applied to certain benefits received by employees who died before August 21, 1996.
Table 1 for Line 3 Above
AND your annuity starting date was—
IF the age at annuity
starting date was...
BEFORE November 19,
1996, enter on line 3...
AFTER November 18,
1996, enter on line 3...
55 or under 300 360
56–60 260 310
61–65 240 260
66–70 170 210
71 or older 120 160
Table 2 for Line 3 Above
IF the combined ages at 
annuity starting date were...
THEN enter
on line 3...
110 or under 410
111–120 360
121–130 310
131–140 260
141 or older 210
Page 82 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 80 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

nonperiodic payments are cash withdrawals, 
distributions of current earnings, certain loans, 
and the value of annuity contracts transferred 
without full and adequate consideration.
Corrective distributions of excess plan con-
tributions. Generally, if the contributions made 
for you during the year to certain retirement 
plans exceed certain limits, the excess is taxa-
ble to you. To correct an excess, your plan may 
distribute it to you (along with any income 
earned on the excess). For information on plan 
contribution limits and how to report corrective 
distributions of excess contributions, see Re-
tirement Plan Contributions  under Employee 
Compensation in Pub. 525.
Figuring the taxable amount of nonperiodic 
payments. How you figure the taxable amount 
of a nonperiodic distribution depends on 
whether it is made before the annuity starting 
date, or on or after the annuity starting date. If it 
is made before the annuity starting date, its tax 
treatment also depends on whether it is made 
under a qualified or nonqualified plan. If it is 
made under a nonqualified plan, its tax treat-
ment depends on whether it fully discharges the 
contract, is received under certain life insurance 
or endowment contracts, or is allocable to an in-
vestment you made before August 14, 1982.
Annuity starting date.  The annuity starting 
date is either the first day of the first period for 
which you receive an annuity payment under 
the contract or the date on which the obligation 
under the contract becomes fixed, whichever is 
later.
Distribution on or after annuity starting 
date. If you receive a nonperiodic payment 
from your annuity contract on or after the annu-
ity starting date, you generally must include all 
of the payment in gross income.
Distribution before annuity starting date.  If 
you receive a nonperiodic distribution before 
the annuity starting date from a qualified retire-
ment plan, you generally can allocate only part 
of it to the cost of the contract. You exclude 
from your gross income the part that you allo-
cate to the cost. You include the remainder in 
your gross income.
Distribution before annuity starting date 
from a nonqualified plan.  If you receive a 
nonperiodic distribution before the annuity start-
ing date from a plan other than a qualified retire-
ment plan (nonqualified plan), it is allocated first 
to earnings (the taxable part) and then to the 
cost of the contract (the tax-free part). This allo-
cation rule applies, for example, to a commer-
cial annuity contract you bought directly from 
the issuer.
Distributions from nonqualified plans 
are subject to the NIIT. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 8960.
For more information, see Figuring the Tax-
able Amount  under Taxation of Nonperiodic 
Payments in Pub. 575.
CAUTION
!
Lump-Sum Distributions
This section on lump-sum distributions 
only applies if the plan participant was 
born before January 2, 1936. If the plan 
participant was born after January 1, 1936, the 
taxable amount of this nonperiodic payment  is 
reported as discussed earlier.
A lump-sum distribution is the distribution or 
payment in one tax year of a plan participant's 
entire balance from all of the employer's quali-
fied plans of one kind (for example, pension, 
profit-sharing, or stock bonus plans). A distribu-
tion from a nonqualified plan (such as a pri-
vately purchased commercial annuity or a sec-
tion 457 deferred compensation plan of a state 
or local government or tax-exempt organization) 
can’t qualify as a lump-sum distribution.
The participant's entire balance from a plan 
doesn’t include certain forfeited amounts. It also 
doesn’t include any deductible voluntary em-
ployee contributions allowed by the plan after 
1981 and before 1987. For more information 
about distributions that don’t qualify as 
lump-sum distributions, see Distributions that 
don’t qualify  under Lump-Sum Distributions  in 
Pub. 575.
If you receive a lump-sum distribution from a 
qualified employee plan or qualified employee 
annuity and the plan participant was born be-
fore January 2, 1936, you may be able to elect 
optional methods of figuring the tax on the dis-
tribution. The part from active participation in 
the plan before 1974 may qualify as capital gain 
subject to a 20% tax rate. The part from partici-
pation after 1973 (and any part from participa-
tion before 1974 that you don’t report as capital 
gain) is ordinary income. You may be able to 
use the 10-year tax option , discussed later, to 
figure tax on the ordinary income part.
Use Form 4972 to figure the separate tax on 
a lump-sum distribution using the optional 
methods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is 
added to the regular tax figured on your other 
income. This may result in a smaller tax than 
you would pay by including the taxable amount 
of the distribution as ordinary income in figuring 
your regular tax.
How to treat the distribution. If you receive a 
lump-sum distribution, you may have the follow-
ing options for how you treat the taxable part.
Report the part of the distribution from par-
ticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if 
you qualify) and the part from participation 
after 1973 as ordinary income.
Report the part of the distribution from par-
ticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if 
you qualify) and use the 10-year tax option 
to figure the tax on the part from participa-
tion after 1973 (if you qualify).
Use the 10-year tax option to figure the tax 
on the total taxable amount (if you qualify).
Roll over all or part of the distribution. See 
Rollovers, later. No tax is currently due on 
the part rolled over. Report any part not rol-
led over as ordinary income. 
Report the entire taxable part of the distri-
bution as ordinary income on your tax re-
turn.
TIP
The first three options are explained in the 
following discussions.
Electing optional lump-sum treatment.  You 
can choose to use the 10-year tax option or 
capital gain treatment only once after 1986 for 
any plan participant. If you make this choice, 
you can’t use either of these optional treatments 
for any future distributions for the participant.
Taxable and tax-free parts of the distribu-
tion. The taxable part of a lump-sum distribu-
tion is the employer's contributions and income 
earned on your account. You may recover your 
cost in the lump sum and any net unrealized ap-
preciation (NUA) in employer securities tax free.
Cost. In general, your cost is the total of:
The plan participant's nondeductible con-
tributions to the plan,
The plan participant's taxable costs of any 
life insurance contract distributed,
Any employer contributions that were taxa-
ble to the plan participant, and
Repayments of any loans that were taxa-
ble to the plan participant.
You must reduce this cost by amounts previ-
ously distributed tax free.
Net unrealized appreciation (NUA).  The 
NUA in employer securities (box 6 of Form 
1099-R) received as part of a lump-sum distri-
bution is generally tax free until you sell or ex-
change the securities. For more information, 
see Distributions of employer securities under 
Taxation of Nonperiodic Payments in Pub. 575.
Capital Gain Treatment
Capital gain treatment applies only to the taxa-
ble part of a lump-sum distribution resulting 
from participation in the plan before 1974. The 
amount treated as capital gain is taxed at a 20% 
rate. You can elect this treatment only once for 
any plan participant, and only if the plan partici-
pant was born before January 2, 1936.
Complete Part II of Form 4972 to choose the 
20% capital gain election. For more information, 
see Capital Gain Treatment under Lump-Sum 
Distributions in Pub. 575.
10-Year Tax Option
The 10-year tax option is a special formula used 
to figure a separate tax on the ordinary income 
part of a lump-sum distribution. You pay the tax 
only once, for the year in which you receive the 
distribution, not over the next 10 years. You can 
elect this treatment only once for any plan par-
ticipant, and only if the plan participant was 
born before January 2, 1936.
The ordinary income part of the distribution 
is the amount shown in box 2a of the Form 
1099-R given to you by the payer, minus the 
amount, if any, shown in box 3. You also can 
treat the capital gain part of the distribution 
(box 3 of Form 1099-R) as ordinary income for 
the 10-year tax option if you don’t choose capi-
tal gain treatment for that part.
Complete Part III of Form 4972 to choose 
the 10-year tax option. You must use the spe-
cial Tax Rate Schedule shown in the instruc-
tions for Part III to figure the tax. Pub. 575 
Page 83 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 81

illustrates how to complete Form 4972 to figure 
the separate tax.
Rollovers
If you withdraw cash or other assets from a 
qualified retirement plan in an eligible rollover 
distribution, you can generally defer tax on the 
distribution by rolling it over into another quali-
fied retirement plan, a traditional IRA, or, after 2 
years of participation in a SIMPLE IRA plan 
sponsored by your employer, a SIMPLE IRA 
under that plan.
For this purpose, the following plans are 
qualified retirement plans.
A qualified employee plan.
A qualified employee annuity.
A tax-sheltered annuity plan (403(b) plan).
An eligible state or local government sec-
tion 457 deferred compensation plan.
Rollovers to SIMPLE retirement accounts.
You can roll over amounts from a qualified re-
tirement plan (as described next) or an IRA into 
a SIMPLE retirement account as follows.
1. During the first 2 years of participation in a 
SIMPLE retirement account, you may roll 
over amounts from one SIMPLE retire-
ment account into another SIMPLE retire-
ment account.
2. After 2 years of participation in a SIMPLE 
retirement account, you may roll over 
amounts from a SIMPLE retirement, a 
qualified retirement plan, or an IRA into a 
SIMPLE retirement account.
Eligible rollover distributions.  Generally, an 
eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of 
all or any part of the balance to your credit in a 
qualified retirement plan. For information about 
exceptions to eligible rollover distributions, see 
Pub. 575.
Rollover of nontaxable amounts.  You may 
be able to roll over the nontaxable part of a dis-
tribution (such as your after-tax contributions) 
made to another qualified retirement plan that is 
a qualified employee plan or a 403(b) plan, or to 
a traditional or Roth IRA. The transfer must be 
made either through a direct rollover to a quali-
fied plan or 403(b) plan that separately ac-
counts for the taxable and nontaxable parts of 
the rollover or through a rollover to a traditional 
or Roth IRA.
If you roll over only part of a distribution that 
includes both taxable and nontaxable amounts, 
the amount you roll over is treated as coming 
first from the taxable part of the distribution.
Any after-tax contributions that you roll over 
into your traditional IRA become part of your ba-
sis (cost) in your IRAs. To recover your basis 
when you take distributions from your IRA, you 
must complete Form 8606 for the year of the 
distribution. For more information, see the Form 
8606 instructions.
Direct rollover option.  You can choose to 
have any part or all of an eligible rollover distri-
bution paid directly to another qualified retire-
ment plan that accepts rollover distributions or 
to a traditional or Roth IRA. If you choose the di-
rect rollover option, or have an automatic roll-
over, no tax will be withheld from any part of the 
distribution that is directly paid to the trustee of 
the other plan.
Payment to you option.  If an eligible rollover 
distribution is paid to you, 20% generally will be 
withheld for income tax. However, the full 
amount is treated as distributed to you even 
though you actually receive only 80%. You gen-
erally must include in income any part (includ-
ing the part withheld) that you don’t roll over 
within 60 days to another qualified retirement 
plan or to a traditional or Roth IRA. (See Pen-
sions and Annuities  under Tax Withholding for 
2018 in chapter 4.)
Rolling over more than amount re-
ceived. If you decide to roll over an 
amount equal to the distribution before 
withholding, your contribution to the new plan or 
IRA must include other money (for example, 
from savings or amounts borrowed) to replace 
the amount withheld.
Time for making rollover. You generally must 
complete the rollover of an eligible rollover dis-
tribution paid to you by the 60th day following 
the day on which you receive the distribution 
from your employer's plan. (If an amount distrib-
uted to you becomes a frozen deposit in a fi-
nancial institution during the 60-day period after 
you receive it, the rollover period is extended for 
the period during which the distribution is in a 
frozen deposit in a financial institution.)
The IRS may waive the 60-day requirement 
where the failure to do so would be against 
equity or good conscience, such as in the event 
of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond 
your reasonable control.
The administrator of a qualified plan must 
give you a written explanation of your distribu-
tion options within a reasonable period of time 
before making an eligible rollover distribution.
Qualified domestic relations order (QDRO).
You may be able to roll over tax free all or part 
of a distribution from a qualified retirement plan 
that you receive under a QDRO. If you receive 
the distribution as an employee's spouse or for-
mer spouse (not as a nonspousal beneficiary), 
the rollover rules apply to you as if you were the 
employee. You can roll over the distribution 
from the plan into a traditional IRA or to another 
eligible retirement plan. See Rollovers in Pub. 
575 for more information on benefits received 
under a QDRO.
Rollover by surviving spouse.  You may be 
able to roll over tax free all or part of a distribu-
tion from a qualified retirement plan you receive 
as the surviving spouse of a deceased em-
ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if you 
were the employee. You can roll over a distribu-
tion into a qualified retirement plan or a tradi-
tional or Roth IRA. For a rollover to a Roth IRA, 
see Rollovers to Roth IRAs, later.
A distribution paid to a beneficiary other 
than the employee's surviving spouse is gener-
ally not an eligible rollover distribution. How-
ever, see Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary 
next.
Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary.  If you 
are a designated beneficiary (other than a sur-
viving spouse) of a deceased employee, you 
may be able to roll over tax free all or a portion 
CAUTION
!
of a distribution you receive from an eligible re-
tirement plan of the employee. The distribution 
must be a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer to 
your traditional or Roth IRA that was set up to 
receive the distribution. The transfer will be 
treated as an eligible rollover distribution and 
the receiving plan will be treated as an inherited 
IRA. For information on inherited IRAs, see 
What if You Inherit an IRA?  in chapter 1 of Pub. 
590-B.
Retirement bonds.  If you redeem retirement 
bonds purchased under a qualified bond pur-
chase plan, you can roll over the proceeds that 
exceed your basis tax free into an IRA (as dis-
cussed in Pub. 590-A) or a qualified employer 
plan.
Designated Roth accounts. You can roll over 
an eligible rollover distribution from a designa-
ted Roth account into another designated Roth 
account or a Roth IRA. If you want to roll over 
the part of the distribution that isn’t included in 
income, you must make a direct rollover of the 
entire distribution or you can roll over the entire 
amount (or any portion) to a Roth IRA. For more 
information on rollovers from designated Roth 
accounts, see Rollovers in Pub. 575.
In-plan rollovers to designated Roth ac-
counts. If you are a plan participant in a 
401(k), 403(b), or 457(b) plan, your plan may 
permit you to roll over amounts in those plans to 
a designated Roth account within the same 
plan. The rollover of any untaxed amounts must 
be included in income. See Designated Roth 
accounts under Rollovers in Pub. 575 for more 
information.
Rollovers to Roth IRAs. You can roll over dis-
tributions directly from a qualified retirement 
plan (other than a designated Roth account) to 
a Roth IRA.
You must include in your gross income dis-
tributions from a qualified retirement plan (other 
than a designated Roth account) that you would 
have had to include in income if you hadn’t rol-
led them over into a Roth IRA. You don’t include 
in gross income any part of a distribution from a 
qualified retirement plan that is a return of con-
tributions to the plan that were taxable to you 
when paid. In addition, the 10% tax on early dis-
tributions doesn’t apply.
More information.  For more information on 
the rules for rolling over distributions, see Roll-
overs in Pub. 575.
Special Additional 
Taxes
To discourage the use of pension funds for pur-
poses other than normal retirement, the law im-
poses additional taxes on early distributions of 
those funds and on failures to withdraw the 
funds timely. Ordinarily, you won’t be subject to 
these taxes if you roll over all early distributions 
you receive, as explained earlier, and begin 
drawing out the funds at a normal retirement 
age, in reasonable amounts over your life ex-
pectancy. These special additional taxes are 
the taxes on:
Early distributions, and
Page 84 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 82 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Excess accumulation (not receiving mini-
mum distributions).
These taxes are discussed in the following sec-
tions.
If you must pay either of these taxes, report 
them on Form 5329. However, you don’t have 
to file Form 5329 if you owe only the tax on 
early distributions and all your Forms 1099-R 
correctly show a “1” in box 7. Instead, enter 
10% of the taxable part of the distribution on 
Form 1040, line 59, and write “No” under the 
heading “Other Taxes” to the left of line 59.
Even if you don’t owe any of these taxes, 
you may have to complete Form 5329 and at-
tach it to your Form 1040. This applies if you 
meet an exception to the tax on early distribu-
tions but box 7 of your Form 1099-R doesn’t in-
dicate an exception.
Tax on Early Distributions
Most distributions (both periodic and nonperi-
odic) from qualified retirement plans and non-
qualified annuity contracts made to you before 
you reach age 59 12 are subject to an additional 
tax of 10%. This tax applies to the part of the 
distribution that you must include in gross in-
come.
For this purpose, a qualified retirement plan 
is:
A qualified employee plan,
A qualified employee annuity plan,
A tax-sheltered annuity plan, or
An eligible state or local government sec-
tion 457 deferred compensation plan (to 
the extent that any distribution is attributa-
ble to amounts the plan received in a direct 
transfer or rollover from one of the other 
plans listed here or an IRA). 
5% rate on certain early distributions from 
deferred annuity contracts.  If an early with-
drawal from a deferred annuity is otherwise 
subject to the 10% additional tax, a 5% rate 
may apply instead. A 5% rate applies to distri-
butions under a written election providing a spe-
cific schedule for the distribution of your interest 
in the contract if, as of March 1, 1986, you had 
begun receiving payments under the election. 
On line 4 of Form 5329, multiply the line 3 
amount by 5% (0.05) instead of 10% (0.10). At-
tach an explanation to your return.
Distributions from Roth IRAs allocable to a 
rollover from an eligible retirement plan 
within the 5-year period.  If, within the 5-year 
period starting with the first day of your tax year 
in which you rolled over an amount from an eli-
gible retirement plan to a Roth IRA, you take a 
distribution from the Roth IRA, you may have to 
pay the additional 10% tax on early distribu-
tions. You generally must pay the 10% addi-
tional tax on any amount attributable to the part 
of the rollover that you had to include in income. 
The additional tax is figured on Form 5329. For 
more information, see Form 5329 and its in-
structions. For information on qualified distribu-
tions from Roth IRAs, see Additional Tax on 
Early Distributions in chapter 2 of Pub. 590-B.
Distributions from designated Roth ac-
counts allocable to in-plan Roth rollovers 
within the 5-year period.  If, within the 5-year 
period starting with the first day of your tax year 
in which you rolled over an amount from a 
401(k), 403(b), or 457(b) plan to a designated 
Roth account, you take a distribution from the 
designated Roth account, you may have to pay 
the additional 10% tax on early distributions. 
You generally must pay the 10% additional tax 
on any amount attributable to the part of the 
in-plan rollover that you had to include in in-
come. The additional tax is figured on Form 
5329. For more information, see Form 5329 and 
its instructions. For information on qualified dis-
tributions from designated Roth accounts, see 
Designated Roth accounts  under Taxation of 
Periodic Payments in Pub. 575.
Exceptions to tax.  Certain early distributions 
are excepted from the early distribution tax. If 
the payer knows that an exception applies to 
your early distribution, distribution code “2,” “3,” 
or “4” should be shown in box 7 of your Form 
1099-R and you don’t have to report the distri-
bution on Form 5329. If an exception applies 
but distribution code “1” (early distribution, no 
known exception) is shown in box 7, you must 
file Form 5329. Enter the taxable amount of the 
distribution shown in box 2a of your Form 
1099-R on line 1 of Form 5329. On line 2, enter 
the amount that can be excluded and the ex-
ception number shown in the Form 5329 in-
structions.
If distribution code “1” is incorrectly 
shown on your Form 1099-R for a dis-
tribution received when you were age 
5912 or older, include that distribution on Form 
5329. Enter exception number “12” on line 2.
General exceptions. The tax doesn’t apply 
to distributions that are:
Made as part of a series of substantially 
equal periodic payments (made at least 
annually) for your life (or life expectancy) or 
the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of 
you and your designated beneficiary (if 
from a qualified retirement plan, the pay-
ments must begin after your separation 
from service),
Made because you are totally and perma-
nently disabled (see Exceptions to Tax un-
der Tax on Early Distributions in Pub. 575), 
or
Made on or after the death of the plan par-
ticipant or contract holder.
Additional exceptions for qualified retire-
ment plans. The tax doesn’t apply to distribu-
tions that are:
From a qualified retirement plan (other 
than an IRA) after your separation from 
service in or after the year you reached 
age 55 (age 50 for qualified public safety 
employees);
From a qualified retirement plan (other 
than an IRA) to an alternate payee under a 
qualified domestic relations order;
From a qualified retirement plan to the ex-
tent you have deductible medical expen-
ses that exceed 10% of your adjusted 
gross income, whether or not you itemize 
your deductions for the year;
TIP
From an employer plan under a written 
election that provides a specific schedule 
for distribution of your entire interest if, as 
of March 1, 1986, you had separated from 
service and had begun receiving payments 
under the election;
From an employee stock ownership plan 
for dividends on employer securities held 
by the plan;
From a qualified retirement plan due to an 
IRS levy of the plan;
From elective deferral accounts under 
401(k) or 403(b) plans or similar arrange-
ments that are qualified reservist distribu-
tions; or
Phased retirement annuity payments made 
to federal employees. See Pub. 721 for 
more information on the phased retirement 
program.
Qualified public safety employees.  If you 
are a qualified public safety employee, distribu-
tions made from a governmental defined benefit 
pension plan aren’t subject to the additional tax 
on early distributions. You are a qualified public 
safety employee if you provide police protec-
tion, firefighting services, or emergency medical 
services for a state or municipality, and you 
separated from service in or after the year you 
attained age 50.
Note. For tax years after December 31, 
2015, the definition of qualified public safety 
employees is expanded to include the following.
Federal law enforcement officers.
Federal customs and border protection of-
ficers.
Federal firefighters.
Air traffic controllers.
Nuclear materials couriers.
Members of the United States Capital Po-
lice.
Members of the Supreme Court Police.
Diplomatic security special agents of the 
United States Department of State.
Qualified reservist distributions.  A quali-
fied reservist distribution isn’t subject to the ad-
ditional tax on early distributions. A qualified re-
servist distribution is a distribution (a) from 
elective deferrals under a section 401(k) or 
403(b) plan, or a similar arrangement; (b) to an 
individual ordered or called to active duty (be-
cause he or she is a member of a reserve com-
ponent) for a period of more than 179 days or 
for an indefinite period; and (c) made during the 
period beginning on the date of the order or call 
and ending at the close of the active duty pe-
riod. You must have been ordered or called to 
active duty after September 11, 2001. For more 
information, see Qualified reservist distributions 
under Special Additional Taxes in Pub. 575.
Additional exceptions for nonqualified 
annuity contracts.  The tax doesn’t apply to 
distributions from:
A deferred annuity contract to the extent 
allocable to investment in the contract be-
fore August 14, 1982;
Page 85 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 83

A deferred annuity contract under a quali-
fied personal injury settlement;
A deferred annuity contract purchased by 
your employer upon termination of a quali-
fied employee plan or qualified employee 
annuity plan and held by your employer 
until your separation from service; or
An immediate annuity contract (a single 
premium contract providing substantially 
equal annuity payments that start within 1 
year from the date of purchase and are 
paid at least annually).
Tax on Excess 
Accumulation
To make sure that most of your retirement ben-
efits are paid to you during your lifetime, rather 
than to your beneficiaries after your death, the 
payments that you receive from qualified retire-
ment plans must begin no later than your re-
quired beginning date  (defined later). The pay-
ments each year can’t be less than the required 
minimum distribution.
Required distributions not made.  If the 
actual distributions to you in any year are less 
than the minimum required distribution for that 
year, you are subject to an additional tax. The 
tax equals 50% of the part of the required mini-
mum distribution that wasn’t distributed.
For this purpose, a qualified retirement plan 
includes:
A qualified employee plan,
A qualified employee annuity plan,
An eligible section 457 deferred compen-
sation plan, or
A tax-sheltered annuity plan (403(b) plan)
(for benefits accruing after 1986).
Waiver. The tax may be waived if you establish 
that the shortfall in distributions was due to rea-
sonable error and that reasonable steps are be-
ing taken to remedy the shortfall. See the In-
structions for Form 5329 for the procedure to 
follow if you believe you qualify for a waiver of 
this tax.
State insurer delinquency proceedings.
You might not receive the minimum distribution 
because assets are invested in a contract is-
sued by an insurance company in state insurer 
delinquency proceedings. If your payments are 
reduced below the minimum due to these pro-
ceedings, you should contact your plan admin-
istrator. Under certain conditions, you won’t 
have to pay the 50% excise tax.
Required beginning date.  Unless the rule for 
5% owners applies, you generally must begin to 
receive distributions from your qualified retire-
ment plan by April 1 of the year that follows the 
later of:
The calendar year in which you reach age 
7012, or
The calendar year in which you retire from 
employment with the employer maintaining 
the plan.
However, your plan may require you to begin to 
receive distributions by April 1 of the year that 
follows the year in which you reach age 70 12, 
even if you haven’t retired.
If you reached age 7012 in 2017, you may be 
required to receive your first distribution by April 
1, 2018. Your required distribution then must be 
made for 2018 by December 31, 2018.
5% owners.  If you are a 5% owner, you 
must begin to receive distributions by April 1 of 
the year that follows the calendar year in which 
you reach age 7012.
You are a 5% owner if, for the plan year end-
ing in the calendar year in which you reach age 
7012, you own (or are considered to own under 
section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code) 
more than 5% of the outstanding stock (or more 
than 5% of the total voting power of all stock) of 
the employer, or more than 5% of the capital or 
profits interest in the employer.
Age 7012. You reach age 70 12 on the date that 
is 6 calendar months after the date of your 70th 
birthday.
For example, if you are retired and your 70th 
birthday was on June 30, 2017, you were age 
7012 on December 30, 2017. If your 70th birth-
day was on July 1, 2017, you reached age 70 12
on January 1, 2018.
Required distributions.  By the required be-
ginning date, as explained earlier, you must ei-
ther:
Receive your entire interest in the plan (for 
a tax-sheltered annuity, your entire benefit 
accruing after 1986), or
Begin receiving periodic distributions in an-
nual amounts calculated to distribute your 
entire interest (for a tax-sheltered annuity, 
your entire benefit accruing after 1986) 
over your life or life expectancy or over the 
joint lives or joint life expectancies of you 
and a designated beneficiary (or over a 
shorter period).
Additional information.  For more informa-
tion on this rule, see Tax on Excess Accumula-
tion in Pub. 575.
Form 5329. You must file Form 5329 if you 
owe tax because you didn’t receive a minimum 
required distribution from your qualified retire-
ment plan.
Survivors and 
Beneficiaries
Generally, a survivor or beneficiary reports pen-
sion or annuity income in the same way the plan 
participant would have. However, some special 
rules apply. See Pub. 575 for more information.
Survivors of employees. If you are entitled to 
receive a survivor annuity on the death of an 
employee who died, you can exclude part of 
each annuity payment as a tax-free recovery of 
the employee's investment in the contract. You 
must figure the taxable and tax-free parts of 
your annuity payments using the method that 
applies as if you were the employee.
Survivors of retirees.  If you receive benefits 
as a survivor under a joint and survivor annuity, 
include those benefits in income in the same 
way the retiree would have included them in in-
come. If you receive a survivor annuity because 
of the death of a retiree who had reported the 
annuity under the Three-Year Rule and recov-
ered all of the cost tax free, your survivor pay-
ments are fully taxable.
If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-
ments under the General Rule, you must apply 
the same exclusion percentage to your initial 
survivor annuity payment called for in the con-
tract. The resulting tax-free amount will then re-
main fixed. Any increases in the survivor annu-
ity are fully taxable.
If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-
ments under the Simplified Method, the part of 
each payment that is tax free is the same as the 
tax-free amount figured by the retiree at the an-
nuity starting date. This amount remains fixed 
even if the annuity payments are increased or 
decreased. See Simplified Method, earlier.
In any case, if the annuity starting date is af-
ter 1986, the total exclusion over the years can’t 
be more than the cost.
Estate tax deduction.  If your annuity was a 
joint and survivor annuity that was included in 
the decedent's estate, an estate tax may have 
been paid on it. You can deduct the part of the 
total estate tax that was based on the annuity. 
The deceased annuitant must have died after 
the annuity starting date. (For details, see sec-
tion 1.691(d)-1 of the regulations.) Deduct it in 
equal amounts over your remaining life expect-
ancy.
If the decedent died before the annuity start-
ing date of a deferred annuity contract and you 
receive a death benefit under that contract, the 
amount you receive (either in a lump sum or as 
periodic payments) in excess of the decedent's 
cost is included in your gross income as income 
in respect of a decedent for which you may be 
able to claim an estate tax deduction.
You can take the estate tax deduction as an 
itemized deduction on Schedule A, Form 1040. 
This deduction isn’t subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit on miscellaneous de-
ductions. See Pub. 559 for more information on 
the estate tax deduction.
Page 86 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 84 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

11.
Social Security 
and Equivalent 
Railroad 
Retirement 
Benefits
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
This chapter explains the federal income tax 
rules for social security benefits and equivalent 
tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains the 
following topics.
How to figure whether your benefits are 
taxable.
How to report your taxable benefits.
How to use the social security benefits 
worksheet (with examples).
Deductions related to your benefits and 
how to treat repayments that are more than 
the benefits you received during the year.
Social security benefits include monthly re-
tirement, survivor, and disability benefits. They 
don’t include Supplemental Security Income 
(SSI) payments, which aren’t taxable.
Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits 
are the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad em-
ployee or beneficiary would have been entitled 
to receive under the social security system. 
They are commonly called the social security 
equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene-
fits. 
If you received these benefits during 2017, 
you should have received a Form SSA-1099, 
Social Security Benefit Statement; or Form 
RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad 
CAUTION
!
Retirement Board. These forms show the 
amounts received and repaid, and taxes with-
held for the year. You may receive more than 
one of these forms for the same year. You 
should add the amounts shown on all the Forms 
SSA-1099 and Forms RRB-1099 you receive 
for the year to determine the total amounts re-
ceived and repaid, and taxes withheld for that 
year. See the Appendix at the end of Pub. 915 
for more information.
Note. When the term “benefits” is used in 
this chapter, it applies to both social security 
benefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad 
retirement benefits.
my Social Security  account. Social Security 
beneficiaries may quickly and easily obtain vari-
ous information from the SSA's website with a 
my Social Security account to:
Keep track of your earnings and verify 
them every year;
Get an estimate of your future benefits if 
you are still working;
Get a letter with proof of your benefits if 
you currently receive them;
Change your address;
Start or change your direct deposit;
Get a replacement Medicare card; and
Get a replacement Form SSA-1099 for the 
tax season.
For more information and to set up an account, 
go to SSA.gov/myaccount.
What isn’t covered in this chapter.  This 
chapter doesn’t cover the tax rules for the fol-
lowing railroad retirement benefits.
Non-social security equivalent benefit 
(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits.
Tier 2 benefits.
Vested dual benefits.
Supplemental annuity benefits.
For information on these benefits, see Pub. 
575, Pension and Annuity Income.
This chapter doesn’t cover the tax rules for 
social security benefits reported on Form 
SSA-1042S, Social Security Benefit Statement; 
or Form RRB-1042S, Statement for Nonresi-
dent Alien Recipients of: Payments by the Rail-
road Retirement Board. For information about 
these benefits, see Pub. 519, U.S. Tax Guide 
for Aliens; and Pub. 915, Social Security and 
Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits.
This chapter also doesn’t cover the tax rules 
for foreign social security benefits. These bene-
fits are taxable as annuities, unless they are ex-
empt from U.S. tax or treated as a U.S. social 
security benefit under a tax treaty.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Pension and Annuity Income
Contributions to Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
  505
  575 
  590-A 
Social Security and Equivalent 
Railroad Retirement Benefits
Forms (and Instructions)
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Social Security Benefit 
Statement
Payments by the Railroad 
Retirement Board
Voluntary Withholding Request
Are Any of Your 
Benefits Taxable?
To find out whether any of your benefits may be 
taxable, compare the base amount for your fil-
ing status with the total of:
1. One-half of your benefits; plus
2. All your other income, including tax-ex-
empt interest.
Exclusions. When making this comparison, 
don’t reduce your other income by any exclu-
sions for:
Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,
Employer-provided adoption benefits,
Foreign earned income or foreign housing, 
or
Income earned by bona fide residents of 
American Samoa or Puerto Rico.
Children's benefits.  The rules in this chapter 
apply to benefits received by children. See Who 
is taxed, later.
Figuring total income.  To figure the total of 
one-half of your benefits plus your other in-
come, use Worksheet 11-1 later in this discus-
sion. If the total is more than your base amount, 
part of your benefits may be taxable.
If you are married and file a joint return for 
2017, you and your spouse must combine your 
incomes and your benefits to figure whether any 
of your combined benefits are taxable. Even if 
your spouse didn’t receive any benefits, you 
must add your spouse's income to yours to fig-
ure whether any of your benefits are taxable.
If the only income you received during 
2017 was your social security or the 
SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire-
ment benefits, your benefits generally aren’t 
taxable and you probably don’t have to file a re-
turn. If you have income in addition to your ben-
efits, you may have to file a return even if none 
of your benefits are taxable. See Do I Have To 
File a Return?  in chapter 1, earlier; Pub. 501, 
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and Filing In-
formation; or your tax return instructions to find 
out if you have to file a return.
Base amount. Your base amount is:
$25,000 if you are single, head of house-
hold, or qualifying widow(er);
$25,000 if you are married filing separately 
and lived apart from your spouse for all of 
2017;
$32,000 if you are married filing jointly; or
  915 
  1040-ES
  SSA-1099
  RRB-1099
  W-4V
TIP
Page 87 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 85

$-0- if you are married filing separately and 
lived with your spouse at any time during 
2017.
Worksheet 11-1. You can use Worksheet 11-1 
to figure the amount of income to compare with 
your base amount. This is a quick way to check 
whether some of your benefits may be taxable.
Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check if 
Your Benefits May Be Taxable
Note. If you plan to file a joint income tax return, 
include your spouse's amounts, if any, on lines 
A, C, and D.
A. Enter the amount from 
box 5 of all your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. 
Include the full amount of 
any lump-sum benefit 
payments received in 2017, 
for 2017 and earlier years. 
(If you received more than 
one form, combine the 
amounts from box 5 and 
enter the total.) ....... A. 
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, 
stop here; none of your benefits are taxable this 
year.
B. Enter one-half of line A ... B. 
C. Enter your total income that 
is taxable (excluding line A), 
such as pensions, wages, 
interest, ordinary dividends, 
and capital gain 
distributions. Don’t reduce 
your income by any 
deductions, exclusions 
(listed earlier), or 
exemptions .......... C. 
D. Enter any tax-exempt 
interest income such as 
interest on municipal 
bonds ............. D. 
E. Add lines B, C, and D ... E. 
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your 
base amount for your filing status. If the 
amount on line E equals or is less than the base 
amount for your filing status, none of your 
benefits are taxable this year. If the amount on 
line E is more than your base amount, some of 
your benefits may be taxable. You need to 
complete Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915 (or the 
Social Security Benefits Worksheet in your tax 
form instructions). If none of your benefits are 
taxable, but you otherwise must file a tax return, 
see Benefits not taxable, later, under How To 
Report Your Benefits.
Example. You and your spouse (both over 
65) are filing a joint return for 2017 and you both 
received social security benefits during the 
year. In January 2018, you received a Form 
SSA-1099 showing net benefits of $7,500 in 
box 5. Your spouse received a Form SSA-1099 
showing net benefits of $3,500 in box 5. You 
also received a taxable pension of $25,800 and 
interest income of $500. You didn’t have any 
tax-exempt interest income. Your benefits aren’t 
taxable for 2017 because your income, as fig-
ured in Worksheet 11-1, isn’t more than your 
base amount ($32,000) for married filing jointly.
Even though none of your benefits are taxa-
ble, you must file a return for 2017 because 
your taxable gross income ($26,300) exceeds 
the minimum filing requirement amount for your 
filing status.
Filled-in Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To 
Check if Your Benefits May Be Taxable
Note. If you plan to file a joint income tax return, 
include your spouse's amounts, if any, on lines 
A, C, and D.
A. Enter the amount from 
box 5 of all your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. 
Include the full amount of 
any lump-sum benefit 
payments received in 2017, 
for 2017 and earlier years. 
(If you received more than 
one form, combine the 
amounts from box 5 and 
enter the total.) ....... A. $11,000
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, 
stop here; none of your benefits are taxable this 
year.
B. Enter one-half of line A ... B. 5,500
C. Enter your total income that 
is taxable (excluding line 
A), such as pensions, 
wages, interest, ordinary 
dividends, and capital gain 
distributions. Don’t reduce 
your income by any 
deductions, exclusions 
(listed earlier), or 
exemptions .......... C. 26,300
D. Enter any tax-exempt 
interest income such as 
interest on municipal 
bonds ............ D. -0-
E. Add lines B, C, and D ... E. $31,800
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your 
base amount for your filing status. If the 
amount on line E equals or is less than the base 
amount for your filing status, none of your 
benefits are taxable this year. If the amount on 
line E is more than your base amount, some of 
your benefits may be taxable. You need to 
complete Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915 (or the 
Social Security Benefits Worksheet in your tax 
form instructions). If none of your benefits are 
taxable, but you otherwise must file a tax return, 
see Benefits not taxable, later, under How To 
Report Your Benefits.
Who is taxed. Benefits are included in the tax-
able income (to the extent they are taxable) of 
the person who has the legal right to receive the 
benefits. For example, if you and your child re-
ceive benefits, but the check for your child is 
made out in your name, you must use only your 
part of the benefits to see whether any benefits 
are taxable to you. One-half of the part that be-
longs to your child must be added to your 
child's other income to see whether any of 
those benefits are taxable to your child.
Repayment of benefits.  Any repayment of 
benefits you made during 2017 must be sub-
tracted from the gross benefits you received in 
2017. It doesn’t matter whether the repayment 
was for a benefit you received in 2017 or in an 
earlier year. If you repaid more than the gross 
benefits you received in 2017, see Repayments 
More Than Gross Benefits, later.
Your gross benefits are shown in box 3 of 
Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099. Your repay-
ments are shown in box 4. The amount in box 5 
shows your net benefits for 2017 (box 3 minus 
box 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figure 
whether any of your benefits are taxable.
Tax withholding and estimated tax. You can 
choose to have federal income tax withheld 
from your social security benefits and/or the 
SSEB portion of your tier 1 railroad retirement 
benefits. If you choose to do this, you must 
complete a Form W-4V.
If you don’t choose to have income tax with-
held, you may have to request additional with-
holding from other income or pay estimated tax 
during the year. For details, see chapter 4, ear-
lier; Pub. 505; or the instructions for Form 
1040-ES.
How To Report
Your Benefits
If part of your benefits are taxable, you must use 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can’t use Form 
1040EZ.
Reporting on Form 1040.  Report your net 
benefits (the total amount from box 5 of all your 
Forms SSA-1099 and Forms RRB-1099) on 
line 20a and the taxable part on line 20b. If you 
are married filing separately and you lived apart 
from your spouse for all of 2017, also enter “D” 
to the right of the word “benefits” on line 20a.
Reporting on Form 1040A.  Report your net 
benefits (the total amount from box 5 of all your 
Forms SSA-1099 and Forms RRB-1099) on line 
14a and the taxable part on line 14b. If you are 
married filing separately and you lived apart 
from your spouse for all of 2017, also enter “D” 
to the right of the word “benefits” on line 14a.
Benefits not taxable.  If you are filing Form 
1040EZ, don’t report any benefits on your tax 
return. If you are filing Form 1040 or Form 
1040A, report your net benefits (the total 
amount from box 5 of all your Forms SSA-1099 
and Forms RRB-1099) on Form 1040, line 20a; 
or Form 1040A, line 14a. Enter -0- on Form 
1040, line 20b; or Form 1040A, line 14b. If you 
are married filing separately and you lived apart 
from your spouse for all of 2017, also enter “D” 
to the right of the word “benefits” on Form 1040, 
line 20a; or Form 1040A, line 14a.
How Much Is Taxable?
If part of your benefits are taxable, how much is 
taxable depends on the total amount of your 
benefits and other income. Generally, the 
higher that total amount, the greater the taxable 
part of your benefits.
Maximum taxable part.  Generally, up to 50% 
of your benefits will be taxable. However, up to 
Page 88 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 86 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

85% of your benefits can be taxable if either of 
the following situations applies to you.
The total of one-half of your benefits and 
all your other income is more than $34,000 
($44,000 if you are married filing jointly).
You are married filing separately and lived 
with your spouse at any time during 2017.
Which worksheet to use.  A worksheet you 
can use to figure your taxable benefits is in the 
instructions for your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. 
You can use either that worksheet or Work-
sheet 1 in Pub. 915, unless any of the following 
situations applies to you.
1. You contributed to a traditional individual 
retirement arrangement (IRA) and you or 
your spouse is covered by a retirement 
plan at work. In this situation, you must 
use the special worksheets in Appendix B 
of Pub. 590-A to figure both your IRA de-
duction and your taxable benefits.
2. Situation 1 doesn’t apply and you take an 
exclusion for interest from qualified U.S. 
savings bonds (Form 8815), for adoption 
benefits (Form 8839), for foreign earned 
income or housing (Form 2555 or Form 
2555-EZ), or for income earned in Ameri-
can Samoa (Form 4563) or Puerto Rico by 
bona fide residents. In this situation, you 
must use Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915 to fig-
ure your taxable benefits.
3. You received a lump-sum payment for an 
earlier year. In this situation, also complete 
Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub. 
915. See Lump-sum election next.
Lump-sum election.  You must include the 
taxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive) pay-
ment of benefits received in 2017 in your 2017 
income, even if the payment includes benefits 
for an earlier year.
This type of lump-sum benefit payment 
shouldn’t be confused with the 
lump-sum death benefit that both the 
SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficia-
ries. No part of the lump-sum death benefit is 
subject to tax.
Generally, you use your 2017 income to fig-
ure the taxable part of the total benefits re-
ceived in 2017. However, you may be able to 
figure the taxable part of a lump-sum payment 
for an earlier year separately, using your in-
come for the earlier year. You can elect this 
method if it lowers your taxable benefits.
Making the election.  If you received a 
lump-sum benefit payment in 2017 that includes 
benefits for one or more earlier years, follow the 
instructions in Pub. 915 under Lump-Sum Elec-
tion to see whether making the election will 
lower your taxable benefits. That discussion 
also explains how to make the election.
Because the earlier year's taxable ben-
efits are included in your 2017 income, 
no adjustment is made to the earlier 
year's return. Don’t file an amended return for 
the earlier year.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Examples
The following are a few examples you can use 
as a guide to figure the taxable part of your ben-
efits.
Example 1.  George White is single and 
files Form 1040 for 2017. He received the fol-
lowing income in 2017.
Fully taxable pension ........ $18,600
Wages from part-time job .....  9,400
Taxable interest income ...... 990
Total ................. $28,990
George also received social security bene-
fits during 2017. The Form SSA-1099 he re-
ceived in January 2018 shows $5,980 in box 5. 
To figure his taxable benefits, George com-
pletes the worksheet shown here.
Filled-in Worksheet 1.
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits
1. Enter the total amount from 
box 5 of ALL your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. Also 
enter this amount on Form 1040, 
line 20a; or Form 1040A, 
line 14a .............. $5,980
2. Enter one-half of line 1 .......... 2,990
3. Combine the amounts from:
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 
through 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, 
and 21.
Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 
11b, 12b, and 13 ............ 28,990
4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 
1040 or 1040A, line 8b .......... -0-
5. Enter the total of any exclusions/
adjustments for:
Adoption benefits (Form 8839, 
line 28),
Foreign earned income or housing 
(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50; or 
Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and
Certain income of bona fide 
residents of American Samoa 
(Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto 
Rico ........ ........ -0-
6. Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ....... 31,980
7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amounts 
from Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, 
and any write-in adjustments you 
entered on the dotted line next to line 36.
Form 1040A filers: Enter the amounts 
from Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ... -0-
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the 
amount on line 6? 
No.
STOP None of your social security 
benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 
1040, line 20b; or Form 1040A, line 14b.
Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 .... 31,980
9. If you are:
Married filing jointly, enter $32,000
Single, head of household, 
qualifying widow(er), or married 
filing separately and you lived 
apart from your spouse for all of 
2017, enter $25,000 .... .... 25,000
Note. If you are married filing separately 
and you lived with your spouse at any 
time in 2017, skip lines 9 through 16; 
multiply line 8 by 85% (0.85) and enter 
the result on line 17. Then go to line 18. 
10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the 
amount on line 8? 
No.
STOP None of your benefits are 
taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, 
line 20b; or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If 
you are married filing separately and 
you lived apart from your spouse for all 
of 2017, be sure you entered “D” to the 
right of the word “benefits” on Form 
1040, line 20a; or on Form 1040A, 
line 14a.
Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .... 6,980
11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; 
$9,000 if single, head of household, 
qualifying widow(er), or married filing 
separately and you lived apart from 
your spouse for all of 2017 ........ 9,000
12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or 
less, enter -0- ............... -0- 
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 
or line 11 ................. 6,980
14. Enter one-half of line 13 ......... 3,490
15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. 2,990
16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (0.85). If line 12 
is zero, enter -0- ............. -0- 
17. Add lines 15 and 16 ........... 2,990
18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (0.85) ....... 5,083
19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of 
line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount 
on Form 1040, line 20b; or Form 1040A, 
line 14b .................. $2,990
The amount on line 19 of George's work-
sheet shows that $2,990 of his social security 
benefits is taxable. On line 20a of his Form 
1040, George enters his net benefits of $5,980. 
On line 20b, he enters his taxable benefits of 
$2,990.
Example 2.  Ray and Alice Hopkins file a 
joint return on Form 1040A for 2017. Ray is re-
tired and received a fully taxable pension of 
$15,500. He also received social security bene-
fits, and his Form SSA-1099 for 2017 shows net 
benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice worked during 
the year and had wages of $14,000. She made 
a deductible payment to her IRA account of 
$1,000 and isn’t covered by a retirement plan at 
work. Ray and Alice have two savings accounts 
with a total of $250 in taxable interest income. 
They complete Worksheet 1, entering $29,750 
($15,500 + $14,000 + $250) on line 3. They find 
none of Ray's social security benefits are taxa-
ble. On Form 1040A, they enter $5,600 on 
line 14a and -0- on line 14b.
Page 89 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 87

Filled-in Worksheet 1.
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits
1. Enter the total amount from 
box 5 of ALL your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. Also 
enter this amount on Form 1040, 
line 20a; or Form 1040A, 
line 14a .............. $5,600
2. Enter one-half of line 1 ...... 2,800
3. Combine the amounts from:
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 
10 through 14, 15b, 16b, 17 
through 19, and 21.
Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 
10, 11b, 12b, and 13 ..... 29,750
4. Enter the amount, if any, from 
Form 1040 or 1040A, line 8b .. -0-
5. Enter the total of any exclusions/
adjustments for:
Adoption benefits (Form 8839, 
line 28),
Foreign earned income or housing 
(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50; or 
Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and
Certain income of bona fide 
residents of American Samoa 
(Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto 
Rico ........ ........ -0-
6. Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ... 32,550
7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amounts 
from Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, 
and any write-in adjustments you 
entered on the dotted line next to line 36.
Form 1040A filers: Enter the 
amounts from Form 1040A, lines 
16 and 17 ............. 1,000
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the 
amount on line 6? 
No.
STOP None of your social security 
benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 
1040, line 20b; or Form 1040A, line 14b.
Yes. Subtract line 7 from 
line 6 ............... 31,550
9. If you are:
Married filing jointly, enter $32,000
Single, head of household, 
qualifying widow(er), or married 
filing separately and you lived 
apart from your spouse for all of 
2017, enter $25,000 .... .... 32,000
Note. If you are married filing separately 
and you lived with your spouse at any 
time in 2017, skip lines 9 through 16; 
multiply line 8 by 85% (0.85) and enter 
the result on line 17. Then go to line 18. 
10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the 
amount on line 8? 
No.
STOP None of your benefits are 
taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, 
line 20b; or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If 
you are married filing separately and 
you lived apart from your spouse for all 
of 2017, be sure you entered “D” to the 
right of the word “benefits” on Form 
1040, line 20a; or on Form 1040A, 
line 14a.
Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ....  
11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; 
$9,000 if single, head of household, 
qualifying widow(er), or married filing 
separately and you lived apart from 
your spouse for all of 2017 ........  
12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or 
less, enter -0- ...............  
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 
or line 11 .................  
14. Enter one-half of line 13 .........  
15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 ..  
16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (0.85). If line 12 
is zero, enter -0- .............  
17. Add lines 15 and 16 ...........  
18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (0.85) .......  
19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of 
line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount 
on Form 1040, line 20b; or Form 1040A, 
line 14b ..................
Example 3.  Joe and Betty Johnson file a 
joint return on Form 1040 for 2017. Joe is a re-
tired railroad worker and in 2017 received the 
SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retirement bene-
fits. Joe's Form RRB-1099 shows $10,000 in 
box 5. Betty is a retired government worker and 
received a fully taxable pension of $38,000. 
They had $2,300 in taxable interest income plus 
interest of $200 on a qualified U.S. savings 
bond. The savings bond interest qualified for 
the exclusion. They figure their taxable benefits 
by completing Worksheet 1. Because they have 
qualified U.S. savings bond interest, they follow 
the note at the beginning of the worksheet and 
use the amount from line 2 of their Schedule B 
(Form 1040A or 1040) on line 3 of the work-
sheet instead of the amount from line 8a of their 
Form 1040. On line 3 of the worksheet, they en-
ter $40,500 ($38,000 + $2,500).
Filled-in Worksheet 1.
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits
Before you begin:
• If you are married filing separately and you lived 
apart from your spouse for all of 2017, enter “D” 
to the right of the word “benefits” on Form 1040, 
line 20a; or Form 1040A, line 14a.
• Don’t use this worksheet if you repaid benefits 
in 2017 and your total repayments (box 4 of 
Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099) were more 
than your gross benefits for 2017 (box 3 of 
Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099). None of your 
benefits are taxable for 2017. For more 
information, see Repayments More Than Gross 
Benefits, later.
• If you are filing Form 8815, Exclusion of Interest 
From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds 
Issued After 1989, don’t include the amount 
from line 8a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A on 
line 3 of this worksheet. Instead, include the 
amount from Schedule B (Form 1040A or 
1040), line 2.
1. Enter the total amount from 
box 5 of ALL your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. Also 
enter this amount on Form 1040, 
line 20a; or Form 1040A, 
line 14a .............. $10,000
2. Enter one-half of line 1 .......... 5,000
3. Combine the amounts from:
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 
through 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, 
and 21.
Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 
11b, 12b, and 13 ............ 40,500
4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 
1040 or 1040A, line 8b .......... -0-
5. Enter the total of any exclusions/
adjustments for:
Adoption benefits (Form 8839, 
line 28),
Foreign earned income or housing 
(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50; or 
Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and
Certain income of bona fide 
residents of American Samoa 
(Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto 
Rico ........ ........ -0-
6. Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ....... 45,500
7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amounts 
from Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, 
and any write-in adjustments you 
entered on the dotted line next to line 36.
Form 1040A filers: Enter the amounts 
from Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ... -0-
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the 
amount on line 6? 
No.
STOP None of your social security 
benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 
1040, line 20b; or Form 1040A, line 14b.
Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 .... 45,500
9. If you are:
Married filing jointly, enter $32,000
Single, head of household, 
qualifying widow(er), or married 
filing separately and you lived 
apart from your spouse for all of 
2017, enter $25,000 .... .... 32,000
Page 90 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 88 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Note. If you are married filing separately 
and you lived with your spouse at any 
time in 2017, skip lines 9 through 16; 
multiply line 8 by 85% (0.85) and enter 
the result on line 17. Then go to line 18. 
10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the 
amount on line 8? 
No.
STOP None of your benefits are 
taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, 
line 20b; or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If 
you are married filing separately and 
you lived apart from your spouse for all 
of 2017, be sure you entered “D” to the 
right of the word “benefits” on Form 
1040, line 20a; or on Form 1040A, 
line 14a.
Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .... 13,500
11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; 
$9,000 if single, head of household, 
qualifying widow(er), or married filing 
separately and you lived apart from 
your spouse for all of 2017 ........ 12,000
12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or 
less, enter -0- ...............  1,500
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 
or line 11 ................. 12,000
14. Enter one-half of line 13 ......... 6,000
15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. 5,000
16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (0.85). If line 12 
is zero, enter -0- ............. 1,275
17. Add lines 15 and 16 ........... 6,275
18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (0.85) ....... 8,500
19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of 
line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount 
on Form 1040, line 20b; or Form 1040A, 
line 14b .................. $6,275
More than 50% of Joe's net benefits are tax-
able because the income on line 8 of the work-
sheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. Joe and 
Betty enter $10,000 on Form 1040, line 20a; 
and $6,275 on Form 1040, line 20b.
Deductions Related to 
Your Benefits
You may be entitled to deduct certain amounts 
related to the benefits you receive.
Disability payments. You may have received 
disability payments from your employer or an in-
surance company that you included as income 
on your tax return in an earlier year. If you re-
ceived a lump-sum payment from the SSA or 
RRB, and you had to repay the employer or in-
surance company for the disability payments, 
you can take an itemized deduction for the part 
of the payments you included in gross income 
in the earlier year. If the amount you repay is 
more than $3,000, you may be able to claim a 
tax credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit 
in the same way explained under Repayments 
More Than Gross Benefits, later.
Legal expenses. You can usually deduct legal 
expenses that you pay or incur to produce or 
collect taxable income or in connection with the 
determination, collection, or refund of any tax.
Legal expenses for collecting the taxable 
part of your benefits are deductible as a miscel-
laneous itemized deduction on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 23.
Repayments More Than 
Gross Benefits
In some situations, your Form SSA-1099 or 
Form RRB-1099 will show that the total benefits 
you repaid (box 4) are more than the gross ben-
efits (box 3) you received. If this occurred, your 
net benefits in box 5 will be a negative figure (a 
figure in parentheses) and none of your benefits 
will be taxable. Don’t use a worksheet in this 
case. If you receive more than one form, a neg-
ative figure in box 5 of one form is used to offset 
a positive figure in box 5 of another form for that 
same year.
If you have any questions about this nega-
tive figure, contact your local SSA office or your 
local RRB field office.
Joint return. If you and your spouse file a joint 
return, and your Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099 
has a negative figure in box 5, but your spou-
se's doesn’t, subtract the amount in box 5 of 
your form from the amount in box 5 of your 
spouse's form. You do this to get your net bene-
fits when figuring if your combined benefits are 
taxable.
Example. John and Mary file a joint return 
for 2017. John received Form SSA-1099 show-
ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Form 
SSA-1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500). 
John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minus 
$500) as the amount of their net benefits when 
figuring if any of their combined benefits are 
taxable.
Repayment of benefits received in an ear-
lier year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of 
all of your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 is a 
negative figure, you can take an itemized de-
duction for the part of this negative figure that 
represents benefits you included in gross in-
come in an earlier year.
Deduction $3,000 or less.  If this deduction 
is $3,000 or less, it is subject to the 2%-of-ad-
justed-gross-income limit that applies to certain 
miscellaneous itemized deductions. Claim it on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.
Deduction more than $3,000.  If this de-
duction is more than $3,000, you should figure 
your tax two ways.
1. Figure your tax for 2017 with the itemized 
deduction included on Schedule A, 
line 28.
2. Figure your tax for 2017 in the following 
steps.
a. Figure the tax without the itemized de-
duction included on Schedule A, 
line 28.
b. For each year after 1983 for which 
part of the negative figure represents 
a repayment of benefits, refigure your 
taxable benefits as if your total bene-
fits for the year were reduced by that 
part of the negative figure. Then refig-
ure the tax for that year.
c. Subtract the total of the refigured tax 
amounts in (b) from the total of your 
actual tax amounts.
d. Subtract the result in (c) from the re-
sult in (a).
Compare the tax figured in methods 1 and 2. 
Your tax for 2017 is the smaller of the two 
amounts. If method 1 results in less tax, take 
the itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 28. If method 2 results in less tax, 
claim a credit for the amount from step 2c 
above on Form 1040, line 73. Check box d and 
enter “I.R.C. 1341” in the space next to that box. 
If both methods produce the same tax, deduct 
the repayment on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 28.
12.
Other Income
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Reminder
Automatic 6-month extension. If you receive 
your Form 1099 and/or Schedule K-1, reporting 
your other income, late and you need more time 
to file your tax return, you can request a 
6-month extension of time to file. See Automatic 
Extension in chapter 1.
Introduction
You must include on your return all items of in-
come you receive in the form of money, prop-
erty, and services unless the tax law states that 
you don’t include them. Some items, however, 
are only partly excluded from income. This 
chapter discusses many kinds of income and 
explains whether they’re taxable or nontaxable.
Income that’s taxable must be reported on 
your tax return and is subject to tax.
Income that’s nontaxable may have to be 
shown on your tax return but isn’t taxable.
CAUTION
!
Page 91 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 89

This chapter begins with discussions of the 
following income items.
Bartering.
Canceled debts.
Sales parties at which you’re the host or 
hostess.
Life insurance proceeds.
Partnership income.
S corporation income.
Recoveries (including state income tax re-
funds).
Rents from personal property.
Repayments.
Royalties.
Unemployment benefits.
Welfare and other public assistance bene-
fits.
These discussions are followed by brief discus-
sions of other income items.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
Canceled Debts, Foreclosures, 
Repossessions, and Abandonments
Bartering
Bartering is an exchange of property or serv-
ices. You must include in your income, at the 
time received, the fair market value of property 
or services you receive in bartering. If you ex-
change services with another person and you 
both have agreed ahead of time on the value of 
the services, that value will be accepted as fair 
market value unless the value can be shown to 
be otherwise.
Generally, you report this income on Sched-
ule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi-
ness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit 
From Business. However, if the barter involves 
an exchange of something other than services, 
such as in Example 3 below, you may have to 
use another form or schedule instead.
Example 1.  You’re a self-employed attor-
ney who performs legal services for a client, a 
small corporation. The corporation gives you 
shares of its stock as payment for your serv-
ices. You must include the fair market value of 
the shares in your income on Schedule C (Form 
1040) or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the 
year you receive them.
Example 2.  You’re self-employed and a 
member of a barter club. The club uses “credit 
units” as a means of exchange. It adds credit 
units to your account for goods or services you 
provide to members, which you can use to pur-
chase goods or services offered by other mem-
bers of the barter club. The club subtracts credit 
units from your account when you receive 
  525
  544
  4681
goods or services from other members. You 
must include in your income the value of the 
credit units that are added to your account, 
even though you may not actually receive 
goods or services from other members until a 
later tax year.
Example 3.  You own a small apartment 
building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of 
an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art 
she created. You must report as rental income 
on Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental In-
come and Loss, the fair market value of the art-
work, and the artist must report as income on 
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040) the fair rental value of the apart-
ment.
Form 1099-B from barter exchange.  If you 
exchanged property or services through a bar-
ter exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds From 
Broker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a 
similar statement from the barter exchange 
should be sent to you by February 15, 2018. It 
should show the value of cash, property, serv-
ices, credits, or scrip you received from ex-
changes during 2017. The IRS also will receive 
a copy of Form 1099-B.
Canceled Debts
In most cases, if a debt you owe is canceled or 
forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you 
must include the canceled amount in your in-
come. You have no income from the canceled 
debt if it’s intended as a gift to you. A debt in-
cludes any indebtedness for which you’re liable 
or which attaches to property you hold.
If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the 
canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it’s a 
business debt, report the amount on Sched-
ule C (Form 1040) or Schedule C-EZ (Form 
1040) (or on Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or 
Loss From Farming, if the debt is farm debt and 
you‘re a farmer).
Form 1099-C. If a federal government agency, 
financial institution, or credit union cancels or 
forgives a debt you owe of $600 or more, you 
will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancellation of 
Debt. The amount of the canceled debt is 
shown in box 2.
Interest included in canceled debt.  If any 
interest is forgiven and included in the amount 
of canceled debt in box 2, the amount of inter-
est also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not 
you must include the interest portion of the can-
celed debt in your income depends on whether 
the interest would be deductible when you paid 
it. See Deductible debt under Exceptions, later.
If the interest wouldn’t be deductible (such 
as interest on a personal loan), include in your 
income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. If 
the interest would be deductible (such as on a 
business loan), include in your income the net 
amount of the canceled debt (the amount 
shown in box 2 less the interest amount shown 
in box 3).
Discounted mortgage loan.  If your financial 
institution offers a discount for the early pay-
ment of your mortgage loan, the amount of the 
discount is canceled debt. You must include the 
canceled amount in your income.
Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-
tion. If you’re personally liable for a mortgage 
(recourse debt), and you’re relieved of the mort-
gage when you dispose of the property, you 
may realize gain or loss up to the fair market 
value of the property. Also, to the extent the 
mortgage discharge exceeds the fair market 
value of the property, it’s income from dis-
charge of indebtedness unless it qualifies for 
exclusion under Excluded debt , later. Report 
any income from discharge of indebtedness on 
nonbusiness debt that doesn’t qualify for exclu-
sion as other income on Form 1040, line 21.
If you aren’t personally liable for a mortgage 
(nonrecourse debt), and you’re relieved of the 
mortgage when you dispose of the property 
(such as through foreclosure), that relief is in-
cluded in the amount you realize. You may have 
a taxable gain if the amount you realize ex-
ceeds your adjusted basis in the property. Re-
port any gain on nonbusiness property as a 
capital gain.
See Pub. 4681 for more information.
Stockholder debt. If you’re a stockholder in a 
corporation and the corporation cancels or for-
gives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a con-
structive distribution that’s generally dividend 
income to you. For more information, see Pub. 
542, Corporations.
If you’re a stockholder in a corporation and 
you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-
tion, you generally don’t realize income. This is 
because the canceled debt is considered as a 
contribution to the capital of the corporation 
equal to the amount of debt principal that you 
canceled.
Repayment of canceled debt. If you included 
a canceled amount in your income and later pay 
the debt, you may be able to file a claim for re-
fund for the year the amount was included in in-
come. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if the 
statute of limitations for filing a claim is still 
open. The statute of limitations generally 
doesn’t end until 3 years after the due date of 
your original return.
Exceptions
There are several exceptions to the inclusion of 
canceled debt in income. These are explained 
next.
Student loans.  Certain student loans contain 
a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to 
attend the qualified educational institution will 
be canceled if you work for a certain period of 
time in certain professions for any of a broad 
class of employers.
You don’t have income if your student loan 
is canceled after you agreed to this provision 
and then performed the services required. To 
qualify, the loan must have been made by:
1. The federal government, a state or local 
government, or an instrumentality, agency, 
or subdivision thereof;
2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation 
that has assumed control of a state, 
county, or municipal hospital, and whose 
employees are considered public employ-
ees under state law; or
3. An educational institution:
Page 92 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 90 Chapter 12 Other Income

a. Under an agreement with an entity de-
scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the 
funds to the institution to make the 
loan, or
b. As part of a program of the institution 
designed to encourage its students to 
serve in occupations with unmet 
needs or in areas with unmet needs 
and under which the services provi-
ded by the students (or former stu-
dents) are for or under the direction of 
a governmental unit or a tax-exempt 
organization described in section 
501(c)(3).
A loan to refinance a qualified student loan 
also will qualify if it was made by an educational 
institution or a qualified tax-exempt organization 
under its program designed as described in 
(3b) above.
Education loan repayment assistance. 
Education loan repayments made to you by the 
National Health Service Corps Loan Repay-
ment Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Pro-
gram), a state education loan repayment pro-
gram eligible for funds under the Public Health 
Service Act, or any other state loan repayment 
or loan forgiveness program that’s intended to 
provide for the increased availability of health 
services in underserved or health professional 
shortage areas aren’t taxable.
Deductible debt. You don’t have income from 
the cancellation of a debt if your payment of the 
debt would be deductible. This exception ap-
plies only if you use the cash method of ac-
counting. For more information, see chapter 5 
of Pub. 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.
Price reduced after purchase.  In most ca-
ses, if the seller reduces the amount of debt you 
owe for property you purchased, you don’t have 
income from the reduction. The reduction of the 
debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment 
and reduces your basis in the property.
Excluded debt. Don’t include a canceled debt 
in your gross income in the following situations.
The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case 
under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Pub. 
908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. 
The debt is canceled when you’re insol-
vent. However, you can’t exclude any 
amount of canceled debt that’s more than 
the amount by which you’re insolvent. See 
Pub. 908. 
The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-
celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 
of Pub. 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. 
The debt is qualified real property business 
debt. See chapter 5 of Pub. 334. 
The cancellation is intended as a gift.
At the time this publication was pre-
pared for printing, Congress was con-
sidering legislation to extend the exclu-
sion of qualified principal residence 
indebtedness from income that had expired at 
the end of 2016. To see if the legislation was 
enacted, go to Recent Developments at 
IRS.gov/Pub17.
CAUTION
!
Host or Hostess
If you host a party or event at which sales are 
made, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving 
the event is a payment for helping a direct seller 
make sales. You must report this item as in-
come at its fair market value.
Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-
ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment 
expenses. These expenses are deductible as 
miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to 
the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
but only up to the amount of income you receive 
for giving the party.
For more information about the 50% limit for 
meal and entertainment expenses, see chap-
ter 26.
Life Insurance 
Proceeds
Life insurance proceeds paid to you because of 
the death of the insured person aren’t taxable 
unless the policy was turned over to you for a 
price. This is true even if the proceeds were 
paid under an accident or health insurance pol-
icy or an endowment contract. However, inter-
est income received as a result of life insurance 
proceeds may be taxable.
Proceeds not received in installments.  If 
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or 
other than at regular intervals, include in your 
income only the benefits that are more than the 
amount payable to you at the time of the in-
sured person's death. If the benefit payable at 
death isn’t specified, you include in your income 
the benefit payments that are more than the 
present value of the payments at the time of 
death.
Proceeds received in installments. If you re-
ceive life insurance proceeds in installments, 
you can exclude part of each installment from 
your income.
To determine the excluded part, divide the 
amount held by the insurance company (gener-
ally the total lump sum payable at the death of 
the insured person) by the number of install-
ments to be paid. Include anything over this ex-
cluded part in your income as interest.
Surviving spouse.  If your spouse died be-
fore October 23, 1986, and insurance proceeds 
paid to you because of the death of your 
spouse are received in installments, you can 
exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-
cluded in the installments. If you remarry, you 
can continue to take the exclusion.
Surrender of policy for cash.  If you surren-
der a life insurance policy for cash, you must in-
clude in income any proceeds that are more 
than the cost of the life insurance policy. In most 
cases, your cost (or investment in the contract) 
is the total of premiums that you paid for the life 
insurance policy, less any refunded premiums, 
rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that 
weren’t included in your income.
You should receive a Form 1099-R showing 
the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report 
these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Form 
1040 or lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
More information.  For more information, see 
Life Insurance Proceeds in Pub. 525.
Endowment Contract 
Proceeds
An endowment contract is a policy under which 
you’re paid a specified amount of money on a 
certain date unless you die before that date, in 
which case, the money is paid to your designa-
ted beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid in a 
lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only if 
the proceeds are more than the cost of the pol-
icy. To determine your cost, subtract any 
amount that you previously received under the 
contract and excluded from your income from 
the total premiums (or other consideration) paid 
for the contract. Include the part of the 
lump-sum payment that’s more than your cost 
in your income.
Accelerated Death 
Benefits
Certain amounts paid as accelerated death 
benefits under a life insurance contract or viati-
cal settlement before the insured's death are 
excluded from income if the insured is termi-
nally or chronically ill.
Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-
ment of any part of the death benefit under a life 
insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-
vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person 
who regularly engages in the business of buy-
ing or taking assignment of life insurance con-
tracts on the lives of insured individuals who are 
terminally or chronically ill and who meets the 
requirements of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the In-
ternal Revenue Code.
Exclusion for terminal illness.  Accelerated 
death benefits are fully excludable if the insured 
is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who 
has been certified by a physician as having an 
illness or physical condition that can reasonably 
be expected to result in death within 24 months 
from the date of the certification.
Exclusion for chronic illness.  If the insured 
is a chronically ill individual who’s not terminally 
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis 
of costs incurred for qualified long-term care 
services are fully excludable. Accelerated death 
benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic 
basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit ap-
plies to the total of the accelerated death bene-
fits and any periodic payments received from 
long-term care insurance contracts. For infor-
mation on the limit and the definitions of chroni-
cally ill individual, qualified long-term care serv-
ices, and long-term care insurance contracts, 
see Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts un-
der Sickness and Injury Benefits in Pub. 525.
Exception. The exclusion doesn’t apply to any 
amount paid to a person (other than the in-
sured) who has an insurable interest in the life 
of the insured because the insured:
Is a director, officer, or employee of the 
person; or
Has a financial interest in the person's 
business.
Page 93 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 91

Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-
ated death benefits made on a per diem or 
other periodic basis, you must file Form 8853, 
Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance 
Contracts, with your return. You don’t have to 
file Form 8853 to exclude accelerated death 
benefits paid on the basis of actual expenses 
incurred.
Public Safety Officer Killed 
or Injured in the Line of 
Duty
A spouse, former spouse, and child of a public 
safety officer killed in the line of duty can ex-
clude from gross income survivor benefits re-
ceived from a governmental section 401(a) plan 
attributable to the officer’s service. See section 
101(h).
A public safety officer who’s permanently 
and totally disabled or killed in the line of duty 
and a surviving spouse or child can exclude 
from income death or disability benefits re-
ceived from the federal Bureau of Justice Assis-
tance or death benefits paid by a state program. 
See section 104(a)(6).
For this purpose, the term public safety offi-
cer includes law enforcement officers, firefight-
ers, chaplains, and rescue squad and ambu-
lance crew members. For more information, see 
Pub. 559, Survivors, Executors, and Adminis-
trators.
Partnership Income
A partnership generally isn’t a taxable entity. 
The income, gains, losses, deductions, and 
credits of a partnership are passed through to 
the partners based on each partner's distribu-
tive share of these items.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065).  Although a part-
nership generally pays no tax, it must file an in-
formation return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of 
Partnership Income, and send Schedule K-1 
(Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, the 
partnership will send each partner a copy of the 
Partner's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form 
1065) to help each partner report his or her 
share of the partnership's income, deductions, 
credits, and tax preference items.
Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) for 
your records. Don’t attach it to your 
Form 1040, unless you’re specifically 
required to do so.
For more information on partnerships, see 
Pub. 541, Partnerships.
Qualified joint venture.  If you and your 
spouse each materially participate as the only 
members of a jointly owned and operated busi-
ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year, 
you can make a joint election to be treated as a 
qualified joint venture instead of a partnership. 
To make this election, you must divide all items 
of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at-
tributable to the business between you and your 
spouse in accordance with your respective in-
terests in the venture. For further information on 
how to make the election and which sched-
ule(s) to file, see the instructions for your indi-
vidual tax return.
RECORDS
S Corporation Income
In most cases, an S corporation doesn’t pay tax 
on its income. Instead, the income, losses, de-
ductions, and credits of the corporation are 
passed through to the shareholders based on 
each shareholder's pro rata share.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).  An S corpora-
tion must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. In-
come Tax Return for an S Corporation, and 
send Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) to each 
shareholder. In addition, the S corporation will 
send each shareholder a copy of the Share-
holder's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form 
1120S) to help each shareholder report his or 
her share of the S corporation's income, losses, 
credits, and deductions.
Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) for 
your records. Don’t attach it to your 
Form 1040, unless you’re specifically 
required to do so.
For more information on S corporations and 
their shareholders, see the Instructions for Form 
1120S.
Recoveries
A recovery is a return of an amount you deduc-
ted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The 
most common recoveries are refunds, reim-
bursements, and rebates of deductions item-
ized on Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may 
have recoveries of non-itemized deductions 
(such as payments on previously deducted bad 
debts) and recoveries of items for which you 
previously claimed a tax credit.
Tax benefit rule. You must include a recovery 
in your income in the year you receive it up to 
the amount by which the deduction or credit you 
took for the recovered amount reduced your tax 
in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-
crease to an amount carried over to the current 
year that resulted from the deduction or credit is 
considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-
lier year. For more information, see Pub. 525.
Federal income tax refund.  Refunds of fed-
eral income taxes aren’t included in your in-
come because they’re never allowed as a de-
duction from income.
State tax refund. If you received a state or lo-
cal income tax refund (or credit or offset) in 
2017, you generally must include it in income if 
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The 
payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov-
ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2018. 
The IRS also will receive a copy of the Form 
1099-G. If you file Form 1040, use the State 
and Local Income Tax Refund Worksheet in the 
2017 Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure 
the amount (if any) to include in your income. 
See Pub. 525 for when you must use another 
worksheet.
If you could choose to deduct for a tax year 
either:
State and local income taxes, or
State and local general sales taxes, then
the maximum refund that you may have to in-
clude in income is limited to the excess of the 
RECORDS
tax you chose to deduct for that year over the 
tax you didn’t choose to deduct for that year. 
For examples, see Pub. 525.
Mortgage interest refund.  If you received a 
refund or credit in 2017 of mortgage interest 
paid in an earlier year, the amount should be 
shown in box 4 of your Form 1098, Mortgage In-
terest Statement. Don’t subtract the refund 
amount from the interest you paid in 2017. You 
may have to include it in your income under the 
rules explained in the following discussions.
Interest on recovery.  Interest on any of the 
amounts you recover must be reported as inter-
est income in the year received. For example, 
report any interest you received on state or lo-
cal income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a.
Recovery and expense in same year.  If the 
refund or other recovery and the expense occur 
in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-
duction or credit and isn’t reported as income.
Recovery for 2 or more years.  If you receive 
a refund or other recovery that’s for amounts 
you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must 
allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered 
amount between the years in which you paid it. 
This allocation is necessary to determine the 
amount of recovery from any earlier years and 
to determine the amount, if any, of your allowa-
ble deduction for this item for the current year. 
For information on how to figure the allocation, 
see Recoveries in Pub. 525.
Itemized Deduction 
Recoveries
If you recover any amount that you deducted in 
an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you 
generally must include the full amount of the re-
covery in your income in the year you receive it.
Where to report.  Enter your state or local in-
come tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and the 
total of all other recoveries as other income on 
Form 1040, line 21. You can’t use Form 1040A 
or Form 1040EZ.
Standard deduction limit.  You generally are 
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you 
don’t itemize your deductions. Only your item-
ized deductions that are more than your stand-
ard deduction are subject to the recovery rule 
(unless you’re required to itemize your deduc-
tions). If your total deductions on the earlier 
year return weren’t more than your income for 
that year, include in your income this year the 
lesser of:
Your recoveries, or
The amount by which your itemized deduc-
tions exceeded the standard deduction.
Example. For 2016, you filed a joint return. 
Your taxable income was $60,000 and you 
weren’t entitled to any tax credits. Your stand-
ard deduction was $12,600, and you had item-
ized deductions of $14,200. In 2017, you re-
ceived the following recoveries for amounts 
deducted on your 2016 return.
Page 94 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 92 Chapter 12 Other Income

Medical expenses ............... $200
State and local income tax refund ....... 400
Refund of mortgage interest .......... 325
Total recoveries ................ $925
None of the recoveries were more than the de-
ductions taken for 2016. The difference be-
tween the state and local income tax you de-
ducted and your local general sales tax was 
more than $400.
Your total recoveries are less than the 
amount by which your itemized deductions ex-
ceeded the standard deduction ($14,200 − 
12,600 = $1,600), so you must include your to-
tal recoveries in your income for 2017. Report 
the state and local income tax refund of $400 
on Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your 
recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21.
Standard deduction for earlier years. To de-
termine if amounts recovered in 2017 must be 
included in your income, you must know the 
standard deduction for your filing status for the 
year the deduction was claimed. Look in the in-
structions for your tax return from prior years to 
locate the standard deduction for the filing sta-
tus for that prior year.
Example. You filed a joint return on Form 
1040 for 2016 with taxable income of $45,000. 
Your itemized deductions were $12,850. The 
standard deduction that you could have claimed 
was $12,600. In 2017, you recovered $2,100 of 
your 2016 itemized deductions. None of the re-
coveries were more than the actual deductions 
for 2016. Include $250 of the recoveries in your 
2017 income. This is the smaller of your recov-
eries ($2,100) or the amount by which your 
itemized deductions were more than the stand-
ard deduction ($12,850 − $12,600 = $250).
Recovery limited to deduction.  You don’t in-
clude in your income any amount of your recov-
ery that’s more than the amount you deducted 
in the earlier year. The amount you include in 
your income is limited to the smaller of:
The amount deducted on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), or
The amount recovered.
Example. During 2016, you paid $1,700 for 
medical expenses. Of this amount, you deduc-
ted $200 on your 2016 Schedule A. In 2017, 
you received a $500 reimbursement from your 
medical insurance for your 2016 expenses. The 
only amount of the $500 reimbursement that 
must be included in your income for 2017 is 
$200—the amount actually deducted.
Other recoveries.  See Recoveries in Pub. 
525 if:
You have recoveries of items other than 
itemized deductions, or
You received a recovery for an item for 
which you claimed a tax credit (other than 
investment credit or foreign tax credit) in a 
prior year.
Rents From Personal 
Property
If you rent out personal property, such as equip-
ment or vehicles, how you report your income 
and expenses is in most cases determined by:
Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-
ness, and
Whether or not the rental activity is con-
ducted for profit.
In most cases, if your primary purpose is in-
come or profit and you’re involved in the rental 
activity with continuity and regularity, your rental 
activity is a business. See Pub. 535, Business 
Expenses, for details on deducting expenses 
for both business and not-for-profit activities.
Reporting business income and expenses. 
If you’re in the business of renting personal 
property, report your income and expenses on 
Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). 
The form instructions have information on how 
to complete them.
Reporting nonbusiness income. If you aren’t 
in the business of renting personal property, re-
port your rental income on Form 1040, line 21. 
List the type and amount of the income on the 
dotted line next to line 21.
Reporting nonbusiness expenses.  If you 
rent personal property for profit, include your 
rental expenses in the total amount you enter 
on Form 1040, line 36, and see the instructions 
there.
If you don’t rent personal property for profit, 
your deductions are limited and you can’t report 
a loss to offset other income. See Activity not 
for profit under Other Income, later.
Repayments
If you had to repay an amount that you included 
in your income in an earlier year, you may be 
able to deduct the amount repaid from your in-
come for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if 
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you 
may be able to take a credit against your tax for 
the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you 
can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-
ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in 
your trade or business or in a for-profit transac-
tion.
Type of deduction.  The type of deduction 
you’re allowed in the year of repayment de-
pends on the type of income you included in the 
earlier year. You generally deduct the repay-
ment on the same form or schedule on which 
you previously reported it as income. For exam-
ple, if you reported it as self-employment in-
come, deduct it as a business expense on 
Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) or 
Schedule F (Form 1040). If you reported it as a 
capital gain, deduct it as a capital loss as ex-
plained in the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 
1040). If you reported it as wages, unemploy-
ment compensation, or other nonbusiness in-
come, deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Repaid social security benefits. If you repaid 
social security benefits or equivalent railroad re-
tirement benefits, see Repayment of benefits in 
chapter 11.
Repayment of $3,000 or less.  If the amount 
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from 
your income in the year you repaid it. If you 
must deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized de-
duction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 23.
Repayment over $3,000.  If the amount you 
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct 
the repayment (as explained under Type of de-
duction, earlier). However, you can choose in-
stead to take a tax credit for the year of repay-
ment if you included the income under a claim 
of right. This means that at the time you inclu-
ded the income, it appeared that you had an un-
restricted right to it. If you qualify for this choice, 
figure your tax under both methods and com-
pare the results. Use the method (deduction or 
credit) that results in less tax.
When determining whether the amount 
you repaid was more or less than 
$3,000, consider the total amount be-
ing repaid on the return. Each instance of re-
payment isn’t considered separately.
Method 1. Figure your tax for 2017 claiming 
a deduction for the repaid amount. If you must 
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tion, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 28.
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2017 claiming 
a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these 
steps.
1. Figure your tax for 2017 without deducting 
the repaid amount.
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year 
without including in income the amount 
you repaid in 2017.
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown 
on your return for the earlier year. This is 
the credit.
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for 
2017 figured without the deduction (Step 
1).
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the 
amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax, 
claim the credit figured in (3) above on Form 
1040, line 73, by adding the amount of the 
credit to any other credits on this line, and see 
the instructions there.
An example of this computation can be 
found in Pub. 525.
Repaid wages subject to social security 
and Medicare taxes.  If you had to repay an 
amount that you included in your wages or com-
pensation in an earlier year on which social se-
curity, Medicare, or tier 1 RRTA taxes were 
paid, ask your employer to refund the excess 
amount to you. If the employer refuses to refund 
the taxes, ask for a statement indicating the 
amount of the overcollection to support your 
claim. File a claim for refund using Form 843, 
Claim for Refund and Request for Abatement.
Repaid wages subject to Additional Medi-
care Tax.  Employers can’t make an adjust-
ment or file a claim for refund for Additional 
Medicare Tax withholding when there is a 
CAUTION
!
Page 95 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 93

repayment of wages received by an employee 
in a prior year because the employee deter-
mines liability for Additional Medicare Tax on 
the employee's income tax return for the prior 
year. If you had to repay an amount that you in-
cluded in your wages or compensation in an 
earlier year, and on which Additional Medicare 
Tax was paid, you may be able to recover the 
Additional Medicare Tax paid on the amount. 
To recover Additional Medicare Tax on the re-
paid wages or compensation, you must file 
Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income 
Tax Return, for the prior year in which the wa-
ges or compensation was originally received. 
See Instructions for Form 1040X.
Royalties
Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, 
and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary 
income. 
In most cases, you report royalties in Part I 
of Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you 
hold an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or 
are in business as a self-employed writer, in-
ventor, artist, etc., report your income and ex-
penses on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 
1040).
Copyrights and patents.  Royalties from 
copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, 
and similar property, or from patents on inven-
tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to 
use your work over a specified period of time. 
Royalties generally are based on the number of 
units sold, such as the number of books, tickets 
to a performance, or machines sold.
Oil, gas, and minerals.  Royalty income from 
oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount 
you receive when natural resources are extrac-
ted from your property. The royalties are based 
on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and are 
paid to you by a person or company that leases 
the property from you.
Depletion. If you’re the owner of an eco-
nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas 
wells, you can recover your investment through 
the depletion allowance. For information on this 
subject, see chapter 9 of Pub. 535.
Coal and iron ore.  Under certain circum-
stances, you can treat amounts you receive 
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-
ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather 
than as royalty income. For information about 
gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore, 
see Pub. 544, chapter 2.
Sale of property interest.  If you sell your 
complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, 
the amount you receive is considered payment 
for the sale of property used in a trade or busi-
ness under section 1231, not royalty income. 
Under certain circumstances, the sale is subject 
to capital gain or loss treatment as explained in 
the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). 
For more information on selling section 1231 
property, see chapter 3 of Pub. 544.
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, 
or a net profit interest in a mineral property for 
the life of the property, you have made a lease 
or a sublease, and any cash you receive for the 
assignment of other interests in the property is 
ordinary income subject to a depletion allow-
ance.
Part of future production sold.  If you own 
mineral property but sell part of the future pro-
duction, in most cases you treat the money you 
receive from the buyer at the time of the sale as 
a loan from the buyer. Don’t include it in your in-
come or take depletion based on it.
When production begins, you include all the 
proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-
tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that 
amount to arrive at your taxable income from 
the property.
Unemployment 
Benefits
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits 
you receive depends on the type of program 
paying the benefits.
Unemployment compensation. You must in-
clude in income all unemployment compensa-
tion you receive. You should receive a Form 
1099-G showing in box 1 the total unemploy-
ment compensation paid to you. In most cases, 
you enter unemployment compensation on 
line 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or 
line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
Types of unemployment compensation. 
Unemployment compensation generally in-
cludes any amount received under an unem-
ployment compensation law of the United 
States or of a state. It includes the following 
benefits.
Benefits paid by a state or the District of 
Columbia from the Federal Unemployment 
Trust Fund.
State unemployment insurance benefits.
Railroad unemployment compensation 
benefits.
Disability payments from a government 
program paid as a substitute for unemploy-
ment compensation. (Amounts received as 
workers' compensation for injuries or ill-
ness aren’t unemployment compensation. 
See chapter 5 for more information.)
Trade readjustment allowances under the 
Trade Act of 1974.
Unemployment assistance under the Dis-
aster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
Act.
Unemployment assistance under the Air-
line Deregulation Act of 1978 Program.
Governmental program.  If you contribute 
to a governmental unemployment compensa-
tion program and your contributions aren’t de-
ductible, amounts you receive under the pro-
gram aren’t included as unemployment 
compensation until you recover your contribu-
tions. If you deducted all of your contributions to 
the program, the entire amount you receive un-
der the program is included in your income.
Repayment of unemployment compensa-
tion. If you repaid in 2017 unemployment com-
pensation you received in 2017, subtract the 
amount you repaid from the total amount you 
received and enter the difference on line 19 of 
Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of 
Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your 
entry, enter “Repaid” and the amount you re-
paid. If you repaid unemployment compensa-
tion in 2017 that you included in income in an 
earlier year, you can deduct the amount repaid 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if you item-
ize deductions. If the amount is more than 
$3,000, see Repayments, earlier.
Tax withholding.  You can choose to have 
federal income tax withheld from your unem-
ployment compensation. To make this choice, 
complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholding 
Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax 
will be withheld at 10% of your payment.
If you don’t choose to have tax withheld 
from your unemployment compensa-
tion, you may be liable for estimated 
tax. If you don’t pay enough tax, either through 
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination 
of both, you may have to pay a penalty. For 
more information on estimated tax, see chap-
ter 4.
Supplemental unemployment benefits.
Benefits received from an employer-financed 
fund (to which the employees didn’t contribute) 
aren’t unemployment compensation. They are 
taxable as wages. For more information, see 
Supplemental Unemployment Benefits  in sec-
tion 5 of Pub. 15-A, Employer's Supplemental 
Tax Guide. Report these payments on line 7 of 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 
1040EZ.
Repayment of benefits.  You may have to 
repay some of your supplemental unemploy-
ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment 
allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you 
repay supplemental unemployment benefits in 
the same year you receive them, reduce the to-
tal benefits by the amount you repay. If you re-
pay the benefits in a later year, you must in-
clude the full amount of the benefits received in 
your income for the year you received them.
Deduct the repayment in the later year as an 
adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. 
(You can’t use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) 
Include the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, 
and see the instructions there. If the amount 
you repay in a later year is more than $3,000, 
you may be able to take a credit against your 
tax for the later year instead of deducting the 
amount repaid. For more information on this, 
see Repayments, earlier.
Private unemployment fund.  Unemployment 
benefit payments from a private (nonunion) 
fund to which you voluntarily contribute are tax-
able only if the amounts you receive are more 
than your total payments into the fund. Report 
the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.
Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you as 
an unemployed member of a union from regular 
union dues are included in your income on 
Form 1040, line 21. However, if you contribute 
to a special union fund and your payments to 
the fund aren’t deductible, the unemployment 
benefits you receive from the fund are includible 
in your income only to the extent they’re more 
than your contributions.
CAUTION
!
Page 96 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 94 Chapter 12 Other Income

Guaranteed annual wage.  Payments you re-
ceive from your employer during periods of un-
employment, under a union agreement that 
guarantees you full pay during the year, are tax-
able as wages. Include them on line 7 of Form 
1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 
1040EZ.
State employees.  Payments similar to a 
state's unemployment compensation may be 
made by the state to its employees who aren’t 
covered by the state's unemployment compen-
sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-
able, don’t report them as unemployment com-
pensation. Report these payments on Form 
1040, line 21.
Welfare and Other 
Public Assistance 
Benefits
Don’t include in your income governmental ben-
efit payments from a public welfare fund based 
upon need, such as payments to blind individu-
als under a state public assistance law. Pay-
ments from a state fund for the victims of crime 
shouldn’t be included in the victims' incomes if 
they’re in the nature of welfare payments. Don’t 
deduct medical expenses that are reimbursed 
by such a fund. You must include in your in-
come any welfare payments that are compen-
sation for services or that are obtained fraudu-
lently.
Reemployment Trade Adjustment Assis-
tance (RTAA) payments.  RTAA payments 
received from a state must be included in your 
income. The state must send you Form 1099-G 
to advise you of the amount you should include 
in income. The amount should be reported on 
Form 1040, line 21.
Persons with disabilities.  If you have a disa-
bility, you must include in income compensation 
you receive for services you perform unless the 
compensation is otherwise excluded. However, 
you don’t include in income the value of goods, 
services, and cash that you receive, not in re-
turn for your services, but for your training and 
rehabilitation because you have a disability. Ex-
cludable amounts include payments for trans-
portation and attendant care, such as inter-
preter services for the deaf, reader services for 
the blind, and services to help individuals with 
an intellectual disability do their work.
Disaster relief grants.  Don’t include post-dis-
aster grants received under the Robert T. Staf-
ford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
Act in your income if the grant payments are 
made to help you meet necessary expenses or 
serious needs for medical, dental, housing, per-
sonal property, transportation, child care, or fu-
neral expenses. Don’t deduct casualty losses or 
medical expenses that are specifically reim-
bursed by these disaster relief grants. If you 
have deducted a casualty loss for the loss of 
your personal residence and you later receive a 
disaster relief grant for the loss of the same res-
idence, you may have to include part or all of 
the grant in your taxable income. See Recover-
ies, earlier. Unemployment assistance pay-
ments under the Act are taxable unemployment 
compensation. See Unemployment compensa-
tion under Unemployment Benefits, earlier.
Disaster relief payments.  You can exclude 
from income any amount you receive that’s a 
qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-
aster relief payment is an amount paid to you:
1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
essary personal, family, living, or funeral 
expenses that result from a qualified dis-
aster;
2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
essary expenses incurred for the repair or 
rehabilitation of your home or repair or re-
placement of its contents to the extent it’s 
due to a qualified disaster;
3. By a person engaged in the furnishing or 
sale of transportation as a common carrier 
because of the death or personal physical 
injuries incurred as a result of a qualified 
disaster; or
4. By a federal, state, or local government, or 
agency, or instrumentality in connection 
with a qualified disaster in order to pro-
mote the general welfare.
You can exclude this amount only to the extent 
any expense it pays for isn’t paid for by insur-
ance or otherwise. The exclusion doesn’t apply 
if you were a participant or conspirator in a ter-
rorist action or a representative of one.
A qualified disaster is:
A disaster which results from a terrorist or 
military action;
A federally declared disaster; or
A disaster which results from an accident 
involving a common carrier, or from any 
other event, which is determined to be 
catastrophic by the Secretary of the Treas-
ury or his or her delegate.
For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster 
is qualified if it’s determined by an applicable 
federal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-
tance from the federal, state, or local govern-
ment, agency, or instrumentality.
Disaster mitigation payments.  You can ex-
clude from income any amount you receive 
that’s a qualified disaster mitigation payment. 
Qualified disaster mitigation payments are most 
commonly paid to you in the period immediately 
following damage to property as a result of a 
natural disaster. However, disaster mitigation 
payments are used to mitigate (reduce the se-
verity of) potential damage from future natural 
disasters. They’re paid to you through state and 
local governments based on the provisions of 
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and 
Emergency Assistance Act or the National 
Flood Insurance Act.
You can’t increase the basis or adjusted ba-
sis of your property for improvements made 
with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.
Home Affordable Modification Program 
(HAMP). If you benefit from Pay-for-Perform-
ance Success Payments under HAMP, the pay-
ments aren’t taxable.
Mortgage assistance payments under sec-
tion 235 of the National Housing Act.  Pay-
ments made under section 235 of the National 
Housing Act for mortgage assistance aren’t in-
cluded in the homeowner's income. Interest 
paid for the homeowner under the mortgage as-
sistance program can’t be deducted.
Medicare. Medicare benefits received under ti-
tle XVIII of the Social Security Act aren’t includi-
ble in the gross income of the individuals for 
whom they’re paid. This includes basic (part A 
(Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged)) and 
supplementary (part B (Supplementary Medical 
Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).
Social Security Benefits (including 
lump-sum payments attributable to prior 
years), Supplemental Security Income Ben-
efits, and Lump-Sum Death Benefits.  The 
Social Security Administration (SSA) provides 
benefits such as old-age benefits, benefits to 
disabled workers, and benefits to spouses and 
dependents. These benefits may be subject to 
federal income tax depending on your filing sta-
tus and other income. See chapter 11, Social 
Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement,  in 
this publication and Pub. 915, Social Security 
and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits, 
for more information. An individual originally de-
nied benefits, but later approved, may receive a 
lump-sum payment for the period when benefits 
were denied (which may be prior years). See 
Pub. 915 for information on how to make a 
lump-sum election, which may reduce your tax 
liability. There are also other types of benefits 
paid by the SSA. However, Supplemental Se-
curity Income (SSI) benefits and lump-sum 
death benefits (one-time payment to spouse 
and children of deceased) aren’t subject to fed-
eral income tax. For more information on these 
benefits, go to SSA.gov.
Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food ben-
efits you receive under the Nutrition Program for 
the Elderly aren’t taxable. If you prepare and 
serve free meals for the program, include in 
your income as wages the cash pay you re-
ceive, even if you’re also eligible for food bene-
fits.
Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.
Payments made by a state to qualified people 
to reduce their cost of winter energy use aren’t 
taxable.
Other Income
The following brief discussions are arranged in 
alphabetical order. Other income items briefly 
discussed below are referenced to publications 
which provide more topical information.
Activity not for profit.  You must include on 
your return income from an activity from which 
you don’t expect to make a profit. An example 
of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you 
operate mostly for recreation and pleasure. En-
ter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-
tions for expenses related to the activity are 
limited. They can’t total more than the income 
you report and can be taken only if you itemize 
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). See 
Not-for-Profit Activities in Pub. 535, chapter 1, 
for information on whether an activity is consid-
ered carried on for a profit.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend.  If you re-
ceived a payment from Alaska's mineral income 
fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report 
Page 97 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 95

it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 of 
Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The 
state of Alaska sends each recipient a docu-
ment that shows the amount of the payment 
with the check. The amount also is reported to 
IRS.
Alimony. Include in your income on Form 
1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-
ceive. Amounts you receive for child support 
aren’t income to you. Alimony and child support 
payments are discussed in chapter 18.
Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in your 
income.
Campaign contributions.  These contribu-
tions aren’t income to a candidate unless 
they’re diverted to his or her personal use. To 
be nontaxable, the contributions must be spent 
for campaign purposes or kept in a fund for use 
in future campaigns. However, interest earned 
on bank deposits, dividends received on con-
tributed securities, and net gains realized on 
sales of contributed securities are taxable and 
must be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In-
come Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza-
tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to an 
office account must be included in the office-
holder's income on Form 1040, line 21, in the 
year transferred.
Car pools.  Don’t include in your income 
amounts you receive from the passengers for 
driving a car in a car pool to and from work. 
These amounts are considered reimbursement 
for your expenses. However, this rule doesn’t 
apply if you have developed car pool arrange-
ments into a profit-making business of trans-
porting workers for hire.
Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive from 
a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy 
isn’t income, but you must reduce your basis by 
the amount of the rebate.
Example. You buy a new car for $24,000 
cash and receive a $2,000 rebate check from 
the manufacturer. The $2,000 isn’t income to 
you. Your basis in the car is $22,000. This is the 
basis on which you figure gain or loss if you sell 
the car and depreciation if you use it for busi-
ness.
Casualty insurance and other reimburse-
ments. You generally shouldn’t report these 
reimbursements on your return unless you’re 
figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft. 
See chapter 25 for more information.
Child support payments.  You shouldn’t re-
port these payments on your return. See chap-
ter 18 for more information.
Court awards and damages.  To determine if 
settlement amounts you receive by compromise 
or judgment must be included in your income, 
you must consider the item that the settlement 
replaces. The character of the income as ordi-
nary income or capital gain depends on the na-
ture of the underlying claim. Include the follow-
ing as ordinary income.
1. Interest on any award.
2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits 
in most cases.
3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It 
doesn’t matter if they relate to a physical 
injury or physical sickness.
4. Amounts received in settlement of pension 
rights (if you didn’t contribute to the plan).
5. Damages for:
a. Patent or copyright infringement,
b. Breach of contract, or
c. Interference with business operations.
6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
tress received to satisfy a claim under title 
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin-
gent fees) where the underlying recovery 
is included in gross income.
Don’t include in your income compensatory 
damages for personal physical injury or physi-
cal sickness (whether received in a lump sum or 
installments).
Emotional distress.  Emotional distress it-
self isn’t a physical injury or physical sickness, 
but damages you receive for emotional distress 
due to a physical injury or sickness are treated 
as received for the physical injury or sickness. 
Don’t include them in your income.
If the emotional distress is due to a personal 
injury that isn’t due to a physical injury or sick-
ness (for example, employment discrimination 
or injury to reputation), you must include the 
damages in your income, except for any dam-
ages that aren’t more than amounts paid for 
medical care due to that emotional distress. 
Emotional distress includes physical symptoms 
that result from emotional distress, such as 
headaches, insomnia, and stomach disorders.
Credit card insurance.  In most cases, if you 
receive benefits under a credit card disability or 
unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are 
taxable to you. These plans make the minimum 
monthly payment on your credit card account if 
you can’t make the payment due to injury, ill-
ness, disability, or unemployment. Report on 
Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits you 
received during the year that’s more than the 
amount of the premiums you paid during the 
year.
Down payment assistance. If you purchase a 
home and receive assistance from a nonprofit 
corporation to make the down payment, that as-
sistance isn’t included in your income. If the cor-
poration qualifies as a tax-exempt charitable or-
ganization, the assistance is treated as a gift 
and is included in your basis of the house. If the 
corporation doesn’t qualify, the assistance is 
treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase 
price and isn’t included in your basis.
Employment agency fees.  If you get a job 
through an employment agency, and the fee is 
paid by your employer, the fee isn’t includible in 
your income if you aren’t liable for it. However, if 
you pay it and your employer reimburses you 
for it, it’s includible in your income.
Energy conservation subsidies. You can ex-
clude from gross income any subsidy provided, 
either directly or indirectly, by public utilities for 
the purchase or installation of an energy con-
servation measure for a dwelling unit.
Energy conservation measure.  This in-
cludes installations or modifications that are pri-
marily designed to reduce consumption of elec-
tricity or natural gas, or improve the 
management of energy demand.
Dwelling unit. This includes a house, apart-
ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or sim-
ilar property. If a building or structure contains 
both dwelling and other units, any subsidy must 
be properly allocated.
Estate and trust income.  An estate or trust, 
unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal in-
come tax. If you’re a beneficiary of an estate or 
trust, you may be taxed on your share of its in-
come distributed or required to be distributed to 
you. However, there is never a double tax. Es-
tates and trusts file their returns on Form 1041, 
U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and Trusts, 
and your share of the income is reported to you 
on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041).
Current income required to be distrib-
uted. If you’re the beneficiary of an estate or 
trust that must distribute all of its current in-
come, you must report your share of the distrib-
utable net income, whether or not you actually 
received it.
Current income not required to be dis-
tributed. If you’re the beneficiary of an estate 
or trust and the fiduciary has the choice of 
whether to distribute all or part of the current in-
come, you must report:
All income that’s required to be distributed 
to you, whether or not it’s actually distrib-
uted, plus
All other amounts actually paid or credited 
to you,
up to the amount of your share of distributable 
net income.
How to report.  Treat each item of income 
the same way that the estate or trust would treat 
it. For example, if a trust's dividend income is 
distributed to you, you report the distribution as 
dividend income on your return. The same rule 
applies to distributions of tax-exempt interest 
and capital gains.
The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell 
you the type of items making up your share of 
the estate or trust income and any credits 
you’re allowed on your individual income tax re-
turn.
Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-
ally aren’t deductible by the beneficiaries.
Grantor trust.  Income earned by a grantor 
trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-
ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over 
the trust. (The grantor is the one who transfer-
red property to the trust.) This rule applies if the 
property (or income from the property) put into 
the trust will or may revert (be returned) to the 
grantor or the grantor's spouse.
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the 
grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at 
the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the 
value of the transferred property.
Expenses paid by another.  If your personal 
expenses are paid for by another person, such 
as a corporation, the payment may be taxable 
to you depending upon your relationship with 
Page 98 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 96 Chapter 12 Other Income

that person and the nature of the payment. But 
if the payment makes up for a loss caused by 
that person, and only restores you to the posi-
tion you were in before the loss, the payment 
isn’t includible in your income.
Fees for services.  Include all fees for your 
services in your income. Examples of these 
fees are amounts you receive for services you 
perform as:
A corporate director;
An executor, administrator, or personal 
representative of an estate;
A manager of a trade or business you op-
erated before declaring Chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy;
A notary public; or
An election precinct official.
Nonemployee compensation. If you aren’t 
an employee and the fees for your services 
from a single payer in the course of the payer's 
trade or business total $600 or more for the 
year, the payer should send you a Form 
1099-MISC. You may need to report your fees 
as self-employment income. See Self-Em-
ployed Persons, in chapter 1, for a discussion of 
when you’re considered self-employed.
Corporate director. Corporate director fees 
are self-employment income. Report these pay-
ments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 
1040).
Personal representatives.  All personal 
representatives must include in their gross in-
come fees paid to them from an estate. If you 
aren’t in the trade or business of being an exec-
utor (for instance, you’re the executor of a 
friend's or relative's estate), report these fees 
on Form 1040, line 21. If you’re in the trade or 
business of being an executor, report these 
fees as self-employment income on Schedule C 
or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee isn’t in-
cludible in income if it’s waived.
Manager of trade or business for bank-
ruptcy estate.  Include in your income all pay-
ments received from your bankruptcy estate for 
managing or operating a trade or business that 
you operated before you filed for bankruptcy. 
Report this income on Form 1040, line 21.
Notary public.  Report payments for these 
services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040). These payments aren’t subject to 
self-employment tax. See the separate Instruc-
tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.
Election precinct official.  You should re-
ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-
ices performed as an election official or election 
worker. Report these payments on line 7 of 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 
1040EZ.
Foster care providers.  Generally, payment 
you receive from a state, political subdivision, or 
a qualified foster care placement agency for 
caring for a qualified foster individual in your 
home is excluded from your income. However, 
you must include in your income payment to the 
extent it’s received for the care of more than five 
qualified foster individuals age 19 years or 
older.
A qualified foster individual is a person who:
1. Is living in a foster family home; and
2. Was placed there by:
a. An agency of a state or one of its polit-
ical subdivisions; or
b. A qualified foster care placement 
agency.
Difficulty-of-care payments.  These are 
payments that are designated by the payer as 
compensation for providing the additional care 
that’s required for physically, mentally, or emo-
tionally handicapped qualified foster individuals. 
A state must determine that this compensation 
is needed, and the care for which the payments 
are made must be provided in the foster care 
provider's home in which the qualified foster in-
dividual was placed.
Certain Medicaid waiver payments are trea-
ted as difficulty-of-care payments when re-
ceived by an individual care provider for caring 
for an eligible individual (whether related or un-
related) living in the provider's home. See No-
tice 2014-7, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2014-4_IRB/ar06.html, and related questions 
and answers, available at IRS.gov/Individuals/
Certain-Medicaid-Waiver-Payments-May-Be-
Excludable-From-Income, for more information.
You must include in your income diffi-
culty-of-care payments to the extent they’re re-
ceived for more than:
10 qualified foster individuals under age 
19, or
Five qualified foster individuals age 19 or 
older.
Maintaining space in home.  If you’re paid 
to maintain space in your home for emergency 
foster care, you must include the payment in 
your income.
Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-
ceive payments that you must include in your 
income and you’re in business as a foster care 
provider, report the payments on Schedule C or 
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). See Pub. 587, 
Business Use of Your Home, to help you deter-
mine the amount you can deduct for the use of 
your home.
Found property. If you find and keep property 
that doesn’t belong to you that has been lost or 
abandoned (treasure trove), it’s taxable to you 
at its fair market value in the first year it’s your 
undisputed possession.
Free tour.  If you received a free tour from a 
travel agency for organizing a group of tourists, 
you must include its value in your income. Re-
port the fair market value of the tour on Form 
1040, line 21, if you aren’t in the trade or busi-
ness of organizing tours. You can’t deduct your 
expenses in serving as the voluntary leader of 
the group at the group's request. If you organize 
tours as a trade or business, report the tour's 
value on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 
1040).
Gambling winnings.  You must include your 
gambling winnings in income on Form 1040, 
line 21. If you itemize your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-
bling losses you had during the year, but only 
up to the amount of your winnings. If you’re in 
the trade or business of gambling, use Sched-
ule C.
Lotteries and raffles.  Winnings from lotter-
ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-
tion to cash winnings, you must include in your 
income the fair market value of bonds, cars, 
houses, and other noncash prizes.
If you win a state lottery prize payable 
in installments, see Pub. 525 for more 
information.
Form W-2G. You may have received a Form 
W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, showing 
the amount of your gambling winnings and any 
tax taken out of them. Include the amount from 
box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include the 
amount shown in box 4 on Form 1040, line 64, 
as federal income tax withheld.
Reporting winnings and recordkeeping. 
For more information on reporting gambling 
winnings and recordkeeping, see Gambling 
Losses up to the Amount of Gambling Winnings 
in chapter 28.
Gifts and inheritances.  In most cases, prop-
erty you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheri-
tance isn’t included in your income. However, if 
property you receive this way later produces in-
come such as interest, dividends, or rents, that 
income is taxable to you. If property is given to 
a trust and the income from it is paid, credited, 
or distributed to you, that income is also taxable 
to you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the 
income from the property, that income is taxa-
ble to you.
Inherited pension or IRA. If you inherited a 
pension or an individual retirement arrangement 
(IRA), you may have to include part of the in-
herited amount in your income. See Survivors 
and Beneficiaries in Pub. 575, if you inherited a 
pension. See What if You Inherit an IRA?  in 
Pubs. 590-A and 590-B, if you inherited an IRA.
Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby aren’t de-
ductible from other income. A hobby is an activ-
ity from which you don’t expect to make a profit. 
See Activity not for profit, earlier.
If you collect stamps, coins, or other 
items as a hobby for recreation and 
pleasure, and you sell any of the items, 
your gain is taxable as a capital gain. (See 
chapter 16 .) However, if you sell items from 
your collection at a loss, you can’t deduct the 
loss.
Illegal activities. Income from illegal activities, 
such as money from dealing illegal drugs, must 
be included in your income on Form 1040, 
line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040) if from your self-employment activ-
ity.
Indian fishing rights.  If you’re a member of a 
qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights se-
cured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of 
Congress as of March 17, 1988, don’t include in 
your income amounts you receive from activi-
ties related to those fishing rights. The income 
isn’t subject to income tax, self-employment 
tax, or employment taxes.
Interest on frozen deposits.  In general, you 
exclude from your income the amount of inter-
est earned on a frozen deposit. See Interest in-
come on frozen deposits in chapter 7.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Page 99 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 97

Interest on qualified savings bonds.  You 
may be able to exclude from income the interest 
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if 
you pay qualified higher education expenses in 
the same year. For more information on this ex-
clusion, see Education Savings Bond Program 
under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 7.
Job interview expenses. If a prospective em-
ployer asks you to appear for an interview and 
either pays you an allowance or reimburses you 
for your transportation and other travel expen-
ses, the amount you receive is generally not 
taxable. You include in income only the amount 
you receive that’s more than your actual expen-
ses.
Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must be 
included in your income on Form 1040, line 21. 
If you gave any of your jury duty pay to your em-
ployer because your employer continued to pay 
you while you served jury duty, include the 
amount you gave your employer as an income 
adjustment on Form 1040, line 36, and see the 
instructions there.
Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks, side 
commissions, push money, or similar payments 
you receive in your income on Form 1040, 
line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040), if from your self-employment ac-
tivity.
Example. You sell cars and help arrange 
car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay 
back part of their commissions to you for refer-
ring customers to them. You must include the 
kickbacks in your income.
Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs 
and Medicare Advantage MSAs). In most ca-
ses, you don’t include in income amounts you 
withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare 
Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for 
qualified medical expenses. Generally, qualified 
medical expenses are those you can deduct on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions. 
For more information about qualified medical 
expenses, see chapter 21 . For more informa-
tion about Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage 
MSAs, see Pub. 969, Health Savings Accounts 
and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.
Prizes and awards.  If you win a prize in a 
lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz 
program, beauty contest, or other event, you 
must include it in your income. For example, if 
you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, 
you must report this income on Form 1040, 
line 21. If you refuse to accept a prize, don’t in-
clude its value in your income.
Prizes and awards in goods or services 
must be included in your income at their fair 
market value.
Employee awards or bonuses.  Cash 
awards or bonuses given to you by your em-
ployer for good work or suggestions generally 
must be included in your income as wages. 
However, certain noncash employee achieve-
ment awards can be excluded from income. 
See Bonuses and awards in chapter 5.
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.  If you 
were awarded a prize in recognition of accom-
plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-
tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you 
generally must include the value of the prize in 
your income. However, you don’t include this 
prize in your income if you meet all of the follow-
ing requirements.
You were selected without any action on 
your part to enter the contest or proceed-
ing.
You aren’t required to perform substantial 
future services as a condition to receiving 
the prize or award.
The prize or award is transferred by the 
payer directly to a governmental unit or 
tax-exempt charitable organization as des-
ignated by you.
See Pub. 525 for more information about the 
conditions that apply to the transfer.
Qualified tuition programs (QTPs).  A QTP 
(also known as a 529 program) is a program set 
up to allow you to either prepay or contribute to 
an account established for paying a student's 
qualified higher education expenses at an eligi-
ble educational institution. A program can be 
established and maintained by a state, an 
agency or instrumentality of a state, or an eligi-
ble educational institution.
The part of a distribution representing the 
amount paid or contributed to a QTP isn’t inclu-
ded in income. This is a return of the investment 
in the program.
In most cases, the beneficiary doesn’t in-
clude in income any earnings distributed from a 
QTP if the total distribution is less than or equal 
to adjusted qualified higher education expen-
ses. See Pub. 970 for more information.
Railroad retirement annuities.  The following 
types of payments are treated as pension or an-
nuity income and are taxable under the rules 
explained in Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity In-
come.
Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are 
more than the social security equivalent 
benefit.
Tier 2 benefits.
Vested dual benefits.
Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing 
information, include it in your income.
Sale of home.  You may be able to exclude 
from income all or part of any gain from the sale 
or exchange of your main home. See chap-
ter 15.
Sale of personal items.  If you sold an item 
you owned for personal use, such as a car, re-
frigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or silver-
ware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. Re-
port it as explained in the Instructions for 
Schedule D (Form 1040). You can’t deduct a 
loss.
However, if you sold an item you held for in-
vestment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins, 
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain 
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.
Example. You sold a painting on an online 
auction website for $100. You bought the paint-
ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Report 
your gain as a capital gain as explained in the 
Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Scholarships and fellowships.  A candidate 
for a degree can exclude amounts received as 
a qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified 
scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-
ceive that’s for:
Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an 
educational institution; or
Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-
quired for courses at the educational insti-
tution.
Amounts used for room and board don’t qualify 
for the exclusion. See Pub. 970 for more infor-
mation on qualified scholarships and fellowship 
grants.
Payment for services.  In most cases, you 
must include in income the part of any scholar-
ship or fellowship that represents payment for 
past, present, or future teaching, research, or 
other services. This applies even if all candi-
dates for a degree must perform the services to 
receive the degree.
For information about the rules that apply to 
a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to 
employees and their families by an educational 
institution, see Pub. 970.
VA payments.  Allowances paid by the De-
partment of Veterans Affairs aren’t included in 
your income. These allowances aren’t consid-
ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contest 
aren’t scholarships or fellowships if you don’t 
have to use the prizes for educational purpo-
ses. You must include these amounts in your in-
come on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you 
use the amounts for educational purposes.
Stolen property.  If you steal property, you 
must report its fair market value in your income 
in the year you steal it unless in the same year, 
you return it to its rightful owner.
Transporting school children.  Don’t include 
in your income a school board mileage allow-
ance for taking children to and from school if 
you aren’t in the business of taking children to 
school. You can’t deduct expenses for provid-
ing this transportation.
Union benefits and dues.  Amounts deducted 
from your pay for union dues, assessments, 
contributions, or other payments to a union 
can’t be excluded from your income.
You may be able to deduct some of these 
payments as a miscellaneous deduction sub-
ject to the 2%-of-AGI limit if they’re related to 
your job and if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). For more information, 
see Union Dues and Expenses in chapter 28.
Strike and lockout benefits.  Benefits paid 
to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits, 
including both cash and the fair market value of 
other property, are usually included in your in-
come as compensation. You can exclude these 
benefits from your income only when the facts 
clearly show that the union intended them as 
gifts to you.
Utility rebates. If you’re a customer of an elec-
tric utility company and you participate in the 
Page 100 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 98 Chapter 12 Other Income

utility's energy conservation program, you may 
receive on your monthly electric bill either:
A reduction in the purchase price of elec-
tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or
A nonrefundable credit against the pur-
chase price of the electricity.
The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-
able credit isn’t included in your income.
Page 101 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 99

Part Three.
Gains and 
Losses
The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses, 
including how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or trading 
stocks, bonds, or other investment property generally is taxable. A loss 
may or may not be deductible. These chapters also discuss gains from 
selling property you personally use — including the special rules for selling 
your home. Nonbusiness casualty and theft losses are discussed in 
chapter 25 in Part Five.
13.
Basis of 
Property
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
This chapter discusses how to figure your basis 
in property. It is divided into the following sec-
tions.
Cost basis.
Adjusted basis.
Basis other than cost.
Your basis is the amount of your investment 
in property for tax purposes. Use the basis to 
figure the gain or loss on the sale, exchange, or 
other disposition of property. Also use it to fig-
ure deductions for depreciation, amortization, 
depletion, and casualty losses.
If you use property for both business or for 
production of income purposes, and for per-
sonal purposes, you must allocate the basis 
based on the use. Only the basis allocated to 
the business or the production of income part of 
the property can be depreciated.
Your original basis in property is adjusted 
(increased or decreased) by certain events. For 
CAUTION
!
example, if you make improvements to the 
property, increase your basis. If you take de-
ductions for depreciation or casualty losses, or 
claim certain credits, reduce your basis.
Keep accurate records of all items that 
affect the basis of your property. For 
more information on keeping records, 
see chapter 1.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe 
Benefits
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Business Expenses
Installment Sales
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
How To Depreciate Property
Cost Basis
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. 
The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debt 
obligations, other property, or services. Your 
cost also includes amounts you pay for the fol-
lowing items.
Sales tax.
Freight.
Installation and testing.
Excise taxes.
Legal and accounting fees (when they 
must be capitalized).
Revenue stamps.
Recording fees. 
Real estate taxes (if you assume liability 
for the seller).
In addition, the basis of real estate and busi-
ness assets may include other items.
Loans with low or no interest.  If you buy 
property on a time-payment plan that charges 
little or no interest, the basis of your property is 
your stated purchase price minus any amount 
considered to be unstated interest. You gener-
RECORDS
  15-B
  525
  535
  537
  544
  550
  551
  946
ally have unstated interest if your interest rate is 
less than the applicable federal rate.
For more information, see Unstated Interest 
and Original Issue Discount (OID) in Pub. 537.
Real Property
Real property, also called real estate, is land 
and generally anything built on, growing on, or 
attached to land.
If you buy real property, certain fees and 
other expenses you pay are part of your cost 
basis in the property.
Lump-sum purchase.  If you buy buildings 
and the land on which they stand for a lump 
sum, allocate the cost basis between the land 
and the buildings. Allocate the cost basis ac-
cording to the respective fair market values 
(FMVs) of the land and buildings at the time of 
purchase. Figure the basis of each asset by 
multiplying the lump sum by a fraction. The nu-
merator is the FMV of that asset and the de-
nominator is the FMV of the whole property at 
the time of purchase.
If you are not certain of the FMVs of the 
land and buildings, you can allocate 
the basis according to their assessed 
values for real estate tax purposes.
Fair market value (FMV).  FMV is the price 
at which the property would change hands be-
tween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither 
having to buy or sell, and both having reasona-
ble knowledge of all the necessary facts. Sales 
of similar property on or about the same date 
may be helpful in figuring the FMV of the prop-
erty.
Assumption of mortgage. If you buy property 
and assume (or buy the property subject to) an 
existing mortgage on the property, your basis 
includes the amount you pay for the property 
plus the amount to be paid on the mortgage.
Settlement costs. Your basis includes the set-
tlement fees and closing costs you paid for buy-
ing the property. (A fee for buying property is a 
cost that must be paid even if you buy the prop-
erty for cash.) Do not include fees and costs for 
getting a loan on the property in your basis.
The following are some of the settlement 
fees or closing costs you can include in the ba-
sis of your property.
Abstract fees (abstract of title fees).
Charges for installing utility services.
TIP
Page 102 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 100 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Legal fees (including fees for the title 
search and preparation of the sales con-
tract and deed). 
Recording fees.
Survey fees.
Transfer taxes. 
Owner's title insurance. 
Any amounts the seller owes that you 
agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-
est, recording or mortgage fees, charges 
for improvements or repairs, and sales 
commissions.
Settlement costs do not include amounts 
placed in escrow for the future payment of items 
such as taxes and insurance.
The following are some of the settlement 
fees and closing costs you cannot include in the 
basis of property.
Casualty insurance premiums. 
Rent for occupancy of the property before 
closing. 
Charges for utilities or other services rela-
ted to occupancy of the property before 
closing.
Charges connected with getting a loan, 
such as points (discount points, loan origi-
nation fees), mortgage insurance premi-
ums, loan assumption fees, cost of a credit 
report, and fees for an appraisal required 
by a lender.
Fees for refinancing a mortgage.
Real estate taxes. If you pay real estate taxes 
the seller owed on real property you bought, 
and the seller did not reimburse you, treat those 
taxes as part of your basis. You cannot deduct 
the taxes as an expense.
If you reimburse the seller for taxes the 
seller paid for you, you can usually deduct that 
amount as an expense in the year of purchase. 
Do not include the amount of real estate taxes 
you deducted as an expense in the basis of 
your property. If you did not reimburse the 
seller, you must reduce your basis by the 
amount of those taxes.
Points. If you pay points to get a loan (includ-
ing a mortgage, second mortgage, line of credit, 
or a home equity loan), do not add the points to 
the basis of the related property. Generally, you 
deduct the points over the term of the loan. For 
more information on how to deduct points, see 
chapter 23.
Points on home mortgage.  Special rules 
may apply to points you and the seller pay 
when you get a mortgage to buy your main 
home. If certain requirements are met, you can 
deduct the points in full for the year in which 
they are paid. Reduce the basis of your home 
by any seller-paid points.
Adjusted Basis
Before figuring gain or loss on a sale, ex-
change, or other disposition of property or figur-
ing allowable depreciation, depletion, or amorti-
zation, you must usually make certain 
adjustments (increases and decreases) to the 
cost basis or basis other than cost (discussed 
later) of the property. The result is the adjusted 
basis.
Increases to Basis
Increase the basis of any property by all items 
properly added to a capital account. Examples 
of items that increase basis are shown in Ta-
ble 13-1. These include the items discussed be-
low.
Improvements. Add to your basis in property 
the cost of improvements having a useful life of 
more than 1 year, that increase the value of the 
property, lengthen its life, or adapt it to a differ-
ent use. For example, improvements include 
putting a recreation room in your unfinished 
basement, adding another bathroom or bed-
room, putting up a fence, putting in new plumb-
ing or wiring, installing a new roof, or paving 
your driveway.
Assessments for local improvements.
Add to the basis of property assessments for 
improvements such as streets and sidewalks if 
they increase the value of the property as-
sessed. Do not deduct them as taxes. How-
ever, you can deduct as taxes assessments for 
maintenance or repairs, or for meeting interest 
charges related to the improvements.
Example. Your city changes the street in 
front of your store into an enclosed pedestrian 
mall and assesses you and other affected prop-
erty owners for the cost of the conversion. Add 
the assessment to your property's basis. In this 
example, the assessment is a depreciable as-
set.
Decreases to Basis
Decrease the basis of any property by all items 
that represent a return of capital for the period 
during which you held the property. Examples 
of items that decrease basis are shown in Ta-
ble 13-1. These include the items discussed be-
low.
Casualty and theft losses.  If you have a 
casualty or theft loss, decrease the basis in 
your property by any insurance proceeds or 
other reimbursement and by any deductible 
loss not covered by insurance.
You must increase your basis in the property 
by the amount you spend on repairs that restore 
the property to its pre-casualty condition.
For more information on casualty and theft 
losses, see chapter 25.
Depreciation and section 179 deduction.
Decrease the basis of your qualifying business 
property by any section 179 deduction you take 
and the depreciation you deducted, or could 
have deducted (including any special deprecia-
tion allowance), on your tax returns under the 
method of depreciation you selected.
For more information about depreciation 
and the section 179 deduction, see Pub. 946 
and the Instructions for Form 4562.
Table 13-1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis
• Capital improvements: • Exclusion from income of 
Putting an addition on your home  subsidies for energy conservation 
Replacing an entire roof  measures
Paving your driveway
Installing central air conditioning • Casualty or theft loss deductions 
Rewiring your home  and insurance reimbursements
• Assessments for local improvements:
Water connections
Extending utility service lines to the
property
• Postponed gain from the sale of a home
Sidewalks 
Roads
• Alternative fuel vehicle refueling
property credit (Form 8911)
• Residential energy credit (Form 5695)
• Casualty losses: • Depreciation and section 179 deduction
Restoring damaged property
• Nontaxable corporate distributions
• Legal fees: 
Cost of defending and perfecting a title • Certain canceled debt excluded from
Fees for getting a reduction of an 
assessment
 income
• Zoning costs • Easements
• Adoption tax benefits
Page 103 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 101

Example. You owned a duplex used as 
rental property that cost you $40,000, of which 
$35,000 was allocated to the building and 
$5,000 to the land. You added an improvement 
to the duplex that cost $10,000. In February last 
year, the duplex was damaged by fire. Up to 
that time, you had been allowed depreciation of 
$23,000. You sold some salvaged material for 
$1,300 and collected $19,700 from your insur-
ance company. You deducted a casualty loss of 
$1,000 on your income tax return for last year. 
You spent $19,000 of the insurance proceeds 
for restoration of the duplex, which was comple-
ted this year. You must use the duplex's adjus-
ted basis after the restoration to determine de-
preciation for the rest of the property's recovery 
period. Figure the adjusted basis of the duplex 
as follows:
Original cost of duplex ........... $35,000
Addition to duplex ............. 10,000
Total cost of duplex ............ $45,000
Minus: Depreciation .......... 23,000
Adjusted basis before casualty ....... $22,000
Minus: Insurance 
proceeds ...... $19,700
Deducted casualty 
loss ......... 1,000
Salvage 
proceeds ......  1,300  22,000
Adjusted basis after casualty ........ $-0-
Add: Cost of restoring duplex ........ 19,000
Adjusted basis after restoration ..... $19,000
Note. Your basis in the land is its original 
cost of $5,000.
Easements. The amount you receive for grant-
ing an easement is generally considered to be 
proceeds from the sale of an interest in real 
property. It reduces the basis of the affected 
part of the property. If the amount received is 
more than the basis of the part of the property 
affected by the easement, reduce your basis in 
that part to zero and treat the excess as a rec-
ognized gain.
If the gain is on a capital asset, see chap-
ter 16  for information about how to report it. If 
the gain is on property used in a trade or busi-
ness, see Pub. 544 for information about how to 
report it.
Exclusion of subsidies for energy conser-
vation measures. You can exclude from gross 
income any subsidy you received from a public 
utility company for the purchase or installation 
of an energy conservation measure for a dwell-
ing unit. Reduce the basis of the property for 
which you received the subsidy by the excluded 
amount. For more information about this sub-
sidy, see chapter 12.
Postponed gain from sale of home.  If you 
postponed gain from the sale of your main 
home under rules in effect before May 7, 1997, 
you must reduce the basis of the home you ac-
quired as a replacement by the amount of the 
postponed gain. For more information on the 
rules for the sale of a home, see chapter 15.
Basis Other Than Cost
There are many times when you cannot use 
cost as basis. In these cases, the fair market 
value or the adjusted basis of the property can 
be used. Fair market value (FMV) and adjusted 
basis were discussed earlier.
Property Received
for Services
If you receive property for your services, include 
the FMV of the property in income. The amount 
you include in income becomes your basis. If 
the services were performed for a price agreed 
on beforehand, it will be accepted as the FMV 
of the property if there is no evidence to the 
contrary.
Restricted property. If you receive property 
for your services and the property is subject to 
certain restrictions, your basis in the property is 
its FMV when it becomes substantially vested. 
However, this rule doesn’t apply if you make an 
election to include in income the FMV of the 
property at the time it is transferred to you, less 
any amount you paid for it. Property is substan-
tially vested when it is transferable or when it is 
not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture (you 
do not have a good chance of losing it). For 
more information, see Restricted Property in 
Pub. 525.
Bargain purchases. A bargain purchase is 
a purchase of an item for less than its FMV. If, 
as compensation for services, you buy goods or 
other property at less than FMV, include the dif-
ference between the purchase price and the 
property's FMV in your income. Your basis in 
the property is its FMV (your purchase price 
plus the amount you include in income). 
If the difference between your purchase 
price and the FMV is a qualified employee dis-
count, do not include the difference in income. 
However, your basis in the property is still its 
FMV. See Employee Discounts in Pub. 15-B.
Taxable Exchanges
A taxable exchange is one in which the gain is 
taxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable gain 
or deductible loss also is known as a recog-
nized gain or loss. If you receive property in ex-
change for other property in a taxable ex-
change, the basis of the property you receive is 
usually its FMV at the time of the exchange.
Nontaxable Exchanges
A nontaxable exchange is an exchange in 
which you are not taxed on any gain and you 
cannot deduct any loss. If you receive property 
in a nontaxable exchange, its basis is generally 
the same as the basis of the property you trans-
ferred. See Nontaxable Trades in chapter 14.
Involuntary Conversions
If you receive replacement property as a result 
of an involuntary conversion, such as a casu-
alty, theft, or condemnation, figure the basis of 
the replacement property using the basis of the 
converted property.
Similar or related property.  If you receive re-
placement property similar or related in service 
or use to the converted property, the replace-
ment property's basis is the same as the con-
verted property's basis on the date of the con-
version, with the following adjustments.
1. Decrease the basis by the following.
a. Any loss you recognize on the invol-
untary conversion.
b. Any money you receive that you do 
not spend on similar property.
2. Increase the basis by the following.
a. Any gain you recognize on the invol-
untary conversion.
b. Any cost of acquiring the replacement 
property.
Money or property not similar or related.  If 
you receive money or property not similar or re-
lated in service or use to the converted prop-
erty, and you buy replacement property similar 
or related in service or use to the converted 
property, the basis of the replacement property 
is its cost decreased by the gain not recognized 
on the conversion.
Example. The state condemned your prop-
erty. The adjusted basis of the property was 
$26,000 and the state paid you $31,000 for it. 
You realized a gain of $5,000 ($31,000 − 
$26,000). You bought replacement property 
similar in use to the converted property for 
$29,000. You recognize a gain of $2,000 
($31,000 − $29,000), the unspent part of the 
payment from the state. Your unrecognized 
gain is $3,000, the difference between the 
$5,000 realized gain and the $2,000 recognized 
gain. The basis of the replacement property is 
figured as follows:
Cost of replacement property ........ $29,000
Minus: Gain not recognized ......... 3,000
Basis of replacement property....... $26,000
Allocating the basis.  If you buy more than 
one piece of replacement property, allocate 
your basis among the properties based on their 
respective costs.
Basis for depreciation. Special rules apply in 
determining and depreciating the basis of Modi-
fied Accelerated Cost Recovery System 
(MACRS) property acquired in an involuntary 
conversion. For information, see What Is the 
Basis of Your Depreciable Property?  in chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 946.
Like-Kind Exchanges
The exchange of property for the same kind of 
property is the most common type of nontaxa-
ble exchange. To qualify as a like-kind ex-
change, the property traded and the property 
received must be both of the following.
Qualifying property.
Like-kind property.
The basis of the property you receive is gen-
erally the same as the adjusted basis of the 
property you gave up. If you trade property in a 
like-kind exchange and also pay money, the ba-
sis of the property received is the adjusted ba-
sis of the property you gave up increased by the 
money you paid.
Page 104 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 102 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Qualifying property.  In a like-kind exchange, 
you must hold for investment or for productive 
use in your trade or business both the property 
you give up and the property you receive.
Like-kind property.  There must be an ex-
change of like-kind property. Like-kind proper-
ties are properties of the same nature or char-
acter, even if they differ in grade or quality. The 
exchange of real estate for real estate and per-
sonal property for similar personal property are 
exchanges of like-kind property.
Example. You trade in an old truck used in 
your business with an adjusted basis of $1,700 
for a new one costing $6,800. The dealer allows 
you $2,000 on the old truck, and you pay 
$4,800. This is a like-kind exchange. The basis 
of the new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of 
the old one, $1,700, plus the amount you paid, 
$4,800).
If you sell your old truck to a third party for 
$2,000 instead of trading it in and then buy a 
new one from the dealer, you have a taxable 
gain of $300 on the sale (the $2,000 sale price 
minus the $1,700 adjusted basis). The basis of 
the new truck is the price you pay the dealer.
Partially nontaxable exchanges.  A partially 
nontaxable exchange is an exchange in which 
you receive unlike property or money in addition 
to like-kind property. The basis of the property 
you receive is the same as the adjusted basis of 
the property you gave up, with the following ad-
justments.
1. Decrease the basis by the following 
amounts.
a. Any money you receive.
b. Any loss you recognize on the ex-
change.
2. Increase the basis by the following 
amounts.
a. Any additional costs you incur.
b. Any gain you recognize on the ex-
change.
If the other party to the exchange assumes your 
liabilities, treat the debt assumption as money 
you received in the exchange.
Allocation of basis.  If you receive like-kind 
and unlike properties in the exchange, allocate 
the basis first to the unlike property, other than 
money, up to its FMV on the date of the ex-
change. The rest is the basis of the like-kind 
property.
More information.  See Like-Kind Exchanges 
in chapter 1 of Pub. 544 for more information.
Basis for depreciation. Special rules apply in 
determining and depreciating the basis of 
MACRS property acquired in a like-kind ex-
change. For information, see What Is the Basis 
of Your Depreciable Property?  in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 946.
Property Transferred
From a Spouse
The basis of property transferred to you or 
transferred in trust for your benefit by your 
spouse is the same as your spouse's adjusted 
basis. The same rule applies to a transfer by 
your former spouse that is incident to divorce. 
However, for property transferred in trust, adjust 
your basis for any gain recognized by your 
spouse or former spouse if the liabilities as-
sumed, plus the liabilities to which the property 
is subject, are more than the adjusted basis of 
the property transferred.
If the property transferred to you is a series 
E, series EE, or series I U.S. savings bond, the 
transferor must include in income the interest 
accrued to the date of transfer. Your basis in the 
bond immediately after the transfer is equal to 
the transferor's basis increased by the interest 
income includible in the transferor's income. For 
more information on these bonds, see chap-
ter 7.
At the time of the transfer, the transferor 
must give you the records needed to determine 
the adjusted basis and holding period of the 
property as of the date of the transfer.
For more information about the transfer of 
property from a spouse, see chapter 14.
Property Received
as a Gift
To figure the basis of property you receive as a 
gift, you must know its adjusted basis to the do-
nor just before it was given to you, its FMV at 
the time it was given to you, and any gift tax 
paid on it.
FMV less than donor's adjusted basis. If the 
FMV of the property at the time of the gift is less 
than the donor's adjusted basis, your basis de-
pends on whether you have a gain or a loss 
when you dispose of the property. Your basis 
for figuring gain is the same as the donor's ad-
justed basis plus or minus any required adjust-
ments to basis while you held the property. 
Your basis for figuring loss is its FMV when you 
received the gift plus or minus any required ad-
justments to basis while you held the property. 
See Adjusted Basis, earlier.
Example. You received an acre of land as 
a gift. At the time of the gift, the land had an 
FMV of $8,000. The donor's adjusted basis was 
$10,000. After you received the property, no 
events occurred to increase or decrease your 
basis. If you later sell the property for $12,000, 
you will have a $2,000 gain because you must 
use the donor's adjusted basis at the time of the 
gift ($10,000) as your basis to figure gain. If you 
sell the property for $7,000, you will have a 
$1,000 loss because you must use the FMV at 
the time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis to fig-
ure loss.
If the sales price is between $8,000 and 
$10,000, you have neither gain nor loss.
Business property.  If you hold the gift as 
business property, your basis for figuring any 
depreciation, depletion, or amortization deduc-
tions is the same as the donor's adjusted basis 
plus or minus any required adjustments to basis 
while you hold the property.
FMV equal to or greater than donor's adjus-
ted basis. If the FMV of the property is equal 
to or greater than the donor's adjusted basis, 
your basis is the donor's adjusted basis at the 
time you received the gift. Increase your basis 
by all or part of any gift tax paid, depending on 
the date of the gift, explained later.
Also, for figuring gain or loss from a sale or 
other disposition or for figuring depreciation, de-
pletion, or amortization deductions on business 
property, you must increase or decrease your 
basis (the donor's adjusted basis) by any re-
quired adjustments to basis while you held the 
property. See Adjusted Basis, earlier.
If you received a gift during the tax year, in-
crease your basis in the gift (the donor's adjus-
ted basis) by the part of the gift tax paid on it 
due to the net increase in value of the gift. Fig-
ure the increase by multiplying the gift tax paid 
by a fraction. The numerator of the fraction is 
the net increase in value of the gift and the de-
nominator is the amount of the gift.
The net increase in value of the gift is the 
FMV of the gift minus the donor's adjusted ba-
sis. The amount of the gift is its value for gift tax 
purposes after reduction by any annual exclu-
sion and marital or charitable deduction that ap-
plies to the gift.
Example. In 2017, you received a gift of 
property from your mother that had an FMV of 
$50,000. Her adjusted basis was $20,000. The 
amount of the gift for gift tax purposes was 
$36,000 ($50,000 minus the $14,000 annual 
exclusion). She paid a gift tax of $7,320 on the 
property. Your basis is $26,076, figured as fol-
lows:
Fair market value .............. $50,000
Minus: Adjusted basis ............ −20,000
Net increase in value ............ $30,000
Gift tax paid ................. $7,320
Multiplied by ($30,000 ÷ $36,000) ...... × 0.83
Gift tax due to net increase in value ..... $6,076
Adjusted basis of property to your 
mother ................... +20,000
Your basis in the property ......... $26,076
Inherited Property
Your basis in property you inherited from a de-
cedent is generally one of the following.
The FMV of the property at the date of the 
decedent's death.
The FMV on the alternate valuation date if 
the personal representative for the estate 
elects to use alternate valuation.
The value under the special-use valuation 
method for real property used in farming or 
a closely held business if elected for estate 
tax purposes.
The decedent's adjusted basis in land to 
the extent of the value excluded from the 
decedent's taxable estate as a qualified 
conservation easement.
If a federal estate tax return doesn’t have to 
be filed, your basis in the inherited property is 
its appraised value at the date of death for state 
inheritance or transmission taxes.
For more information, see the Instructions 
for Form 706, United States Estate (and Gener-
ation-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return.
Page 105 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 103

Information for beneficiaries receiving 
Schedule A (Form 8971).  Form 8971, Infor-
mation Regarding Beneficiaries Acquiring Prop-
erty From a Decedent, and its Schedule A, are 
used to comply with the reporting requirements 
regarding consistency of basis for assets ac-
quired from an estate. In certain circumstances, 
an executor of an estate (or other person) re-
quired to file an estate tax return after July 31, 
2015, will be required to provide a Schedule A 
(Form 8971) to a beneficiary who receives or is 
to receive property from an estate. For more in-
formation about when Form 8971 and Sched-
ule A must be completed, see the Instructions 
for Form 8971 and Schedule A.
The beneficiary uses the final estate tax 
value reported on Schedule A to determine his 
or her basis in the property. When calculating a 
basis consistent with the final estate tax value, 
start with the reported value and then make any 
allowed adjustments.
Community property.  In community property 
states (Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, 
Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and 
Wisconsin), married individuals are each usu-
ally considered to own half the community prop-
erty. When either spouse dies, the total value of 
the community property, even the part belong-
ing to the surviving spouse, generally becomes 
the basis of the entire property. For this rule to 
apply, at least half the value of the community 
property interest must be includible in the dece-
dent's gross estate, whether or not the estate 
must file a return.
Example. You and your spouse owned 
community property that had a basis of 
$80,000. When your spouse died, half the FMV 
of the community interest was includible in your 
spouse's estate. The FMV of the community in-
terest was $100,000. The basis of your half of 
the property after the death of your spouse is 
$50,000 (half of the $100,000 FMV). The basis 
of the other half to your spouse's heirs is also 
$50,000.
For more information about community 
property, see Pub. 555, Community Property.
Property Changed From 
Personal to Business or 
Rental Use
If you hold property for personal use and then 
change it to business use or use it to produce 
rent, you can begin to depreciate the property 
at the time of the change. To do so, you must 
figure its basis for depreciation at the time of the 
change. An example of changing property held 
for personal use to business or rental use would 
be renting out your former personal residence.
Basis for depreciation. The basis for depreci-
ation is the lesser of the following amounts.
The FMV of the property on the date of the 
change.
Your adjusted basis on the date of the 
change.
Example. Several years ago, you paid 
$160,000 to have your house built on a lot that 
cost $25,000. You paid $20,000 for permanent 
improvements to the house and claimed a 
$2,000 casualty loss deduction for damage to 
the house before changing the property to 
rental use last year. Because land is not depre-
ciable, you include only the cost of the house 
when figuring the basis for depreciation.
Your adjusted basis in the house when you 
changed its use to rental property was 
$178,000 ($160,000 + $20,000 − $2,000). On 
the same date, your property had an FMV of 
$180,000, of which $15,000 was for the land 
and $165,000 was for the house. The basis for 
figuring depreciation on the house is its FMV on 
the date of the change ($165,000) because it is 
less than your adjusted basis ($178,000).
Sale of property. If you later sell or dispose of 
property changed to business or rental use, the 
basis you use will depend on whether you are 
figuring gain or loss.
Gain. The basis for figuring a gain is your 
adjusted basis in the property when you sell the 
property.
Example. Assume the same facts as in the 
previous example except that you sell the prop-
erty at a gain after being allowed depreciation 
deductions of $37,500. Your adjusted basis for 
figuring gain is $165,500 ($178,000 + $25,000 
(land) − $37,500).
Loss. Figure the basis for a loss starting with 
the smaller of your adjusted basis or the FMV of 
the property at the time of the change to busi-
ness or rental use. Then make adjustments (in-
creases and decreases) for the period after the 
change in the property's use, as discussed ear-
lier under Adjusted Basis.
Example. Assume the same facts as in the 
previous example, except that you sell the prop-
erty at a loss after being allowed depreciation 
deductions of $37,500. In this case, you would 
start with the FMV on the date of the change to 
rental use ($180,000) because it is less than the 
adjusted basis of $203,000 ($178,000 + 
$25,000 (land)) on that date. Reduce that 
amount ($180,000) by the depreciation deduc-
tions ($37,500). The basis for loss is $142,500 
($180,000 − $37,500).
Stocks and Bonds
The basis of stocks or bonds you buy generally 
is the purchase price plus any costs of pur-
chase, such as commissions and recording or 
transfer fees. If you get stocks or bonds other 
than by purchase, your basis is usually deter-
mined by the FMV or the previous owner's ad-
justed basis, as discussed earlier.
You must adjust the basis of stocks for cer-
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-
ple, if you receive additional stock from nontax-
able stock dividends or stock splits, reduce your 
basis for each share of stock by dividing the ad-
justed basis of the old stock by the number of 
shares of old and new stock. This rule applies 
only when the additional stock received is iden-
tical to the stock held. Also reduce your basis 
when you receive nontaxable distributions. The 
nontaxable distributions are a return of capital.
Example. In 2015, you bought 100 shares 
of XYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a share. In 2016, 
you bought 100 shares of XYZ stock for $1,600 
or $16 a share. In 2017, XYZ declared a 2-for-1 
stock split. You now have 200 shares of stock 
with a basis of $5 a share and 200 shares with a 
basis of $8 a share.
Other basis.  There are other ways to figure 
the basis of stocks or bonds depending on how 
you acquired them. For detailed information, 
see Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Invest-
ment Property in chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
Identifying stocks or bonds sold.  If you can 
adequately identify the shares of stock or the 
bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other 
basis of the particular shares of stocks or 
bonds. If you buy and sell securities at various 
times in varying quantities and you cannot ade-
quately identify the shares you sell, the basis of 
the securities you sell is the basis of the securi-
ties you acquired first. For more information 
about identifying securities you sell, see Stocks 
and Bonds under Basis of Investment Property 
in chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
Mutual fund shares.  If you sell mutual fund 
shares you acquired at various times and prices 
and left on deposit in an account kept by a cus-
todian or agent, you can elect to use an aver-
age basis. For more information, see Pub. 550.
Bond premium. If you buy a taxable bond at a 
premium and elect to amortize the premium, re-
duce the basis of the bond by the amortized 
premium you deduct each year. See Bond Pre-
mium Amortization in chapter 3 of Pub. 550 for 
more information. Although you cannot deduct 
the premium on a tax-exempt bond, you must 
amortize the premium each year and reduce 
your basis in the bond by the amortized 
amount.
Original issue discount (OID) on debt in-
struments. You must increase your basis in an 
OID debt instrument by the OID you include in 
income for that instrument. See Original Issue 
Discount (OID)  in chapter 7, and Pub. 1212, 
Guide To Original Issue Discount (OID) Instru-
ments.
Tax-exempt obligations.  OID on tax-ex-
empt obligations is generally not taxable. How-
ever, when you dispose of a tax-exempt obliga-
tion issued after September 3, 1982, and 
acquired after March 1, 1984, you must accrue 
OID on the obligation to determine its adjusted 
basis. The accrued OID is added to the basis of 
the obligation to determine your gain or loss. 
See chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
14.
Sale of Property
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
CAUTION
!
Page 106 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 104 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Reminder
Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen who 
sells property located outside the United States, 
you must report all gains and losses from the 
sale of that property on your tax return unless it 
is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you 
reside inside or outside the United States and 
whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from 
the payer.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax consequences 
of selling or trading investment property. It ex-
plains the following.
What a sale or trade is.
Figuring gain or loss.
Nontaxable trades.
Related party transactions.
Capital gains or losses.
Capital assets and noncapital assets.
Holding period.
Rollover of gain from publicly traded secur-
ities.
Other property transactions.  Certain trans-
fers of property aren’t discussed here. They are 
discussed in other IRS publications. These in-
clude the following.
Sales of a main home, covered in chap-
ter 15.
Installment sales, covered in Pub. 537.
Transactions involving business property, 
covered in Pub. 544.
Dispositions of an interest in a passive ac-
tivity, covered in Pub. 925.
Pub. 550 provides a more detailed discus-
sion about sales and trades of investment prop-
erty. Pub. 550 includes information about the 
rules covering nonbusiness bad debts, strad-
dles, section 1256 contracts, puts and calls, 
commodity futures, short sales, and wash 
sales. It also discusses investment-related ex-
penses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Investment Income and Expenses
Form (and Instructions)
Capital Gains 
and Losses
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Capital Assets
Like-Kind Exchanges
Sales and Trades
If you sold property such as stocks, bonds, or 
certain commodities through a broker during the 
year, you should receive from the broker a Form 
1099-B. You should receive a Form 1099-B for 
2017 by February 15, 2018. It will show the 
gross proceeds from the sale. It may also show 
your basis. The IRS will also get a copy of Form 
1099-B from the broker.
Use the Form 1099-B received from your 
broker to complete Form 8949, Sales and Other 
Dispositions of Capital Assets, and/or Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).
What Is a Sale or Trade?
This section explains what is a sale or trade. It 
also explains certain transactions and events 
that are treated as sales or trades.
A sale is generally a transfer of property for 
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to 
pay money.
A trade is a transfer of property for other 
property or services and may be taxed in the 
same way as a sale.
Sale and purchase.  Ordinarily, a transaction 
isn’t a trade when you voluntarily sell property 
for cash and immediately buy similar property to 
replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
rate transactions. But see Like-kind exchanges 
under Nontaxable Trades, later.
Redemption of stock.  A redemption of stock 
is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the 
capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
demption is a dividend or other distribution on 
stock.
Dividend versus sale or trade.  Whether a 
redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend, 
or other distribution depends on the circumstan-
ces in each case. Both direct and indirect own-
ership of stock will be considered. The redemp-
tion is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:
The redemption isn’t essentially equivalent 
to a dividend (see chapter 8),
There is a substantially disproportionate 
redemption of stock,
There is a complete redemption of all the 
stock of the corporation owned by the 
shareholder, or
The redemption is a distribution in partial 
liquidation of a corporation.
Redemption or retirement of bonds.  A re-
demption or retirement of bonds or notes at 
  550 
  Schedule D (Form 1040) 
  8949 
  8824 
their maturity is generally treated as a sale or 
trade.
In addition, a significant modification of a 
bond is treated as a trade of the original bond 
for a new bond. For details, see Regulations 
section 1.1001-3.
Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a 
dominant shareholder who retains ownership of 
more than half of the corporation's voting 
shares is treated as a contribution to capital 
rather than as an immediate loss deductible 
from taxable income. The surrendering share-
holder must reallocate his or her basis in the 
surrendered shares to the shares he or she re-
tains.
Worthless securities.  Stocks, stock rights, 
and bonds (other than those held for sale by a 
securities dealer) that became completely 
worthless during the tax year are treated as 
though they were sold on the last day of the tax 
year. This affects whether your capital loss is 
long term or short term. See Holding Period , 
later.
Worthless securities also include securities 
that you abandon after March 12, 2008. To 
abandon a security, you must permanently sur-
render and relinquish all rights in the security 
and receive no consideration in exchange for it. 
All the facts and circumstances determine 
whether the transaction is properly character-
ized as an abandonment or other type of trans-
action, such as an actual sale or exchange, 
contribution to capital, dividend, or gift.
If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make 
payments on a negotiable promissory note that 
you issued for stock that became worthless, 
you can deduct these payments as losses in the 
years you actually make the payments. Don’t 
deduct them in the year the stock became 
worthless.
How to report loss.  Report worthless se-
curities on Form 8949, Part I or Part II, which-
ever applies.
Report your worthless securities trans-
actions on Form 8949 with the correct 
box checked for these transactions. 
See Form 8949 and the Instructions for Form 
8949.
For more information on Form 8949 
and Schedule D (Form 1040), see Re-
porting Capital Gains and Losses  in 
chapter 16. See also Schedule D (Form 1040), 
Form 8949, and their separate instructions.
Filing a claim for refund.  If you don’t claim 
a loss for a worthless security on your original 
return for the year it becomes worthless, you 
can file a claim for a credit or refund due to the 
loss. You must use Form 1040X to amend your 
return for the year the security became worth-
less. You must file it within 7 years from the 
date your original return for that year had to be 
filed, or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, 
whichever is later. For more information about 
filing a claim, see Amended Returns and 
Claims for Refund in chapter 1.
CAUTION
!
TIP
Page 107 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 105

How To Figure
Gain or Loss
You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of 
property by subtracting the adjusted basis of 
the property from the amount you realize on the 
sale or trade.
Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale or 
trade is more than the adjusted basis of the 
property you transfer, the difference is a gain.
Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you 
transfer is more than the amount you realize, 
the difference is a loss.
Adjusted basis.  The adjusted basis of prop-
erty is your original cost or other original basis 
properly adjusted (increased or decreased) for 
certain items. See chapter 13 for more informa-
tion about determining the adjusted basis of 
property.
Amount realized.  The amount you realize 
from a sale or trade of property is everything 
you receive for the property minus your expen-
ses related to the sale (such as redemption 
fees, sales commissions, sales charges, or exit 
fees). Amount realized includes the money you 
receive plus the fair market value of any prop-
erty or services you receive. If you received a 
note or other debt instrument for the property, 
see How To Figure Gain or Loss  in chapter 4 of 
Pub. 550 to figure the amount realized.
If you finance the buyer's purchase of your 
property and the debt instrument doesn’t pro-
vide for adequate stated interest, the unstated 
interest that you must report as ordinary income 
will reduce the amount realized from the sale. 
For more information, see Pub. 537.
Fair market value.  Fair market value is the 
price at which the property would change hands 
between a buyer and a seller, neither being 
forced to buy or sell and both having reasona-
ble knowledge of all the relevant facts.
Example. You trade A Company stock with 
an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company 
stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which 
is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 
($10,000 − $7,000).
Debt paid off.  A debt against the property, 
or against you, that is paid off as a part of the 
transaction, or that is assumed by the buyer, 
must be included in the amount realized. This is 
true even if neither you nor the buyer is person-
ally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell 
or trade property that is subject to a nonre-
course loan, the amount you realize generally 
includes the full amount of the note assumed by 
the buyer even if the amount of the note is more 
than the fair market value of the property.
Example. You sell stock that you had 
pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000. 
Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer 
pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 
in cash. The amount realized is $28,000 
($20,000 + $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 
($28,000 − $6,000).
Payment of cash. If you trade property and 
cash for other property, the amount you realize 
is the fair market value of the property you re-
ceive. Determine your gain or loss by 
subtracting the cash you pay plus the adjusted 
basis of the property you trade in from the 
amount you realize. If the result is a positive 
number, it is a gain. If the result is a negative 
number, it is a loss.
No gain or loss.  You may have to use a basis 
for figuring gain that is different from the basis 
used for figuring loss. In this case, you may 
have neither a gain nor a loss. See Basis Other 
Than Cost in chapter 13.
Nontaxable Trades
This section discusses trades that generally 
don’t result in a taxable gain or deductible loss. 
For more information on nontaxable trades, see 
chapter 1 of Pub. 544, Sales and Other Disposi-
tions of Assets.
Like-kind exchanges. If you trade business or 
investment property for other business or in-
vestment property of a like kind, you don’t pay 
tax on any gain or deduct any loss until you sell 
or dispose of the property you receive. To be 
nontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the fol-
lowing conditions.
1. The property must be business or invest-
ment property. You must hold both the 
property you trade and the property you 
receive for productive use in your trade or 
business or for investment. Neither prop-
erty may be property used for personal 
purposes, such as your home or family 
car.
2. The property must not be held primarily for 
sale. The property you trade and the prop-
erty you receive must not be property you 
sell to customers, such as merchandise.
3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, 
notes, choses in action, certificates of trust 
or beneficial interest, or other securities or 
evidences of indebtedness or interest, in-
cluding partnership interests. However, 
see Special rules for mutual ditch, reser-
voir, or irrigation company stock in chap-
ter 4 of Pub. 550 for an exception. Also, 
you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-
rate stocks under a different rule, as dis-
cussed later.
4. There must be a trade of like property. The 
trade of real estate for real estate, or per-
sonal property for similar personal prop-
erty, is a trade of like property. The trade 
of an apartment house for a store building, 
or a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a 
trade of like property. The trade of a piece 
of machinery for a store building isn’t a 
trade of like property. Real property loca-
ted in the United States and real property 
located outside the United States aren’t 
like property. Also, personal property used 
predominantly within the United States 
and personal property used predominantly 
outside the United States aren’t like prop-
erty.
5. The property to be received must be iden-
tified in writing within 45 days after the 
date you transfer the property given up in 
the trade.
6. The property to be received must be re-
ceived by the earlier of:
a. The 180th day after the date on which 
you transfer the property given up in 
the trade; or
b. The due date, including extensions, 
for your tax return for the year in 
which the transfer of the property 
given up occurs.
If you trade property with a related party in a 
like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply. 
See Related Party Transactions , later in this 
chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Pub. 544 for 
more information on exchanges of business 
property and special rules for exchanges using 
qualified intermediaries or involving multiple 
properties.
Partly nontaxable exchange.  If you receive 
money or property that is not like-kind in addi-
tion to like-kind property, and the above six con-
ditions are met, you have a partly nontaxable 
trade. You are taxed on any gain you realize, 
but only up to the amount of the money and the 
fair market value of the property that is not 
like-kind that you receive. You can’t deduct a 
loss.
Like property and unlike property trans-
ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-
tion to the like property, you must recognize 
gain or loss on the unlike property you give up. 
The gain or loss is the difference between the 
adjusted basis of the unlike property and its fair 
market value.
Like property and money transferred.  If all 
of the above conditions (1)–(6) are met, you 
have a nontaxable trade even if you pay money 
in addition to the like property.
Basis of property received.  To figure the ba-
sis of the property received, see Nontaxable 
Exchanges in chapter 13.
How to report.  You must report the trade of 
like-kind property on Form 8824. If you figure a 
recognized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it 
on Schedule D (Form 1040), or on Form 4797, 
Sales of Business Property, whichever applies. 
See the instructions for line 22 in the Instruc-
tions for Form 8824.
For information on using Form 4797, see 
chapter 4 of Pub. 544.
Corporate stocks. The following trades of cor-
porate stocks generally don’t result in a taxable 
gain or a deductible loss.
Corporate reorganizations.  In some in-
stances, a company will give you common 
stock for preferred stock, preferred stock for 
common stock, or stock in one corporation for 
stock in another corporation. If this is a result of 
a merger, recapitalization, transfer to a control-
led corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, 
corporate acquisition, or other corporate reor-
ganization, you don’t recognize gain or loss.
Stock for stock of the same corporation. 
You can exchange common stock for common 
stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in 
the same corporation without having a recog-
nized gain or loss. This is true for a trade be-
tween two stockholders as well as a trade be-
tween a stockholder and the corporation.
Convertible stocks and bonds.  You gen-
erally will not have a recognized gain or loss if 
Page 108 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 106 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

you convert bonds into stock or preferred stock 
into common stock of the same corporation ac-
cording to a conversion privilege in the terms of 
the bond or the preferred stock certificate.
Property for stock of a controlled corpo-
ration. If you transfer property to a corporation 
solely in exchange for stock in that corporation, 
and immediately after the trade you are in con-
trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not rec-
ognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both to 
individuals and to groups who transfer property 
to a corporation. It doesn’t apply if the corpora-
tion is an investment company.
For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-
ration, you or your group of transferors must 
own, immediately after the exchange, at least 
80% of the total combined voting power of all 
classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 
80% of the outstanding shares of each class of 
nonvoting stock of the corporation.
If this provision applies to you, you may 
have to attach to your return a complete state-
ment of all facts pertinent to the exchange. For 
details, see Regulations section 1.351-3.
Additional information.  For more informa-
tion on trades of stock, see Nontaxable Trades 
in chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
Insurance policies and annuities.  You will 
not have a recognized gain or loss if the insured 
or annuitant is the same under both contracts 
and you trade:
A life insurance contract for another life in-
surance contract or for an endowment or 
annuity contract or for a qualified long-term 
care insurance contract,
An endowment contract for another en-
dowment contract that provides for regular 
payments beginning at a date no later than 
the beginning date under the old contract 
or for an annuity contract or for a qualified 
long-term insurance contract,
An annuity contract for annuity contract or 
for a qualified long-term care insurance 
contract, or
A qualified long-term care insurance con-
tract for a qualified long-term care insur-
ance contract.
You also may not have to recognize gain or 
loss on an exchange of a portion of an annuity 
contract for another annuity contract. See Rev-
enue Ruling 2003-76 and Revenue Procedure 
2011-38.
For tax years beginning after 2010, amounts 
received as an annuity for a period of 10 years 
or more, or for the lives of one or more individu-
als, under any portion of an annuity, endow-
ment, or life insurance contract, are treated as a 
separate contract and are considered partial 
annuities. A portion of an annuity, endowment, 
or life insurance contract may be annuitized, 
provided that the annuitization period is for 10 
years or more or for the lives of one or more in-
dividuals. The investment in the contract is allo-
cated between the part of the contract from 
which amounts are received as an annuity and 
the part of the contract from which amounts 
aren’t received as an annuity.
Exchanges of contracts not included in this 
list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-
ment contract, or an annuity or endowment 
contract for a life insurance contract, are taxa-
ble.
Demutualization of life insurance compa-
nies.  If you received stock in exchange for 
your equity interest as a policyholder or an an-
nuitant, you generally will not have a recognized 
gain or loss. See Demutualization of Life Insur-
ance Companies in Pub. 550.
U.S. Treasury notes or bonds. You can trade 
certain issues of U.S. Treasury obligations for 
other issues designated by the Secretary of the 
Treasury, with no gain or loss recognized on the 
trade. See Savings bonds traded in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 550 for more information.
Transfers Between 
Spouses
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a 
transfer of property from an individual to (or in 
trust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if incident to 
a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition 
rule doesn’t apply in the following situations.
The recipient spouse or former spouse is a 
nonresident alien.
Property is transferred in trust and liability 
exceeds basis. Gain must be recognized 
to the extent the amount of the liabilities 
assumed by the trust, plus any liabilities on 
the property, exceed the adjusted basis of 
the property.
For other situations, see Transfers Between 
Spouses in chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
Any transfer of property to a spouse or for-
mer spouse on which gain or loss isn’t recog-
nized is treated by the recipient as a gift and 
isn’t considered a sale or exchange. The recipi-
ent's basis in the property will be the same as 
the adjusted basis of the giver immediately be-
fore the transfer. This carryover basis rule ap-
plies whether the adjusted basis of the transfer-
red property is less than, equal to, or greater 
than either its fair market value at the time of 
transfer or any consideration paid by the recipi-
ent. This rule applies for purposes of determin-
ing loss as well as gain. Any gain recognized on 
a transfer in trust increases the basis.
A transfer of property is incident to a divorce 
if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date 
on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is 
related to the ending of the marriage.
Related Party 
Transactions
Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop-
erty between related parties.
Gain on sale or trade of depreciable prop-
erty. Your gain from the sale or trade of prop-
erty to a related party may be ordinary income, 
rather than capital gain, if the property can be 
depreciated by the party receiving it. See chap-
ter 3 of Pub. 544 for more information.
Like-kind exchanges.  Generally, if you trade 
business or investment property for other busi-
ness or investment property of a like kind, no 
gain or loss is recognized. See Like-kind ex-
changes, earlier, under Nontaxable Trades.
This rule also applies to trades of property 
between related parties, defined next under 
Losses on sales or trades of property. However, 
if either you or the related party disposes of the 
like property within 2 years after the trade, you 
both must report any gain or loss not recog-
nized on the original trade on your return filed 
for the year in which the later disposition oc-
curs. See Related Party Transactions  in chap-
ter 4 of Pub. 550 for exceptions.
Losses on sales or trades of property.  You 
can’t deduct a loss on the sale or trade of prop-
erty, other than a distribution in complete liqui-
dation of a corporation, if the transaction is di-
rectly or indirectly between you and the 
following related parties.
Members of your family. This includes only 
your brothers and sisters, half-brothers 
and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (pa-
rents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-
scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).
A partnership in which you directly or indi-
rectly own more than 50% of the capital in-
terest or the profits interest. 
A corporation in which you directly or indi-
rectly own more than 50% in value of the 
outstanding stock. (See Constructive own-
ership of stock, later.)
A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-
ganization directly or indirectly controlled, 
in any manner or by any method, by you or 
by a member of your family, whether or not 
this control is legally enforceable. 
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of 
property isn’t deductible if the transaction is di-
rectly or indirectly between the following related 
parties.
A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary and 
beneficiary, of any trust. 
Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the fi-
duciary and beneficiary of two different 
trusts, if the same person is the grantor of 
both trusts. 
A trust fiduciary and a corporation of which 
more than 50% in value of the outstanding 
stock is directly or indirectly owned by or 
for the trust, or by or for the grantor of the 
trust.
A corporation and a partnership if the 
same persons own more than 50% in value 
of the outstanding stock of the corporation 
and more than 50% of the capital interest, 
or the profits interest, in the partnership.
Two S corporations if the same persons 
own more than 50% in value of the out-
standing stock of each corporation. 
Two corporations, one of which is an S 
corporation, if the same persons own more 
than 50% in value of the outstanding stock 
of each corporation.
An executor and a beneficiary of an estate 
(except in the case of a sale or trade to sat-
isfy a pecuniary bequest). 
Two corporations that are members of the 
same controlled group. (Under certain con-
ditions, however, these losses aren’t disal-
lowed but must be deferred.) 
Page 109 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 107

Two partnerships if the same persons own, 
directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the 
capital interests or the profit interests in 
both partnerships. 
Multiple property sales or trades.  If you 
sell or trade to a related party a number of 
blocks of stock or pieces of property in a lump 
sum, you must figure the gain or loss separately 
for each block of stock or piece of property. The 
gain on each item may be taxable. However, 
you can’t deduct the loss on any item. Also, you 
can’t reduce gains from the sales of any of 
these items by losses on the sales of any of the 
other items.
Indirect transactions.  You can’t deduct 
your loss on the sale of stock through your 
broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related 
party buys the same stock you had owned. This 
doesn’t apply to a trade between related parties 
through an exchange that is purely coincidental 
and isn’t prearranged.
Constructive ownership of stock.  In de-
termining whether a person directly or indirectly 
owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-
tion, the following rules apply.
Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by 
or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust 
is considered owned proportionately by or for 
its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
Rule 2.  An individual is considered to own 
the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for 
his or her family. Family includes only brothers 
and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, 
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.
Rule 3. An individual owning, other than by 
applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is 
considered to own the stock directly or indi-
rectly owned by or for his or her partner.
Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock 
constructively owned by a person under rule 1 
is treated as actually owned by that person. But 
stock constructively owned by an individual un-
der rule 2 or rule 3 isn’t treated as owned by 
that individual for again applying either rule 2 or 
rule 3 to make another person the constructive 
owner of the stock.
Property received from a related party.  If 
you sell or trade at a gain property you acquired 
from a related party, you recognize the gain 
only to the extent it is more than the loss previ-
ously disallowed to the related party. This rule 
applies only if you are the original transferee 
and you acquired the property by purchase or 
exchange. This rule doesn’t apply if the related 
party's loss was disallowed because of the 
wash sale rules described in chapter 4 of Pub. 
550 under Wash Sales. See Example 1 below.
If you sell or trade at a loss property you ac-
quired from a related party, you can’t recognize 
the loss that wasn’t allowed to the related party. 
See Example 2 below.
Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for 
$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother 
can’t deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell 
the same stock to an unrelated party for 
$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-
able gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain minus the 
$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother).
Example 2.  If, in Example 1 , you sold the 
stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your rec-
ognized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis 
minus $6,900). You can’t deduct the loss that 
wasn't allowed to your brother.
Capital Gains
and Losses
This section discusses the tax treatment of 
gains and losses from different types of invest-
ment transactions.
Character of gain or loss.  You need to clas-
sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or 
capital gains or losses. You then need to clas-
sify your capital gains and losses as either short 
term or long term. If you have long-term gains 
and losses, you must identify your 28% rate 
gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain, 
you must also identify any unrecaptured section 
1250 gain.
The correct classification and identification 
helps you figure the limit on capital losses and 
the correct tax on capital gains. Reporting capi-
tal gains and losses is explained in chapter 16.
Capital or Ordinary
Gain or Loss
If you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss 
from a transaction, it may be either a capital 
gain or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depend-
ing on the circumstances. Generally, a sale or 
trade of a capital asset (defined next) results in 
a capital gain or loss. A sale or trade of a non-
capital asset generally results in ordinary gain 
or loss. Depending on the circumstances, a 
gain or loss on a sale or trade of property used 
in a trade or business may be treated as either 
capital or ordinary, as explained in Pub. 544. In 
some situations, part of your gain or loss may 
be a capital gain or loss and part may be an or-
dinary gain or loss.
Capital Assets and 
Noncapital Assets
For the most part, everything you own and use 
for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment 
is a capital asset. Some examples are:
Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-
count;
A house owned and used by you and your 
family;
Household furnishings;
A car used for pleasure or commuting;
Coin or stamp collections;
Gems and jewelry; and
Gold, silver, or any other metal.
Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-
cept the following noncapital assets.
1. Property held mainly for sale to customers 
or property that will physically become a 
part of the merchandise for sale to cus-
tomers. For an exception, see Capital As-
set Treatment for Self-Created Musical 
Works, later.
2. Depreciable property used in your trade or 
business, even if fully depreciated. 
3. Real property used in your trade or busi-
ness. 
4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic 
composition, a letter or memorandum, or 
similar property that is:
a. Created by your personal efforts,
b. Prepared or produced for you (in the 
case of a letter, memorandum, or sim-
ilar property), or
c. Acquired under circumstances (for 
example, by gift) entitling you to the 
basis of the person who created the 
property or for whom it was prepared 
or produced.
For an exception to this rule, see Capi-
tal Asset Treatment for Self-Created Musi-
cal Works, later.
5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in 
the ordinary course of a trade or business 
for services rendered or from the sale of 
property described in (1).
6. U.S. Government publications that you re-
ceived from the government free or for 
less than the normal sales price, or that 
you acquired under circumstances enti-
tling you to the basis of someone who re-
ceived the publications free or for less 
than the normal sales price.
7. Certain commodities derivative financial 
instruments held by commodities deriva-
tives dealers.
8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-
action is clearly identified as a hedging 
transaction before the close of the day on 
which it was acquired, originated, or en-
tered into.
9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or 
consume in the ordinary course of your 
trade or business.
Investment Property
Investment property is a capital asset. Any gain 
or loss from its sale or trade is generally a capi-
tal gain or loss.
Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.
These are capital assets except when they are 
held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss you 
have from their sale or trade generally is a capi-
tal gain or loss.
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of these 
(including stock received as a dividend) are 
capital assets except when held for sale by a 
securities dealer. However, if you own small 
business stock, see Losses on Section 1244 
(Small Business) Stock , later, and Losses on 
Small Business Investment Company Stock  in 
chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
Personal Use Property
Property held for personal use only, rather than 
for investment, is a capital asset, and you must 
report a gain from its sale as a capital gain. 
However, you can’t deduct a loss from selling 
personal use property.
Page 110 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 108 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Capital Asset Treatment for 
Self-Created Musical Works
You can elect to treat musical compositions and 
copyrights in musical works as capital assets 
when you sell or exchange them if:
Your personal efforts created the property, 
or
You acquired the property under circum-
stances (for example, by gift) entitling you 
to the basis of the person who created the 
property or for whom it was prepared or 
produced.
You must make a separate election for each 
musical composition (or copyright in a musical 
work) sold or exchanged during the tax year. 
Make the election by the due date (including ex-
tensions) of the income tax return for the tax 
year of the sale or exchange. Make the election 
on Form 8949 and your Schedule D (Form 
1040) by treating the sale or exchange as the 
sale or exchange of a capital asset, according 
to Form 8949, Schedule D (Form 1040), and 
their separate instructions.
You can revoke the election if you have IRS 
approval. To get IRS approval, you must submit 
a request for a letter ruling under the appropri-
ate IRS revenue procedure. See, for example, 
Revenue Procedure 2017-1, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2017-01_IRB/ar07.html#d0e1497. 
Alternatively, you are granted an automatic 
6-month extension from the due date of your in-
come tax return (excluding extensions) to re-
voke the election, provided you timely file your 
income tax return, and within this 6-month ex-
tension period, you file Form 1040X that treats 
the sale or exchange as the sale or exchange of 
property that isn’t a capital asset.
Discounted Debt Instruments
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption, 
or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument 
originally issued at a discount or bought at a 
discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-
plained in the following discussions.
Short-term government obligations.  Treat 
gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-
ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt ob-
ligations) as ordinary income up to your ratable 
share of the acquisition discount. This treatment 
applies to obligations with a fixed maturity date 
not more than 1 year from the date of issue. Ac-
quisition discount is the stated redemption price 
at maturity minus your basis in the obligation.
However, don’t treat these gains as income 
to the extent you previously included the dis-
count in income. See Discount on Short-Term 
Obligations in chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
Short-term nongovernment obligations.
Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-
gations as ordinary income up to your ratable 
share of original issue discount (OID). This 
treatment applies to obligations with a fixed ma-
turity date of not more than 1 year from the date 
of issue.
However, to the extent you previously inclu-
ded the discount in income, you don’t have to 
include it in income again. See Discount on 
Short-Term Obligations  in chapter 1 of Pub. 
550.
Tax-exempt state and local government 
bonds. If these bonds were originally issued at 
a discount before September 4, 1982, or you 
acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your 
part of OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure 
your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these 
bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part 
of OID.
If the bonds were issued after September 3, 
1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-
crease the adjusted basis by your part of OID to 
figure gain or loss. For more information on the 
basis of these bonds, see Discounted Debt In-
struments in chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
Any gain from market discount is usually 
taxable on disposition or redemption of tax-ex-
empt bonds. If you bought the bonds before 
May 1, 1993, the gain from market discount is 
capital gain. If you bought the bonds after April 
30, 1993, the gain is ordinary income.
You figure the market discount by subtract-
ing the price you paid for the bond from the sum 
of the original issue price of the bond and the 
amount of accumulated OID from the date of is-
sue that represented interest to any earlier hold-
ers. For more information, see Market Discount 
Bonds in chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
A loss on the sale or other disposition of a 
tax-exempt state or local government bond is 
deductible as a capital loss.
Redeemed before maturity. If a state or lo-
cal bond issued before June 9, 1980, is re-
deemed before it matures, the OID isn’t taxable 
to you.
If a state or local bond issued after June 8, 
1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of 
OID earned while you hold the bond isn’t taxa-
ble to you. However, you must report the un-
earned part of OID as a capital gain.
Example. On July 5, 2006, the date of is-
sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond 
for $800. The face amount of the bond was 
$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time 
the bond was issued, the issuer had no inten-
tion of redeeming it before it matured. The bond 
was callable at its face amount beginning 10 
years after the issue date.
The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of 
11 years (July 5, 2017) for its face amount of 
$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The 
OID earned during the time you held the bond, 
$73, isn’t taxable. The $60 accrued annual in-
terest also isn’t taxable. However, you must re-
port the unearned part of OID, $127 ($200 − 
$73 = $127) as a capital gain.
Long-term debt instruments issued after 
1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before 
July 2, 1982, if a government instrument). If 
you sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of 
these debt instruments, the part of your gain 
that isn’t more than your ratable share of the 
OID at the time of the sale or redemption is ordi-
nary income. The rest of the gain is capital gain. 
If, however, there was an intention to call the 
debt instrument before maturity, all of your gain 
that isn’t more than the entire OID is treated as 
ordinary income at the time of the sale. This 
treatment of taxable gain also applies to corpo-
rate instruments issued after May 27, 1969, un-
der a written commitment that was binding on 
May 27, 1969, and at all times thereafter.
Long-term debt instruments issued after 
May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-
ernment instrument). If you hold one of these 
debt instruments, you must include a part of 
OID in your gross income each year you own 
the instrument. Your basis in that debt instru-
ment is increased by the amount of OID that 
you have included in your gross income. See 
Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 7 for in-
formation about OID that you must report on 
your tax return.
If you sell or trade the debt instrument be-
fore maturity, your gain is a capital gain. How-
ever, if at the time the instrument was originally 
issued there was an intention to call it before its 
maturity, your gain generally is ordinary income 
to the extent of the entire OID reduced by any 
amounts of OID previously includible in your in-
come. In this case, the rest of the gain is capital 
gain.
Market discount bonds.  If the debt instru-
ment has market discount and you chose to in-
clude the discount in income as it accrued, in-
crease your basis in the debt instrument by the 
accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss 
on its disposition. If you didn’t choose to include 
the discount in income as it accrued, you must 
report gain as ordinary interest income up to the 
instrument's accrued market discount. The rest 
of the gain is capital gain. See Market Discount 
Bonds in chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
A different rule applies to market discount 
bonds issued before July 19, 1984, and pur-
chased by you before May 1, 1993. See Market 
discount bonds  under Discounted Debt Instru-
ments in chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
Retirement of debt instrument.  Any 
amount you receive on the retirement of a debt 
instrument is treated in the same way as if you 
had sold or traded that instrument.
Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation 
of an individual issued with OID after March 1, 
1984, you generally must include the OID in 
your income currently, and your gain or loss on 
its sale or retirement is generally capital gain or 
loss. An exception to this treatment applies if 
the obligation is a loan between individuals and 
all the following requirements are met.
The lender isn’t in the business of lending 
money.
The amount of the loan, plus the amount of 
any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000 or 
less.
Avoiding federal tax isn’t one of the princi-
pal purposes of the loan.
If the exception applies, or the obligation 
was issued before March 2, 1984, you don’t in-
clude the OID in your income currently. When 
you sell or redeem the obligation, the part of 
your gain that isn’t more than your accrued 
share of OID at that time is ordinary income. 
The rest of the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any 
loss on the sale or redemption is capital loss.
Deposit in Insolvent or Bankrupt 
Financial Institution
If you lose money you have on deposit in a 
bank, credit union, or other financial institution 
that becomes insolvent or bankrupt, you may 
Page 111 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 109

be able to deduct your loss in one of three 
ways.
Ordinary loss.
Casualty loss.
Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital 
loss).
For more information, see Deposit in Insolvent 
or Bankrupt Financial Institution  in chapter 4 of 
Pub. 550.
Sale of Annuity
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuity 
contract before its maturity date that is based 
on interest accumulated on the contract is ordi-
nary income.
Losses on Section 1244 (Small 
Business) Stock
You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than 
as a capital loss, your loss on the sale, trade, or 
worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report an 
ordinary loss from the sale, exchange, or worth-
lessness of section 1244 stock on Form 4797. 
However, if the total loss is more than the maxi-
mum amount that can be treated as an ordinary 
loss, also report the transaction on Form 8949. 
See the instructions for Forms 4797 and 8949.
Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capital 
gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands. 
Report the gain on Form 8949. See Losses on 
Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock  in chap-
ter 4 of Pub. 550.
For more information on Form 8949 
and Schedule D (Form 1040), see Re-
porting Capital Gains and Losses  in 
chapter 16. See also Schedule D (Form 1040), 
Form 8949, and their separate instructions.
Holding Period
If you sold or traded investment property, you 
must determine your holding period for the 
property. Your holding period determines 
whether any capital gain or loss was a 
short-term or long-term capital gain or loss.
Long-term or short-term.  If you hold invest-
ment property more than 1 year, any capital 
gain or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If 
you hold the property 1 year or less, any capital 
gain or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.
To determine how long you held the invest-
ment property, begin counting on the date after 
the day you acquired the property. The day you 
disposed of the property is part of your holding 
period.
Example. If you bought investment prop-
erty on February 3, 2016, and sold it on Febru-
ary 3, 2017, your holding period isn’t more than 
1 year and you have a short-term capital gain or 
loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2017, your 
holding period is more than 1 year and you will 
have a long-term capital gain or loss.
Securities traded on established market.
For securities traded on an established securi-
ties market, your holding period begins the day 
after the trade date you bought the securities, 
and ends on the trade date you sold them.
TIP
Don’t confuse the trade date with the 
settlement date, which is the date by 
which the stock must be delivered and 
payment must be made.
Example. You are a cash method, calendar 
year taxpayer. You sold stock on December 30, 
2017. According to the rules of the stock ex-
change, the sale was closed by delivery of the 
stock and payment of the sale price in January 
2018. Report your gain or loss on your 2017 re-
turn, even though you received the payment in 
2018. The gain or loss is long term or short term 
depending on whether you held the stock more 
than 1 year. Your holding period ended on De-
cember 30.
U.S. Treasury notes and bonds.  The holding 
period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at 
auction on the basis of yield starts the day after 
the Secretary of the Treasury, through news re-
leases, gives notification of acceptance to suc-
cessful bidders. The holding period of U.S. 
Treasury notes and bonds sold through an of-
fering on a subscription basis at a specified 
yield starts the day after the subscription is sub-
mitted.
Automatic investment service.  In determin-
ing your holding period for shares bought by the 
bank or other agent, full shares are considered 
bought first and any fractional shares are con-
sidered bought last. Your holding period starts 
on the day after the bank's purchase date. If a 
share was bought over more than one purchase 
date, your holding period for that share is a split 
holding period. A part of the share is considered 
to have been bought on each date that stock 
was bought by the bank with the proceeds of 
available funds.
Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment 
property in a trade for other investment property 
and your basis for the new property is deter-
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the 
old property, your holding period for the new 
property begins on the day following the date 
you acquired the old property.
Property received as a gift.  If you receive a 
gift of property and your basis is determined by 
the donor's adjusted basis, your holding period 
is considered to have started on the same day 
the donor's holding period started.
If your basis is determined by the fair market 
value of the property, your holding period starts 
on the day after the date of the gift.
Inherited property. Generally, if you inherited 
investment property, your capital gain or loss on 
any later disposition of that property is 
long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-
gardless of how long you actually held the prop-
erty.
Real property bought. To figure how long you 
have held real property bought under an uncon-
ditional contract, begin counting on the day af-
ter you received title to it or on the day after you 
took possession of it and assumed the burdens 
and privileges of ownership, whichever hap-
pened first. However, taking delivery or posses-
sion of real property under an option agreement 
isn’t enough to start the holding period. The 
holding period can’t start until there is an actual 
CAUTION
!
contract of sale. The holding period of the seller 
can’t end before that time.
Real property repossessed.  If you sell real 
property but keep a security interest in it, and 
then later repossess the property under the 
terms of the sales contract, your holding period 
for a later sale includes the period you held the 
property before the original sale and the period 
after the repossession. Your holding period 
doesn’t include the time between the original 
sale and the repossession. That is, it doesn’t in-
clude the period during which the first buyer 
held the property. However, the holding period 
for any improvements made by the first buyer 
begins at the time of repossession.
Stock dividends. The holding period for stock 
you received as a taxable stock dividend begins 
on the date of distribution.
The holding period for new stock you re-
ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins 
on the same day as the holding period of the 
old stock. This rule also applies to stock ac-
quired in a “spin-off,” which is a distribution of 
stock or securities in a controlled corporation.
Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding period 
for nontaxable stock rights begins on the same 
day as the holding period of the underlying 
stock. The holding period for stock acquired 
through the exercise of stock rights begins on 
the date the right was exercised.
Nonbusiness Bad Debts
If someone owes you money that you can’t col-
lect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to 
deduct the amount owed to you when you figure 
your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-
less.
Generally, nonbusiness bad debts are bad 
debts that didn’t come from operating your 
trade or business, and are deductible as 
short-term capital losses. To be deductible, 
nonbusiness bad debts must be totally worth-
less. You can’t deduct a partly worthless non-
business debt.
Genuine debt required.  A debt must be gen-
uine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is genuine 
if it arises from a debtor-creditor relationship 
based on a valid and enforceable obligation to 
repay a fixed or determinable sum of money.
Basis in bad debt required.  To deduct a bad 
debt, you must have a basis in it—that is, you 
must have already included the amount in your 
income or loaned out your cash. For example, 
you can’t claim a bad debt deduction for 
court-ordered child support not paid to you by 
your former spouse. If you are a cash method 
taxpayer (as most individuals are), you gener-
ally can’t take a bad debt deduction for unpaid 
salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends, 
and similar items.
When deductible.  You can take a bad debt 
deduction only in the year the debt becomes 
worthless. You don’t have to wait until a debt is 
due to determine whether it is worthless. A debt 
becomes worthless when there is no longer any 
chance that the amount owed will be paid.
It isn’t necessary to go to court if you can 
show that a judgment from the court would be 
uncollectible. You must only show that you have 
Page 112 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 110 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. 
Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-
dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of 
an unsecured and unpreferred debt.
How to report bad debts.  Deduct nonbusi-
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on 
Form 8949.
Make sure you report your bad debt(s) 
(and any other short-term transactions 
for which you didn’t receive a Form 
1099-B) on Form 8949, Part I, with box C 
checked.
For more information on Form 8949 
and Schedule D (Form 1040), see Re-
porting Capital Gains and Losses  in 
chapter 16. See also Schedule D (Form 1040), 
Form 8949, and their separate instructions.
For each bad debt, attach a statement to 
your return that contains:
A description of the debt, including the 
amount, and the date it became due;
The name of the debtor, and any business 
or family relationship between you and the 
debtor;
The efforts you made to collect the debt; 
and
Why you decided the debt was worthless. 
For example, you could show that the bor-
rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-
gal action to collect would probably not re-
sult in payment of any part of the debt.
Filing a claim for refund.  If you don’t de-
duct a bad debt on your original return for the 
year it becomes worthless, you can file a claim 
for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do 
this, use Form 1040X to amend your return for 
the year the debt became worthless. You must 
file it within 7 years from the date your original 
return for that year had to be filed, or 2 years 
from the date you paid the tax, whichever is 
later. For more information about filing a claim, 
see Amended Returns and Claims for Refund in 
chapter 1.
Additional information. For more information, 
see Nonbusiness Bad Debts  in Pub. 550. For 
information on business bad debts, see chap-
ter 10 of Pub. 535.
Wash Sales
You can’t deduct losses from sales or trades of 
stock or securities in a wash sale.
A wash sale occurs when you sell or trade 
stock or securities at a loss and within 30 days 
before or after the sale you:
1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-
ties,
2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-
curities in a fully taxable trade,
3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-
stantially identical stock or securities, or
4. Acquire substantially identical stock for 
your individual retirement account (IRA) or 
Roth IRA.
If your loss was disallowed because of the 
wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the 
CAUTION
!
TIP
cost of the new stock or securities (except in (4) 
above). The result is your basis in the new stock 
or securities. This adjustment postpones the 
loss deduction until the disposition of the new 
stock or securities. Your holding period for the 
new stock or securities includes the holding pe-
riod of the stock or securities sold.
For more information, see Wash Sales  in 
chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
Rollover of Gain From 
Publicly Traded Securities
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain 
gains from the sale of publicly traded securities. 
This means that if you buy certain replacement 
property and make the choice described in this 
section, you postpone part or all of your gain.
You postpone the gain by adjusting the ba-
sis of the replacement property as described in 
Basis of replacement property , later. This post-
pones your gain until the year you dispose of 
the replacement property.
You qualify to make this choice if you meet 
all the following tests.
You sell publicly traded securities at a 
gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-
ties traded on an established securities 
market.
Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.
During the 60-day period beginning on the 
date of the sale, you buy replacement 
property. This replacement property must 
be either common stock of, or a partner-
ship interest in a specialized small busi-
ness investment company (SSBIC). This is 
any partnership or corporation licensed by 
the Small Business Administration under 
section 301(d) of the Small Business In-
vestment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 
13, 1993.
Amount of gain recognized.  If you make the 
choice described in this section, you must rec-
ognize gain only up to the following amount.
The amount realized on the sale, minus
The cost of any common stock or partner-
ship interest in an SSBIC that you bought 
during the 60-day period beginning on the 
date of sale (and didn’t previously take into 
account on an earlier sale of publicly tra-
ded securities).
If this amount is less than the amount of your 
gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain, 
subject to the limit described next. If this 
amount is equal to or more than the amount of 
your gain, you must recognize the full amount of 
your gain.
Limit on gain postponed.  The amount of 
gain you can postpone each year is limited to 
the smaller of:
$50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and 
file a separate return); or
$500,000 ($250,000 if you are married and 
file a separate return), minus the amount of 
gain you postponed for all earlier years.
Basis of replacement property.  You must 
subtract the amount of postponed gain from the 
basis of your replacement property.
How to report and postpone gain.  See How 
to report and postpone gain  under Rollover of 
Gain From Publicly Traded Securities  in chap-
ter 4 of Pub. 550 for details.
15.
Selling Your 
Home
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Reminder
Home sold with undeducted points.  If you 
haven’t deducted all the points you paid to se-
cure a mortgage on your old home, you may be 
able to deduct the remaining points in the year 
of the sale. See Mortgage ending early  under 
Points in chapter 23.
Introduction
This chapter explains the tax rules that apply 
when you sell your main home. In most cases, 
your main home is the one in which you live 
most of the time.
If you sold your main home in 2017, you 
may be able to exclude from income any gain 
up to a limit of $250,000 ($500,000 on a joint re-
turn in most cases). See Excluding the Gain , 
later. Generally, if you can exclude all the gain, 
you don’t need to report the sale on your tax re-
turn.
If you have gain that is more than the exclu-
sion amount or that otherwise can't be exclu-
ded, then you have taxable gain. Report it on 
Form 8949, Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Capital Assets, and Schedule D (Form 1040). 
You may also have to complete Form 4797, 
Sales of Business Property. See Reporting the 
Sale, later.
CAUTION
!
Page 113 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 111

If you have a loss on the sale, you generally 
can’t deduct it on your return. However, you 
may need to report it. See Reporting the Sale , 
later.
The following are main topics in this chapter.
Figuring gain or loss.
Basis.
Excluding the gain.
Ownership and use tests.
Reporting the sale.
Other topics include the following.
Business use or rental of home.
Recapturing a federal mortgage subsidy.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Selling Your Home
Tax Information for Homeowners
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Form (and Instructions)
Capital Gains 
and Losses
Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to 
Discharge of Indebtedness
Recapture of Federal Mortgage 
Subsidy
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Capital Assets
Main Home
This section explains the term “main home.” 
Usually, the home you live in most of the time is 
your main home and can be a:
House,
Houseboat,
Mobile home,
Cooperative apartment, or
Condominium.
To exclude gain under the rules of this chap-
ter, in most cases, you must have owned and 
lived in the property as your main home for at 
least 2 years during the 5-year period ending on 
the date of sale.
Land. If you sell the land on which your main 
home is located, but not the house itself, you 
can’t exclude any gain you have from the sale 
of the land. However, if you sell vacant land that 
is used as part of your main home and that is 
adjacent to the land on which your home sits, 
you may be able to exclude the gain from the 
sale under certain circumstances. See Pub. 523 
for more information.
Example. You buy a piece of land and 
move your main home to it. Then you sell the 
land on which your main home was located. 
This sale isn’t considered a sale of your main 
home, and you can’t exclude any gain on the 
sale of the land.
  523 
  530 
  547
  Schedule D (Form 1040) 
  982
  8828 
  8949
More than one home.  If you have more than 
one home, you can exclude gain only from the 
sale of your main home. You must include in in-
come gain from the sale of any other home. If 
you have two homes and live in both of them, 
your main home is ordinarily the one you live in 
most of the time during the year.
Example 1.  You own two homes, one in 
New York and one in Florida. From 2013 
through 2017, you live in the New York home 
for 7 months and in the Florida residence for 5 
months of each year. In the absence of facts 
and circumstances indicating otherwise, the 
New York home is your main home. You would 
be eligible to exclude the gain from the sale of 
the New York home but you wouldn’t be eligible 
to exclude the gain on the Florida home in 
2017.
Example 2. You own a house, but you live 
in another house that you rent. The rented 
house is your main home.
Example 3.  You own two homes, one in 
Virginia and one in New Hampshire. In 2013 
and 2014, you lived in the Virginia home. In 
2015 and 2016, you lived in the New Hamp-
shire home. In 2017, you lived again in the Vir-
ginia home. Your main home in 2013, 2014, 
and 2017 is the Virginia home. Your main home 
in 2015 and 2016 is the New Hampshire home. 
You would be eligible to exclude gain from the 
sale of either home (but not both) in 2017.
Property used partly as your main home.  If 
you use only part of the property as your main 
home, the rules discussed in this publication 
apply only to the gain or loss on the sale of that 
part of the property. For details, see Business 
Use or Rental of Home, later.
Figuring Gain or Loss
To figure the gain or loss on the sale of your 
main home, you must know the selling price, 
the amount realized, and the adjusted basis. 
Subtract the adjusted basis from the amount re-
alized to get your gain or loss.
Selling price
− Selling expenses
Amount realized
Amount realized
− Adjusted basis
Gain or loss
Selling Price
The selling price is the total amount you receive 
for your home. It includes money and the fair 
market value of any other property or any other 
services you receive and all notes, mortgages, 
or other debts assumed by the buyer as part of 
the sale.
Payment by employer.  You may have to sell 
your home because of a job transfer. If your em-
ployer pays you for a loss on the sale or for your 
selling expenses, don’t include the payment as 
part of the selling price. Your employer will in-
clude it as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2, 
and you will include it in your income on Form 
1040, line 7.
Option to buy.  If you grant an option to buy 
your home and the option is exercised, add the 
amount you receive for the option to the selling 
price of your home. If the option isn’t exercised, 
you must report the amount as ordinary income 
in the year the option expires. Report this 
amount on Form 1040, line 21.
Form 1099-S.  If you received Form 1099-S, 
Proceeds From Real Estate Transactions, 
box 2 (Gross proceeds) should show the total 
amount you received for your home.
However, box 2 won’t include the fair market 
value of any services or property other than 
cash or notes you received or will receive. In-
stead, box 4 will be checked to indicate your re-
ceipt or expected receipt of these items.
Amount Realized
The amount realized is the selling price minus 
selling expenses.
Selling expenses. Selling expenses include:
Commissions;
Advertising fees;
Legal fees; and
Loan charges paid by the seller, such as 
loan placement fees or “points.”
Adjusted Basis
While you owned your home, you may have 
made adjustments (increases or decreases) to 
the basis. This adjusted basis must be deter-
mined before you can figure gain or loss on the 
sale of your home. For information on how to 
figure your home's adjusted basis, see Deter-
mining Basis, later.
Amount of Gain or Loss
To figure the amount of gain or loss, compare 
the amount realized to the adjusted basis.
Gain on sale.  If the amount realized is more 
than the adjusted basis, the difference is a gain 
and, except for any part you can exclude, in 
most cases is taxable.
Loss on sale.  If the amount realized is less 
than the adjusted basis, the difference is a loss. 
A loss on the sale of your main home can’t be 
deducted.
Jointly owned home.  If you and your spouse 
sell your jointly owned home and file a joint re-
turn, you figure your gain or loss as one tax-
payer.
Separate returns.  If you file separate re-
turns, each of you must figure your own gain or 
loss according to your ownership interest in the 
home. Your ownership interest is generally de-
termined by state law.
Joint owners not married.  If you and a 
joint owner other than your spouse sell your 
jointly owned home, each of you must figure 
your own gain or loss according to your 
Page 114 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 112 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

ownership interest in the home. Each of you ap-
plies the rules discussed in this chapter on an 
individual basis.
Dispositions Other Than 
Sales
Some special rules apply to other dispositions 
of your main home.
Foreclosure or repossession.  If your home 
was foreclosed on or repossessed, you have a 
disposition. See Pub. 4681, Canceled Debts, 
Foreclosures, Repossessions, and Abandon-
ments, to determine if you have ordinary in-
come, gain, or loss.
Abandonment. If you abandon your home, 
see Pub. 4681 to determine if you have ordinary 
income, gain, or loss.
Trading (exchanging) homes.  If you trade 
your old home for another home, treat the trade 
as a sale and a purchase.
Example. You owned and lived in a home 
with an adjusted basis of $41,000. A real estate 
dealer accepted your old home as a trade-in 
and allowed you $50,000 toward a new home 
priced at $80,000. This is treated as a sale of 
your old home for $50,000 with a gain of $9,000 
($50,000 – $41,000).
If the dealer had allowed you $27,000 and 
assumed your unpaid mortgage of $23,000 on 
your old home, your sales price would still be 
$50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in allowed plus the 
$23,000 mortgage assumed).
Transfer to spouse. If you transfer your home 
to your spouse or you transfer it to your former 
spouse incident to your divorce, in most cases, 
you have no gain or loss. This is true even if you 
receive cash or other consideration for the 
home. As a result, the rules in this chapter don’t 
apply.
More information.  If you need more infor-
mation, see Pub. 523 and Property Settlements 
in Pub. 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals.
Involuntary conversion. You have a disposi-
tion when your home is destroyed or con-
demned and you receive other property or 
money in payment, such as insurance or a con-
demnation award. This is treated as a sale and 
you may be able to exclude all or part of any 
gain from the destruction or condemnation of 
your home, as explained later under Special Sit-
uations.
Determining Basis
You need to know your basis in your home to 
figure any gain or loss when you sell it. Your ba-
sis in your home is determined by how you got 
the home. Generally, your basis is its cost if you 
bought it or built it. If you got it in some other 
way (inheritance, gift, etc.), your basis is gener-
ally either its fair market value when you re-
ceived it or the adjusted basis of the previous 
owner.
While you owned your home, you may have 
made adjustments (increases or decreases) to 
your home's basis. The result of these adjust-
ments is your home's adjusted basis, which is 
used to figure gain or loss on the sale of your 
home. See Adjusted Basis, later.
You can find more information on basis and 
adjusted basis in chapter 13 of this publication 
and in Pub. 523.
Cost as Basis
The cost of property is the amount you paid for 
it in cash, debt obligations, other property, or 
services.
Purchase. If you bought your home, your basis 
is its cost to you. This includes the purchase 
price and certain settlement or closing costs. In 
most cases, your purchase price includes your 
down payment and any debt, such as a first or 
second mortgage or notes you gave the seller 
in payment for the home. If you build, or con-
tract to build, a new home, your purchase price 
can include costs of construction, as discussed 
in Pub. 523.
Settlement fees or closing costs.  When you 
bought your home, you may have paid settle-
ment fees or closing costs in addition to the 
contract price of the property. You can include 
in your basis some of the settlement fees and 
closing costs you paid for buying the home, but 
not the fees and costs for getting a mortgage 
loan. A fee paid for buying the home is any fee 
you would have had to pay even if you paid 
cash for the home (that is, without the need for 
financing).
Chapter 13 lists some of the settlement fees 
and closing costs that you can include in the ba-
sis of property, including your home. It also lists 
some settlement costs that can’t be included in 
basis.
Also see Pub. 523 for additional items and a 
discussion of basis other than cost.
Adjusted Basis
Adjusted basis is your cost or other basis in-
creased or decreased by certain amounts. To 
figure your adjusted basis, see Pub. 523.
If you are selling a home in which you 
acquired an interest from a decedent 
who died in 2010, see Pub. 4895, Tax 
Treatment of Property Acquired From a Dece-
dent Dying in 2010, to determine your basis.
Increases to basis.  These include the follow-
ing.
Additions and other improvements that 
have a useful life of more than 1 year.
Special assessments for local improve-
ments.
Amounts you spent after a casualty to re-
store damaged property.
Improvements. These add to the value of 
your home, prolong its useful life, or adapt it to 
new uses. You add the cost of additions and 
other improvements to the basis of your prop-
erty.
For example, putting a recreation room or 
another bathroom in your unfinished basement, 
putting up a new fence, putting in new plumbing 
or wiring, putting on a new roof, or paving your 
CAUTION
!
unpaved driveway is an improvement. An addi-
tion to your house, such as a new deck, a sun 
room, or a new garage, is also an improvement.
Repairs. These maintain your home in good 
condition but don’t add to its value or prolong its 
life. You don’t add their cost to the basis of your 
property.
Examples of repairs include repainting your 
house inside or outside, fixing your gutters or 
floors, repairing leaks or plastering, and replac-
ing broken window panes.
Decreases to basis. These include the follow-
ing.
Discharge of qualified principal residence 
indebtedness that was excluded from in-
come before January 1, 2017.
Some or all of the cancellation of debt in-
come that was excluded due to your bank-
ruptcy or insolvency. For details, see Pub. 
4681.
Gain you postponed from the sale of a pre-
vious home before May 7, 1997.
Deductible casualty losses.
Insurance payments you received or ex-
pect to receive for casualty losses.
Payments you received for granting an 
easement or right-of-way.
Depreciation allowed or allowable if you 
used your home for business or rental pur-
poses.
Energy-related credits allowed for expendi-
tures made on the residence. (Reduce the 
increase in basis otherwise allowable for 
expenditures on the residence by the 
amount of credit allowed for those expen-
ditures.)
Adoption credit you claimed for improve-
ments added to the basis of your home.
Nontaxable payments from an adoption 
assistance program of your employer you 
used for improvements you added to the 
basis of your home.
Energy conservation subsidy excluded 
from your gross income because you re-
ceived it (directly or indirectly) from a pub-
lic utility after 1992 to buy or install any en-
ergy conservation measure. An energy 
conservation measure is an installation or 
modification primarily designed either to 
reduce consumption of electricity or natural 
gas or to improve the management of en-
ergy demand for a home.
District of Columbia first-time homebuyer 
credit (allowed on the purchase of a princi-
pal residence in the District of Columbia 
beginning on August 5, 1997, and before 
January 1, 2012).
General sales taxes (beginning in 2004) 
claimed as an itemized deduction on 
Schedule A (Form 1040) that were im-
posed on the purchase of personal prop-
erty, such as a houseboat used as your 
home or a mobile home.
Recordkeeping. You should keep re-
cords to prove your home's adjusted 
basis. Ordinarily, you must keep re-
cords for 3 years after the due date for filing 
RECORDS
Page 115 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 113

your return for the tax year in which you sold 
your home. But if you sold a home before May 
7, 1997, and postponed tax on any gain, the ba-
sis of that home affects the basis of the new 
home you bought. Keep records proving the ba-
sis of both homes as long as they are needed 
for tax purposes.
The records you should keep include:
Proof of the home's purchase price and 
purchase expenses;
Receipts and other records for all improve-
ments, additions, and other items that af-
fect the home's adjusted basis;
Any worksheets or other computations you 
used to figure the adjusted basis of the 
home you sold, the gain or loss on the 
sale; the exclusion, and the taxable gain;
Any Form 982 you filed to report any dis-
charge of qualified principal residence in-
debtedness;
Any Form 2119, Sale of Your Home, you 
filed to postpone gain from the sale of a 
previous home before May 7, 1997; and
Any worksheets you used to prepare Form 
2119, such as the Adjusted Basis of Home 
Sold Worksheet or the Capital Improve-
ments Worksheet from the Form 2119 in-
structions, or other source of computa-
tions.
Excluding the Gain
You may qualify to exclude from your income all 
or part of any gain from the sale of your main 
home. This means that, if you qualify, you won’t 
have to pay tax on the gain up to the limit de-
scribed under Maximum Exclusion , next. To 
qualify, you must meet the ownership and use 
tests described later.
You can choose not to take the exclusion by 
including the gain from the sale in your gross in-
come on your tax return for the year of the sale.
See Pub. 523 to figure the amount of your 
exclusion and your taxable gain, if any.
If you have any taxable gain from the 
sale of your home, you may have to in-
crease your withholding or make esti-
mated tax payments. See Pub. 505, Tax With-
holding and Estimated Tax.
Maximum Exclusion
You can exclude up to $250,000 of the gain 
(other than gain allocated to periods of nonqua-
lified use) on the sale of your main home if all of 
the following are true.
You meet the ownership test.
You meet the use test.
During the 2-year period ending on the 
date of the sale, you didn’t exclude gain 
from the sale of another home.
For details on gain allocated to periods of 
nonqualified use, see Periods of nonqualified 
use, later.
You may be able to exclude up to $500,000 
of the gain (other than gain allocated to periods 
of nonqualified use) on the sale of your main 
CAUTION
!
home if you are married, file a joint return, and 
meet the requirements listed in the discussion 
of the special rules for joint returns, later, under 
Married Persons.
Ownership and Use Tests
To claim the exclusion, you must meet the own-
ership and use tests. This means that during 
the 5-year period ending on the date of the sale, 
you must have:
Owned the home for at least 2 years (the 
ownership test), and
Lived in the home as your main home for at 
least 2 years (the use test).
Exception. If you owned and lived in the prop-
erty as your main home for less than 2 years, 
you can still claim an exclusion in some cases. 
However, the maximum amount you may be 
able to exclude will be reduced. See Reduced 
Maximum Exclusion, later.
Example 1—Home owned and occupied 
for at least 2 years.  Mya bought and moved 
into her main home in September 2015. She 
sold the home at a gain in October 2017. During 
the 5-year period ending on the date of sale in 
October 2017, she owned and lived in the home 
for more than 2 years. She meets the ownership 
and use tests.
Example 2—Ownership test met but use 
test not met. Ayden bought a home, lived in it 
for 6 months, moved out, and never occupied 
the home again. He later sold the home for a 
gain. He owned the home during the entire 
5-year period ending on the date of sale. He 
meets the ownership test but not the use test. 
He can’t exclude any part of his gain on the sale 
unless he qualified for a reduced maximum ex-
clusion (explained later).
Period of Ownership and Use
The required 2 years of ownership and use dur-
ing the 5-year period ending on the date of the 
sale don’t have to be continuous nor do they 
both have to occur at the same time.
You meet the tests if you can show that you 
owned and lived in the property as your main 
home for either 24 full months or 730 days (365 
× 2) during the 5-year period ending on the date 
of sale.
Temporary absence. Short temporary absen-
ces for vacations or other seasonal absences, 
even if you rent out the property during the ab-
sences, are counted as periods of use. The fol-
lowing examples assume that the reduced max-
imum exclusion (discussed later) doesn’t apply 
to the sales.
Example 1.  David Johnson, who is single, 
bought and moved into his home on February 1, 
2015. Each year during 2015 and 2016, David 
left his home for a 2-month summer vacation. 
David sold the house on March 1, 2017. Al-
though the total time David used his home is 
less than 2 years (21 months), he meets the re-
quirement and may exclude gain. The 2-month 
vacations are short temporary absences and 
are counted as periods of use in determining 
whether David used the home for the required 2 
years.
Example 2.  Professor Paul Beard, who is 
single, bought and moved into a house on Au-
gust 19, 2014. He lived in it as his main home 
continuously until January 5, 2016, when he 
went abroad for a 1-year sabbatical leave. On 
February 5, 2017, 1 month after returning from 
the leave, Paul sold the house at a gain. Be-
cause his leave wasn’t a short temporary ab-
sence, he can’t include the period of leave to 
meet the 2-year use test. He can’t exclude any 
part of his gain, because he didn’t use the resi-
dence for the required 2 years.
Ownership and use tests met at different 
times. You can meet the ownership and use 
tests during different 2-year periods. However, 
you must meet both tests during the 5-year pe-
riod ending on the date of the sale.
Example.  Beginning in 2006, Helen Jones 
lived in a rented apartment. The apartment 
building was later converted to condominiums, 
and she bought her same apartment on De-
cember 2, 2014. In 2015, Helen became ill and 
on April 14 of that year she moved to her 
daughter's home. On July 7, 2017, while still liv-
ing in her daughter's home, she sold her condo-
minium.
Helen can exclude gain on the sale of her 
condominium because she met the ownership 
and use tests during the 5-year period from July 
8, 2012, to July 7, 2017, the date she sold the 
condominium. She owned her condominium 
from December 2, 2014, to July 7, 2017 (more 
than 2 years). She lived in the property from 
July 8, 2012 (the beginning of the 5-year pe-
riod), to April 14, 2015 (more than 2 years).
The time Helen lived in her daughter's home 
during the 5-year period can be counted toward 
her period of ownership, and the time she lived 
in her rented apartment during the 5-year period 
can be counted toward her period of use.
Cooperative apartment. If you sold stock as a 
tenant-stockholder in a cooperative housing 
corporation, the ownership and use tests are 
met if, during the 5-year period ending on the 
date of sale, you:
Owned the stock for at least 2 years, and
Lived in the house or apartment that the 
stock entitles you to occupy as your main 
home for at least 2 years.
Exceptions to Ownership and Use 
Tests
The following sections contain exceptions to the 
ownership and use tests for certain taxpayers.
Exception for individuals with a disability. 
There is an exception to the use test if:
You become physically or mentally unable 
to care for yourself, and
You owned and lived in your home as your 
main home for a total of at least 1 year dur-
ing the 5-year period before the sale of 
your home.
Under this exception, you are considered to live 
in your home during any time within the 5-year 
period that you own the home and live in a 
Page 116 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 114 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

facility (including a nursing home) licensed by a 
state or political subdivision to care for persons 
in your condition.
If you meet this exception to the use test, 
you still have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year owner-
ship test to claim the exclusion.
Previous home destroyed or condemned.
For the ownership and use tests, you add the 
time you owned and lived in a previous home 
that was destroyed or condemned to the time 
you owned and lived in the replacement home 
on whose sale you wish to exclude gain. This 
rule applies if any part of the basis of the home 
you sold depended on the basis of the de-
stroyed or condemned home. Otherwise, you 
must have owned and lived in the same home 
for 2 of the 5 years before the sale to qualify for 
the exclusion.
Members of the uniformed services or For-
eign Service, employees of the intelligence 
community, or employees or volunteers of 
the Peace Corps. You can choose to have the 
5-year test period for ownership and use sus-
pended during any period you or your spouse 
serve on “qualified official extended duty” as a 
member of the uniformed services or Foreign 
Service of the United States, or as an employee 
of the intelligence community. You can choose 
to have the 5-year test period for ownership and 
use suspended during any period you or your 
spouse serve outside the United States either 
as an employee of the Peace Corps on “quali-
fied official extended duty” or as an enrolled vol-
unteer or volunteer leader of the Peace Corps. 
This means that you may be able to meet the 
2-year use test even if, because of your service, 
you didn’t actually live in your home for at least 
the required 2 years during the 5-year period 
ending on the date of sale.
If this helps you qualify to exclude gain, you 
can choose to have the 5-year test period sus-
pended by filing a return for the year of sale that 
doesn’t include the gain.
For more information about the suspension 
of the 5-year test period, see Service, Intelli-
gence, and Peace Corps Personnel  in Pub. 
523.
Married Persons
If you and your spouse file a joint return for the 
year of sale and one spouse meets the owner-
ship and use tests, you can exclude up to 
$250,000 of the gain. (But see Special rules for 
joint returns next.)
Special rules for joint returns.  You can ex-
clude up to $500,000 of the gain on the sale of 
your main home if all of the following are true.
You are married and file a joint return for 
the year.
Either you or your spouse meets the own-
ership test.
Both you and your spouse meet the use 
test.
During the 2-year period ending on the 
date of the sale, neither you nor your 
spouse excluded gain from the sale of an-
other home.
If either spouse doesn’t satisfy all these require-
ments, the maximum exclusion that can be 
claimed by the couple is the total of the maxi-
mum exclusions that each spouse would qualify 
for if not married and the amounts were figured 
separately. For this purpose, each spouse is 
treated as owning the property during the pe-
riod that either spouse owned the property.
Example 1—One spouse sells a home. 
Emily sells her home in June 2017 for a gain of 
$300,000. She marries Jamie later in the year. 
She meets the ownership and use tests, but Ja-
mie doesn’t. Emily can exclude up to $250,000 
of gain on a separate or joint return for 2017. 
The $500,000 maximum exclusion for certain 
joint returns doesn’t apply because Jamie 
doesn’t meet the use test.
Example 2—Each spouse sells a home. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1, except 
that Jamie also sells a home in 2017 for a gain 
of $200,000 before he marries Emily. He meets 
the ownership and use tests on his home, but 
Emily doesn’t. Emily can exclude $250,000 of 
gain and Jamie can exclude $200,000 of gain 
on the respective sales of their individual 
homes. However, Emily can’t use Jamie's un-
used exclusion to exclude more than $250,000 
of gain. Therefore, Emily and Jamie must rec-
ognize $50,000 of gain on the sale of Emily's 
home. The $500,000 maximum exclusion for 
certain joint returns doesn’t apply because Em-
ily and Jamie don’t both meet the use test for 
the same home.
Sale of main home by surviving spouse.  If 
your spouse died and you didn’t remarry before 
the date of sale, you are considered to have 
owned and lived in the property as your main 
home during any period of time when your 
spouse owned and lived in it as a main home.
If you meet all of the following requirements, 
you may qualify to exclude up to $500,000 of 
any gain from the sale or exchange of your 
main home.
The sale or exchange took place after 
2007.
The sale or exchange took place no more 
than 2 years after the date of death of your 
spouse.
You haven’t remarried.
You and your spouse met the use test at 
the time of your spouse's death.
You or your spouse met the ownership test 
at the time of your spouse's death.
Neither you nor your spouse excluded gain 
from the sale of another home during the 
last 2 years.
Example.  Harry owned and used a house 
as his main home since 2013. Harry and Wilma 
married on July 1, 2017, and from that date they 
use Harry's house as their main home. Harry 
died on August 15, 2017, and Wilma inherited 
the property. Wilma sold the property on Sep-
tember 2, 2017, at which time she hadn’t remar-
ried. Although Wilma owned and used the 
house for less than 2 years, Wilma is consid-
ered to have satisfied the ownership and use 
tests because her period of ownership and use 
includes the period that Harry owned and used 
the property before death.
Home transferred from spouse. If your home 
was transferred to you by your spouse (or for-
mer spouse if the transfer was incident to di-
vorce), you are considered to have owned it 
during any period of time when your spouse 
owned it.
Use of home after divorce.  You are consid-
ered to have used property as your main home 
during any period when:
You owned it, and
Your spouse or former spouse is allowed 
to live in it under a divorce or separation in-
strument and uses it as his or her main 
home.
Reduced Maximum 
Exclusion
If you fail to meet the requirements to qualify for 
the $250,000 or $500,000 exclusion, you may 
still qualify for a reduced exclusion. This applies 
to those who:
Fail to meet the ownership and use tests, 
or
Have used the exclusion within 2 years of 
selling their current home.
In both cases, to qualify for a reduced exclu-
sion, the sale of your main home must be due to 
one of the following reasons.
A change in place of employment.
Health.
Unforeseen circumstances.
Unforeseen circumstances. The sale of your 
main home is because of an unforeseen cir-
cumstance if your primary reason for the sale is 
the occurrence of an event that you couldn’t 
reasonably have anticipated before buying and 
occupying your main home.
See Pub. 523 for more information.
Business Use or
Rental of Home
You may be able to exclude gain from the sale 
of a home you have used for business or to pro-
duce rental income. But you must meet the 
ownership and use tests.
Periods of nonqualified use.  In most cases, 
gain from the sale or exchange of your main 
home won’t qualify for the exclusion to the ex-
tent that the gains are allocated to periods of 
nonqualified use. Nonqualified use is any pe-
riod after 2008 during which neither you nor 
your spouse (or your former spouse) used the 
property as a main home with the following ex-
ceptions.
Exceptions. A period of nonqualified use 
doesn’t include:
1. Any portion of the 5-year period ending on 
the date of the sale or exchange after the 
last date you (or your spouse) use the 
property as a main home;
2. Any period (not to exceed an aggregate 
period of 10 years) during which you (or 
your spouse) are serving on qualified 
official extended duty:
Page 117 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 115

a. As a member of the uniformed serv-
ices,
b. As a member of the Foreign Service 
of the United States, or
c. As an employee of the intelligence 
community; and
3. Any other period of temporary absence 
(not to exceed an aggregate period of 2 
years) due to change of employment, 
health conditions, or such other unfore-
seen circumstances as may be specified 
by the IRS.
The gain resulting from the sale of the prop-
erty is allocated between qualified and nonqua-
lified use periods based on the amount of time 
the property was held for qualified and nonqua-
lified use. Gain from the sale or exchange of a 
main home allocable to periods of qualified use 
will continue to qualify for the exclusion for the 
sale of your main home. Gain from the sale or 
exchange of property allocable to nonqualified 
use won’t qualify for the exclusion.
Calculation. To figure the portion of the gain 
allocated to the period of nonqualified use, mul-
tiply the gain by the following fraction.
Total nonqualified use during the period of 
ownership after 2008
Total period of ownership
Example 1. On May 24, 2011, Amy, who is 
single for all years in this example, bought a 
house. She moved in on that date and lived in it 
until May 31, 2013, when she moved out of the 
house and put it up for rent. The house was ren-
ted from June 1, 2013, to March 31, 2015. Amy 
claimed depreciation deductions in 2013 
through 2015 totaling $10,000. Amy moved 
back into the house on April 1, 2015, and lived 
there until she sold it on January 28, 2017, for a 
gain of $200,000. During the 5-year period end-
ing on the date of the sale (January 29, 2012–
January 28, 2017), Amy owned and lived in the 
house for more than 2 years as shown in the fol-
lowing table.
Five-Year
Period
Used as
 Home
Used as
 Rental
 1/29/12 –
5/31/13 16 months
 6/1/13 –
3/31/15  22 months
 4/1/15 –
1/28/17 21 months  
37 months 22 months
Next, Amy must figure how much of her gain is 
allocated to nonqualified use and how much is 
allocated to qualified use. During the period 
Amy owned the house (2,076 days), her period 
of nonqualified use was 669 days. Amy divides 
669 by 2,076 and obtains a decimal (rounded to 
at least three decimal places) of 0.322. To fig-
ure her gain attributable to the period of non-
qualified use, she multiplies $190,000 (the gain 
not attributable to the $10,000 depreciation de-
duction) by 0.322. Because the gain attributable 
to periods of nonqualified use is $61,180, Amy 
can exclude $128,820 of her gain.
See the worksheet for Taxable Gain on Sale 
of Home—Completed Example 1 for Amy, later, 
for how to figure Amy's taxable gain and exclu-
sion.
Example 2.  William owned and used a 
house as his main home from 2011 through 
2014. On January 1, 2015, he moved to another 
state. He rented his house from that date until 
April 29, 2017, when he sold it. During the 
5-year period ending on the date of sale (April 
30, 2012–April 29, 2017), William owned and 
lived in the house for more than 2 years. He 
must report the sale on Form 4797 because it 
was rental property at the time of sale. Because 
the period of nonqualified use doesn’t include 
any part of the 5-year period after the last date 
William lived in the house, he has no period of 
nonqualified use. Because he met the owner-
ship and use tests, he can exclude gain up to 
$250,000. However, he can’t exclude the part of 
the gain equal to the depreciation he claimed or 
could have claimed for renting the house, as ex-
plained next.
Depreciation after May 6, 1997.  If you were 
entitled to take depreciation deductions be-
cause you used your home for business purpo-
ses or as rental property, you can’t exclude the 
part of your gain equal to any depreciation al-
lowed or allowable as a deduction for periods 
after May 6, 1997. If you can show by adequate 
records or other evidence that the depreciation 
allowed was less than the amount allowable, 
then you may limit the amount of gain recog-
nized to the depreciation allowed. See Pub. 544 
for more information.
Property used partly for business or rental. 
If you used property partly as a home and partly 
for business or to produce rental income, see 
Pub. 523.
Taxable Gain on Sale of Home—
Completed Example 1 for Amy
Part 1. Gain or (Loss) on Sale
1. Selling price of home ........................................................................ 1.  
2. Selling expenses (including commissions, advertising and legal fees, and seller-paid loan charges) ....... 2.  
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1. This is the amount realized ............................................. 3.  
4. Adjusted basis of home sold. See Pub. 523 ..................................................... 4.  
5. Gain or (loss) on the sale. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If this is a loss, stop here ........................ 5. 200,000
Part 2. Exclusion and Taxable Gain
6. Enter any depreciation allowed or allowable on the property for periods after May 6, 1997. If none, 
enter -0- ................................................................................... 6. 10,000
7. Subtract line 6 from line 5. If the result is less than zero, enter -0- .................................... 7. 190,000
8. Aggregate number of days of nonqualified use after 2008. If none, enter -0-.
If line 8 is equal to zero, skip to line 12 and enter the amount from line 7 on line 12 ...................... 8. 669
9. Number of days taxpayer owned the property .................................................... 9. 2,076
10. Divide the amount on line 8 by the amount on line 9. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at least 3 
places). Don’t enter an amount greater than 1.000 ............................................... 10. 0.322
11. Gain allocated to nonqualified use. (Line 7 multiplied by line 10) ..................................... 11. 61,180
12. Gain eligible for exclusion. Subtract line 11 from line 7 ............................................. 12. 128,820
13. If you qualify to exclude gain on the sale, enter your maximum exclusion.
If you qualify for a reduced maximum exclusion, enter your reduced maximum exclusion. 
If you don’t qualify to exclude gain, enter -0-. See Pub. 523 ......................................... 13. 250,000
14. Exclusion. Enter the smaller of line 12 or line 13 ................................................. 14. 128,820
15. Taxable gain. Subtract line 14 from line 5.
If the amount on line 6 is more than zero, complete line 16 ..................................... 15. 71,180
16. Enter the smaller of line 6 or line 15. Enter this amount on line 12 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain 
Worksheet in the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040) ......................................... 16. 10,000
Worksheet.
Page 118 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 116 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Reporting the Sale
Don’t report the 2017 sale of your main home 
on your tax return unless:
You have a gain and don’t qualify to ex-
clude all of it,
You have a gain and choose not to ex-
clude it, or
You received Form 1099-S.
If any of these conditions apply, report the 
entire gain or loss. For details on how to report 
the gain or loss, see the Instructions for Sched-
ule D (Form 1040) and the Instructions for Form 
8949.
If you used the home for business or to pro-
duce rental income, you may have to use Form 
4797 to report the sale of the business or rental 
part (or the sale of the entire property if used 
entirely for business or rental). See Pub. 523 
and the Instructions for Form 4797 for additional 
information.
Installment sale. Some sales are made under 
arrangements that provide for part or all of the 
selling price to be paid in a later year. These 
sales are called “installment sales.” If you fi-
nance the buyer's purchase of your home your-
self instead of having the buyer get a loan or 
mortgage from a bank, you probably have an in-
stallment sale. You may be able to report the 
part of the gain you can’t exclude on the install-
ment basis.
Use Form 6252, Installment Sale Income, to 
report the sale. Enter your exclusion on line 15 
of Form 6252.
Seller-financed mortgage.  If you sell your 
home and hold a note, mortgage, or other finan-
cial agreement, the payments you receive in 
most cases consist of both interest and princi-
pal. You must separately report as interest in-
come the interest you receive as part of each 
payment. If the buyer of your home uses the 
property as a main or second home, you must 
also report the name, address, and social se-
curity number (SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of 
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040). The buyer 
must give you his or her SSN, and you must 
give the buyer your SSN. Failure to meet these 
requirements may result in a $50 penalty for 
each failure. If either you or the buyer doesn’t 
have and isn’t eligible to get an SSN, see Social 
Security Number (SSN) in chapter 1.
More information. For more information on 
installment sales, see Pub. 537, Installment 
Sales.
Special Situations
The situations that follow may affect your exclu-
sion.
Sale of home acquired in a like-kind ex-
change. You can’t claim the exclusion if:
1. (a) You acquired your home in a like-kind 
exchange (also known as a section 1031 
exchange), or (b) your basis in your home 
is determined by reference to a previous 
owner's basis, and that previous owner ac-
quired the property in a like-kind exchange 
(for example, the owner acquired the 
home and then gave it to you as a gift); 
and
2. You sold the home within 5-years of the 
date your home was acquired in the 
like-kind exchange.
Gain from a like-kind exchange isn’t taxable at 
the time of the exchange. This means that gain 
won’t be taxed until you sell or otherwise dis-
pose of the property you receive. To defer gain 
from a like-kind exchange, you must have ex-
changed business or investment property for 
business or investment property of a like kind. 
For more information about like-kind ex-
changes, see Pub. 544, Sales and Other Dispo-
sitions of Assets.
Home relinquished in a like-kind exchange. 
If you use your main home partly for business or 
rental purposes and then exchange the home 
for another property, see Pub. 523.
Expatriates. You can’t claim the exclusion if 
the expatriation tax applies to you. The expatri-
ation tax applies to certain U.S. citizens who 
have renounced their citizenship (and to certain 
long-term residents who have ended their resi-
dency). For more information about the expatri-
ation tax, see Expatriation Tax  in chapter 4 of 
Pub. 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Home destroyed or condemned.  If your 
home was destroyed or condemned, any gain 
(for example, because of insurance proceeds 
you received) qualifies for the exclusion.
Any part of the gain that can’t be excluded 
(because it’s more than the maximum exclu-
sion) can be postponed under the rules ex-
plained in:
Pub. 547, in the case of a home that was 
destroyed; or
Pub. 544, chapter 1, in the case of a home 
that was condemned.
Sale of remainder interest.  Subject to the 
other rules in this chapter, you can choose to 
exclude gain from the sale of a remainder inter-
est in your home. If you make this choice, you 
can’t choose to exclude gain from your sale of 
any other interest in the home that you sell sep-
arately.
Exception for sales to related persons.
You can’t exclude gain from the sale of a re-
mainder interest in your home to a related per-
son. Related persons include your brothers, sis-
ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, 
ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and lin-
eal descendants (children, grandchildren, etc.). 
Related persons also include certain corpora-
tions, partnerships, trusts, and exempt organi-
zations.
Recapturing (Paying 
Back) a Federal 
Mortgage Subsidy
If you financed your home under a federally 
subsidized program (loans from tax-exempt 
qualified mortgage bonds or loans with mort-
gage credit certificates), you may have to re-
capture all or part of the benefit you received 
from that program when you sell or otherwise 
dispose of your home. You recapture the bene-
fit by increasing your federal income tax for the 
year of the sale. You may have to pay this re-
capture tax even if you can exclude your gain 
from income under the rules discussed earlier; 
that exclusion doesn’t affect the recapture tax.
Loans subject to recapture rules.  The re-
capture applies to loans that:
1. Came from the proceeds of qualified mort-
gage bonds, or
2. Were based on mortgage credit certifi-
cates.
The recapture also applies to assumptions of 
these loans.
When recapture applies.  Recapture of the 
federal mortgage subsidy applies only if you 
meet both of the following conditions.
You sell or otherwise dispose of your home 
at a gain within the first 9 years after the 
date you close your mortgage loan.
Your income for the year of disposition is 
more than that year's adjusted qualifying 
income for your family size for that year 
(related to the income requirements a per-
son must meet to qualify for the federally 
subsidized program).
When recapture doesn’t apply.  Recapture 
doesn’t apply in any of the following situations.
Your mortgage loan was a qualified home 
improvement loan (QHIL) of not more than 
$15,000 used for alterations, repairs, and 
improvements that protect or improve the 
basic livability or energy efficiency of your 
home.
Your mortgage loan was a QHIL of not 
more than $150,000 in the case of a QHIL 
used to repair damage from Hurricane Ka-
trina to homes in the hurricane disaster 
area; a QHIL funded by a qualified mort-
gage bond that is a qualified Gulf Opportu-
nity Zone Bond; or a QHIL for an 
owner-occupied home in the Gulf Opportu-
nity Zone (GO Zone), Rita GO Zone, or 
Wilma GO Zone. For more information, 
see Pub. 4492, Information for Taxpayers 
Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and 
Wilma. Also see Pub. 4492-B, Information 
for Affected Taxpayers in the Midwestern 
Disaster Areas.
The home is disposed of as a result of your 
death.
You dispose of the home more than 9 
years after the date you closed your mort-
gage loan.
You transfer the home to your spouse, or 
to your former spouse incident to a di-
vorce, where no gain is included in your in-
come.
You dispose of the home at a loss.
Your home is destroyed by a casualty, and 
you replace it on its original site within 2 
years after the end of the tax year when 
the destruction happened. The replace-
ment period is extended for main homes 
destroyed in a federally declared disaster 
area, a Midwestern disaster area, the Kan-
sas disaster area, and the Hurricane 
Page 119 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 117

Katrina disaster area. For more informa-
tion, see Replacement Period in Pub. 547.
You refinance your mortgage loan (unless 
you later meet the conditions listed previ-
ously under When recapture applies, ear-
lier).
Notice of amounts. At or near the time of set-
tlement of your mortgage loan, you should re-
ceive a notice that provides the federally subsi-
dized amount and other information you will 
need to figure your recapture tax.
How to figure and report the recapture. The 
recapture tax is figured on Form 8828. If you 
sell your home and your mortgage is subject to 
recapture rules, you must file Form 8828 even if 
you don’t owe a recapture tax. Attach Form 
8828 to your Form 1040. For more information, 
see Form 8828 and its instructions.
16.
Reporting Gains 
and Losses 
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as California 
wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted, 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
This chapter discusses how to report capital 
gains and losses from sales, exchanges, and 
other dispositions of investment property on 
Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040). The 
discussion includes the following topics.
How to report short-term gains and losses.
How to report long-term gains and losses.
How to figure capital loss carryovers.
How to figure your tax on a net capital 
gain.
If you sell or otherwise dispose of property 
used in a trade or business or for the production 
CAUTION
!
of income, see Pub. 544, Sales and Other Dis-
positions of Assets, before completing Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Installment Sales
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
Investment Income and Expenses
Form (and Instructions)
Capital Gains 
and Losses
Sales of Business Property
Installment Sale Income
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Capital Assets
Reporting Capital 
Gains and Losses 
Generally, report capital gains and losses on 
Form 8949. Complete Form 8949 before you 
complete line 1b, 2, 3, 8b, 9, or 10 of Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).
Use Form 8949 to report:
The sale or exchange of a capital asset not 
reported on another form or schedule,
Gains from involuntary conversions (other 
than from casualty or theft) of capital as-
sets not held for business or profit,
Nonbusiness bad debts, and
Securities that become worthless.
Use Schedule D (Form 1040) to report:
Overall gain or loss from transactions re-
ported on Form 8949;
Certain transactions you do not have to re-
port on Form 8949;
Gain from Form 2439 or 6252 or Part I of 
Form 4797;
Gain or loss from Form 4684, 6781, or 
8824;
Gain or loss from a partnership, S corpora-
tion, estate, or trust;
Capital gain distributions not reported di-
rectly on your Form 1040; and
Capital loss carryover from the previous 
year to the current year.
On Form 8949, enter all sales and ex-
changes of capital assets, including stocks, 
bonds, etc., and real estate (if not reported on 
Form 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or 8824, or 
line 1a or 8a of Schedule D (Form 1040)). In-
clude these transactions even if you did not re-
ceive a Form 1099-B or 1099-S for the transac-
tion. Report short-term gains or losses in Part I. 
Report long-term gains or losses in Part II. Use 
as many Forms 8949 as you need.
  537 
  544 
  550 
  Schedule D (Form 1040) 
  4797 
  6252 
  8582 
  8949 
Exceptions to filing Form 8949 and Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).  There are certain situa-
tions where you may not have to file Form 8949 
and/or Schedule D (Form 1040).
Exception 1.  You do not have to file Form 
8949 or Schedule D (Form 1040) if you have no 
capital losses and your only capital gains are 
capital gain distributions from Form(s) 
1099-DIV, box 2a. If any Form(s) 1099-DIV you 
receive have an amount in box 2b (unrecap-
tured section 1250 gain), box 2c (section 1202 
gain), or box 2d (collectibles (28%) gain), you 
do not qualify for this exception.
If you qualify for this exception, report your 
capital gain distributions directly on line 13 of 
Form 1040 (and check the box on line 13). Also 
use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain 
Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to 
figure your tax. You can report your capital gain 
distributions on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead 
of on Form 1040, if you do not have to file Form 
1040.
Exception 2.  You must file Schedule D 
(Form 1040), but generally do not have to file 
Form 8949, if Exception 1 above does not apply 
and your only capital gains and losses are:
Capital gain distributions;
A capital loss carryover;
A gain from Form 2439 or 6252 or Part I of 
Form 4797;
A gain or loss from Form 4684, 6781, or 
8824;
A gain or loss from a partnership, S corpo-
ration, estate, or trust; or
Gains and losses from transactions for 
which you received a Form 1099-B that 
shows the basis was reported to the IRS 
and for which you do not need to make any 
adjustments in column (g) of Form 8949 or 
enter any codes in column (f) of Form 
8949.
Installment sales.  You can’t use the install-
ment method to report a gain from the sale of 
stock or securities traded on an established se-
curities market. You must report the entire gain 
in the year of sale (the year in which the trade 
date occurs).
Passive activity gains and losses.  If you 
have gains or losses from a passive activity, 
you may also have to report them on Form 
8582. In some cases, the loss may be limited 
under the passive activity rules. Refer to Form 
8582 and its instructions for more information 
about reporting capital gains and losses from a 
passive activity.
Form 1099-B transactions.  If you sold prop-
erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain com-
modities, through a broker, you should receive 
a Form 1099-B from the broker. Use the Form 
1099-B to complete Form 8949 and/or Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).
If you received a Form 1099-B for a transac-
tion, you usually report the transaction on Form 
8949. Report the proceeds shown in box 1d of 
Form 1099-B in column (d) of either Part I or 
Part II of Form 8949, whichever applies. Include 
in column (g) any selling expenses or option 
premiums not reflected in Form 1099-B, box 1d 
or box 1e. If you include a selling expense in 
Page 120 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 118 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses 

column (g), enter “E” in column (f). Enter the ba-
sis shown in box 1e in column (e). If the basis 
shown on Form 1099-B is not correct, see How 
To Complete Form 8949, Columns (f) and (g)  in 
the Instructions for Form 8949 for the adjust-
ment you must make. If no basis is shown on 
Form 1099-B, enter the correct basis of the 
property in column (e). See the instructions for 
Form 1099-B, Form 8949, and Schedule D 
(Form 1040) for more information.
Form 1099-CAP transactions.  If a corpora-
tion in which you own stock has had a change 
in control or a substantial change in capital 
structure, you should receive Form 1099-CAP 
from the corporation. Use the Form 1099-CAP 
to fill in Form 8949. If your computations show 
that you would have a loss because of the 
change, do not enter any amounts on Form 
8949 or Schedule D (Form 1040). You cannot 
claim a loss on Schedule D (Form 1040) as a 
result of this transaction.
Report the aggregate amount received 
shown in box 2 of Form 1099-CAP as the sales 
price in column (d) of either Part I or Part II of 
Form 8949, whichever applies.
Form 1099-S transactions.  If you sold or tra-
ded land (including air rights), a building or simi-
lar structure, a condominium unit, or co-op 
stock, you may receive a Form 1099-S, Pro-
ceeds From Real Estate Transactions, showing 
your proceeds and other important information. 
See the Instructions for Form 8949 and the 
Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040) for 
how to report these transactions and include 
them in Part I or Part II of Form 8949 as appro-
priate. However, report like-kind exchanges on 
Form 8824 instead.
See Form 1099-S and the Instructions for 
Form 1099-S for more information.
Nominees.  If you receive gross proceeds as a 
nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your 
name but actually belong to someone else), see 
the Instructions for Form 8949 for how to report 
these amounts on Form 8949.
File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with the 
IRS.  If you received gross proceeds as a nom-
inee in 2017, you must file a Form 1099-B or 
Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS. 
Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a 
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal 
of U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal 
Revenue Service Center by February 28, 2018 
(April 2, 2018, if you file Form 1099-B or Form 
1099-S electronically). Give the actual owner of 
the proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or 
Form 1099-S by February 15, 2018. On Form 
1099-B, you should be listed as the “Payer.” 
The actual owner should be listed as the “Re-
cipient.” On Form 1099-S, you should be listed 
as the “Filer.” The actual owner should be listed 
as the “Transferor.” You do not have to file a 
Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds 
for your spouse. For more information about the 
reporting requirements and the penalties for 
failure to file (or furnish) certain information re-
turns, see the General Instructions for Certain 
Information Returns. If you are filing electroni-
cally, see Pub. 1220.
Sale of property bought at various times.  If 
you sell a block of stock or other property that 
you bought at various times, report the 
short-term gain or loss from the sale on one row 
in Part I of Form 8949, and the long-term gain or 
loss on one row in Part II of Form 8949. Write 
“Various” in column (b) for the “Date acquired.”
Sale expenses.  On Form 8949, include in col-
umn (g) any expense of sale, such as broker's 
fees, commissions, state and local transfer 
taxes, and option premiums, unless you repor-
ted the net sales price in column (d). If you in-
clude an expense of sale in column (g), enter 
“E” in column (f).
For information about adjustments to basis, 
see chapter 13.
Short-term gains and losses.  Capital gain or 
loss on the sale or trade of investment property 
held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or 
loss. You report it in Part I of Form 8949.
You combine your share of short-term capi-
tal gain or loss from partnerships, S corpora-
tions, estates, and trusts, and any short-term 
capital loss carryover, with your other 
short-term capital gains and losses to figure 
your net short-term capital gain or loss on line 7 
of Schedule D (Form 1040).
Long-term gains and losses.  A capital gain 
or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-
erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital 
gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Form 
8949.
You report the following in Part II of Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).
Undistributed long-term capital gains from 
a mutual fund (or other regulated invest-
ment company) or real estate investment 
trust (REIT). 
Your share of long-term capital gains or 
losses from partnerships, S corporations, 
estates, and trusts. 
All capital gain distributions from mutual 
funds and REITs not reported directly on 
line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form 
1040.
Long-term capital loss carryovers. 
The result after combining these items with 
your other long-term capital gains and losses is 
your net long-term capital gain or loss (Sched-
ule D (Form 1040), line 15).
Total net gain or loss.  To figure your total net 
gain or loss, combine your net short-term capi-
tal gain or loss (Schedule D (Form 1040), line 7) 
with your net long-term capital gain or loss 
(Schedule D (Form 1040), line 15). Enter the re-
sult on Schedule D (Form 1040), Part III, 
line 16. If your losses are more than your gains, 
see Capital Losses next. If both lines 15 and 16 
of your Schedule D (Form 1040) are gains and 
your taxable income on your Form 1040 is more 
than zero, see Capital Gain Tax Rates, later.
Capital Losses 
If your capital losses are more than your capital 
gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction. 
Report the amount of the deduction on line 13 
of Form 1040, in parentheses.
Limit on deduction.  Your allowable capital 
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D (Form 
1040), is the lesser of:
$3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file a 
separate return), or
Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of 
Schedule D (Form 1040).
You can use your total net loss to reduce 
your income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 
limit.
Capital loss carryover.  If you have a total net 
loss on line 16 of Schedule D (Form 1040) that 
is more than the yearly limit on capital loss de-
ductions, you can carry over the unused part to 
the next year and treat it as if you had incurred it 
in that next year. If part of the loss is still un-
used, you can carry it over to later years until it 
is completely used up.
When you figure the amount of any capital 
loss carryover to the next year, you must take 
the current year's allowable deduction into ac-
count, whether or not you claimed it and 
whether or not you filed a return for the current 
year.
When you carry over a loss, it remains long 
term or short term. A long-term capital loss you 
carry over to the next tax year will reduce that 
year's long-term capital gains before it reduces 
that year's short-term capital gains.
Figuring your carryover.  The amount of 
your capital loss carryover is the amount of your 
total net loss that is more than the lesser of:
1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for 
the year, or
2. Your taxable income increased by your al-
lowable capital loss deduction for the year 
and your deduction for personal exemp-
tions.
If your deductions are more than your gross 
income for the tax year, use your negative taxa-
ble income in figuring the amount in item (2) 
above.
Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work-
sheet in the Instructions for Schedule D or Pub. 
550 to determine the part of your capital loss 
that you can carry over.
Example.  Brian and Jackie sold securities 
in 2017. The sales resulted in a capital loss of 
$7,000. They had no other capital transactions. 
Their taxable income was $26,000. On their 
joint 2017 return, they can deduct $3,000. The 
unused part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − 
$3,000), can be carried over to 2018.
If their capital loss had been $2,000, their 
capital loss deduction would have been $2,000. 
They would have no carryover.
Use short-term losses first.  When you fig-
ure your capital loss carryover, use your 
short-term capital losses first, even if you incur-
red them after a long-term capital loss. If you 
have not reached the limit on the capital loss 
deduction after using the short-term capital los-
ses, use the long-term capital losses until you 
reach the limit.
Decedent's capital loss.  A capital loss 
sustained by a decedent during his or her last 
tax year (or carried over to that year from an 
earlier year) can be deducted only on the final 
Page 121 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses  Page 119

income tax return filed for the decedent. The 
capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply in 
this situation. The decedent's estate cannot de-
duct any of the loss or carry it over to following 
years.
Joint and separate returns.  If you and 
your spouse once filed separate returns and are 
now filing a joint return, combine your separate 
capital loss carryovers. However, if you and 
your spouse once filed a joint return and are 
now filing separate returns, any capital loss car-
ryover from the joint return can be deducted 
only on the return of the spouse who actually 
had the loss.
Capital Gain Tax Rates 
The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are 
generally lower than the tax rates that apply to 
other income. These lower rates are called the 
maximum capital gain rates.
The term “net capital gain” means the 
amount by which your net long-term capital gain 
for the year is more than your net short-term 
capital loss.
For 2017, the maximum capital gain rates 
are 0%, 15%, 20%, 25%, and 28%. See Ta-
ble 16-1 for details.
If you figure your tax using the maxi-
mum capital gain rate and the regular 
tax computation results in a lower tax, 
the regular tax computation applies.
TIP
Example.  All of your net capital gain is 
from selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate 
would be 28%. If you are otherwise subject to a 
rate lower than 28%, the 28% rate does not ap-
ply.
Investment interest deducted.  If you claim a 
deduction for investment interest, you may have 
to reduce the amount of your net capital gain 
that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates. Re-
duce it by the amount of the net capital gain you 
choose to include in investment income when 
figuring the limit on your investment interest de-
duction. This is done on the Schedule D Tax 
Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and Capi-
tal Gain Tax Worksheet. For more information 
about the limit on investment interest, see Inter-
est Expenses in chapter 3 of Pub. 550.
Collectibles gain or loss.  This is gain or loss 
from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug, anti-
que, metal (such as gold, silver, and platinum 
bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bever-
age held more than 1 year.
Collectibles gain includes gain from sale of 
an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or 
trust due to unrealized appreciation of collecti-
bles.
Gain on qualified small business stock.  If 
you realized a gain from qualified small busi-
ness stock that you held more than 5 years, you 
generally can exclude some or all of your gain 
under section 1202. The eligible gain minus 
your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain. 
See Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock in 
chapter 4 of Pub. 550.
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.  Generally, 
this is any part of your capital gain from selling 
section 1250 property (real property) that is due 
to depreciation (but not more than your net sec-
tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the 
28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 
1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D (Form 
1040) instructions to figure your unrecaptured 
section 1250 gain. For more information about 
section 1250 property and section 1231 gain, 
see chapter 3 of Pub. 544.
Tax computation using maximum capital 
gain rates.  Use the Qualified Dividends and 
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D 
Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure 
your tax if you have qualified dividends or net 
capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-
ule D (Form 1040), lines 15 and 16, are both 
gains.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet.  Use the 
Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D 
(Form 1040) instructions to figure your tax if:
You have to file Schedule D (Form 1040); 
and
Schedule D (Form 1040), line 18 (28% rate 
gain) or line 19 (unrecaptured section 1250 
gain), is more than zero.
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax 
Worksheet.  If you do not have to use the 
Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained 
above) and any of the following apply, use the 
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-
sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form 
1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.
You received qualified dividends. (See 
Qualified Dividends in chapter 8.)
You do not have to file Schedule D (Form 
1040) and you received capital gain distri-
butions. (See Exceptions to filing Form 
8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040), ear-
lier.)
Schedule D (Form 1040), lines 15 and 16, 
are both more than zero.
Alternative minimum tax.  These capital gain 
rates are also used in figuring alternative mini-
mum tax.
Table 16-1. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
IF your net capital gain is from ...
THEN your 
maximum capital
gain rate is ...
collectibles gain 28%
eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the 
section 1202 exclusion 28%
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 
39.6% 20%
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25%, 
28%, 33%, or 35% 15%
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 10% 
or 15%  0%
1“Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
Page 122 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 120 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses 

Part Four.
Adjustments to 
Income
The three chapters in this part discuss some of the adjustments to income 
that you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income. These chapters 
cover:
Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs) — chapter 17,
Alimony you pay — chapter 18, and
Student loan interest you pay — chapter 19.
Other adjustments to income are discussed elsewhere. See Table V.
Table V. Other Adjustments to Income
Use this table to find information about other adjustments to income not covered in this part of the publication.
IF you are looking for more information about the 
deduction for...
THEN see...
certain business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and 
fee-basis officials 
chapter 26.
contributions to a health savings account Pub. 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored 
Health Plans.
moving expenses Pub. 521, Moving Expenses.
part of your self-employment tax chapter 22.
self-employed health insurance chapter 21.
payments to self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans Pub. 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE, 
and Qualified Plans).
penalty on the early withdrawal of savings chapter 7.
contributions to an Archer MSA Pub. 969.
reforestation amortization or expense chapters 7 and 8 of Pub. 535, Business Expenses.
contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18)(D) 
pension plans
Pub. 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
expenses from the rental of personal property chapter 12.
certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment 
benefits (sub-pay)
chapter 12.
foreign housing costs chapter 4 of Pub. 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident 
Aliens Abroad.
jury duty pay given to your employer chapter 12.
contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code 
section 403(b) plans
Pub. 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of 
the Clergy and Religious Workers.
attorney fees and certain costs for actions involving certain 
unlawful discrimination claims or awards to whistleblowers
Pub. 525.
domestic production activities deduction Form 8903, Domestic Production Activities Deduction.
Page 123 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses  Page 121

17.
Individual 
Retirement 
Arrangements 
(IRAs)
What's New for 2017
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return, including 
the tuition and fees deduction.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri-
butions. For 2017, if you are covered by a re-
tirement plan at work, your deduction for contri-
butions to a traditional IRA is reduced (phased 
out) if your modified AGI is:
More than $99,000 but less than $119,000 
for a married couple filing a joint return or a 
qualifying widow(er),
More than $62,000 but less than $72,000 
for a single individual or head of house-
hold, or
Less than $10,000 for a married individual 
filing a separate return.
If you either live with your spouse or file a joint 
return, and your spouse is covered by a retire-
ment plan at work but you aren’t, your deduc-
tion is phased out if your modified AGI is more 
than $186,000 but less than $196,000. If your 
modified AGI is $196,000 or more, you can’t 
take a deduction for contributions to a tradi-
tional IRA. See How Much Can You Deduct , 
later.
Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contribu-
tions. For 2017, your Roth IRA contribution 
limit is reduced (phased out) in the following sit-
uations.
Your filing status is married filing jointly or 
qualifying widow(er) and your modified AGI 
is at least $186,000. You can’t make a 
Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI 
is $196,000 or more.
CAUTION
!
Your filing status is single, head of house-
hold, or married filing separately and you 
didn’t live with your spouse at any time in 
2017 and your modified AGI is at least 
$118,000. You can’t make a Roth IRA con-
tribution if your modified AGI is $133,000 
or more.
Your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, you lived with your spouse at any 
time during the year, and your modified 
AGI is more than -0-. You can’t make a 
Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI 
is $10,000 or more.
See Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA, later.
Reminders
2018 limits. You can find information about the 
2018 contribution and AGI limits in Pub. 590-A.
Contributions to both traditional and Roth 
IRAs. For information on your combined contri-
bution limit if you contribute to both traditional 
and Roth IRAs, see Roth IRAs and traditional 
IRAs, later.
Statement of required minimum distribu-
tion. If a minimum distribution from your IRA is 
required, the trustee, custodian, or issuer that 
held the IRA at the end of the preceding year 
must either report the amount of the required 
minimum distribution to you, or offer to calculate 
it for you. The report or offer must include the 
date by which the amount must be distributed. 
The report is due January 31 of the year in 
which the minimum distribution is required. It 
can be provided with the year-end fair market 
value statement that you normally get each 
year. No report is required for IRAs of owners 
who have died.
Application of one-rollover-per-year limita-
tion. You can make only one rollover from an 
IRA to another (or the same) IRA in any 1-year 
period regardless of the number of IRAs you 
own. However, you can continue to make un-
limited trustee-to-trustee transfers between 
IRAs because this type of transfer isn’t consid-
ered a rollover. Furthermore, there is no limit on 
the number of rollovers from a traditional IRA to 
a Roth IRA (also known as conversions). For 
more information, see Application of one-roll-
over limitation, later.
IRA interest.  Although interest earned from 
your IRA is generally not taxed in the year 
earned, it isn't tax-exempt interest. Tax on your 
traditional IRA is generally deferred until you 
take a distribution. Don't report this interest on 
your tax return as tax-exempt interest.
Net Investment Income Tax.  For purposes of 
the Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT), net in-
vestment income doesn't include distributions 
from a qualified retirement plan including IRAs 
(for example, 401(a), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 
408A, or 457(b) plans). However, these distri-
butions are taken into account when determin-
ing the modified adjusted gross income thresh-
old. Distributions from a nonqualified retirement 
plan are included in net investment income. 
See Form 8960, Net Investment Income 
Tax—Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, and its 
instructions for more information.
Form 8606.  To designate contributions as 
nondeductible, you must file Form 8606, Non-
deductible IRAs.
The term “50 or older” is used several 
times in this chapter. It refers to an IRA 
owner who is age 50 or older by the 
end of the tax year.
Introduction
An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is a 
personal savings plan that gives you tax advan-
tages for setting aside money for your retire-
ment.
This chapter discusses the following topics.
The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRA that 
isn't a Roth or SIMPLE IRA).
The Roth IRA, which features nondeducti-
ble contributions and tax-free distributions.
Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) and 
Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees 
(SIMPLEs) aren't discussed in this chapter. For 
more information on these plans and employ-
ees' SEP IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are part 
of these plans, see Pub. 560, Retirement Plans 
for Small Business.
For information about contributions, deduc-
tions, withdrawals, transfers, rollovers, and 
other transactions, see Pub. 590-A and Pub. 
590-B.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Retirement Plans for Small Business
Contributions to Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
Distributions from Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
Form (and Instructions)
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans 
(Including IRAs) and Other 
Tax-Favored Accounts
Nondeductible IRAs
Traditional IRAs
In this chapter, the original IRA (sometimes 
called an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred to 
as a “traditional IRA.” A traditional IRA is any 
IRA that isn't a Roth IRA or a SIMPLE IRA.Two 
advantages of a traditional IRA are:
You may be able to deduct some or all of 
your contributions to it, depending on your 
circumstances; and
Generally, amounts in your IRA, including 
earnings and gains, aren't taxed until they 
are distributed.
Who Can Open
a Traditional IRA?
You can open and make contributions to a tradi-
tional IRA if:
You (or, if you file a joint return, your 
spouse) received taxable compensation 
during the year, and
TIP
  560
  590-A
  590-B
  5329
  8606
Page 124 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 122 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

You weren't age 7012 by the end of the 
year.
What is compensation?  Generally, compen-
sation is what you earn from working. Compen-
sation includes wages, salaries, tips, professio-
nal fees, bonuses, and other amounts you 
receive for providing personal services. The 
IRS treats as compensation any amount prop-
erly shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other com-
pensation) of Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-
ment, provided that this amount is reduced by 
any amount properly shown in box 11 (Nonqua-
lified plans).
Scholarship and fellowship payments are 
compensation for this purpose only if shown in 
box 1 of Form W-2.
Compensation also includes commissions 
and taxable alimony and separate maintenance 
payments.
Self-employment income.  If you are 
self-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner), 
compensation is the net earnings from your 
trade or business (provided your personal serv-
ices are a material income-producing factor) re-
duced by the total of:
The deduction for contributions made on 
your behalf to retirement plans, and
The deductible part of your self-employ-
ment tax.
Compensation includes earnings from 
self-employment even if they aren't subject to 
self-employment tax because of your religious 
beliefs.
Nontaxable combat pay.  For IRA purpo-
ses, if you were a member of the U.S. Armed 
Forces, your compensation includes any non-
taxable combat pay you receive.
What isn't compensation?  Compensation 
doesn't include any of the following items.
Earnings and profits from property, such as 
rental income, interest income, and divi-
dend income.
Pension or annuity income.
Deferred compensation received (compen-
sation payments postponed from a past 
year).
Income from a partnership for which you 
don't provide services that are a material 
income-producing factor.
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) 
payments reported on Schedule SE (Form 
1040), line 1b.
Any amounts (other than combat pay) you 
exclude from income, such as foreign 
earned income and housing costs.
When and How Can a 
Traditional IRA Be 
Opened?
You can open a traditional IRA at any time. 
However, the time for making contributions for 
any year is limited. See When Can Contribu-
tions Be Made, later.
You can open different kinds of IRAs with a 
variety of organizations. You can open an IRA 
at a bank or other financial institution or with a 
mutual fund or life insurance company. You can 
also open an IRA through your stockbroker. Any 
IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code require-
ments.
Kinds of traditional IRAs. Your traditional IRA 
can be an individual retirement account or an-
nuity. It can be part of either a SEP or an em-
ployer or employee association trust account.
How Much Can Be
Contributed?
There are limits and other rules that affect the 
amount that can be contributed to a traditional 
IRA. These limits and other rules are explained 
below.
Community property laws.  Except as dis-
cussed later under Kay Bailey Hutchison 
Spousal IRA limit , each spouse figures his or 
her limit separately, using his or her own com-
pensation. This is the rule even in states with 
community property laws.
Brokers' commissions.  Brokers' commis-
sions paid in connection with your traditional 
IRA are subject to the contribution limit.
Trustees' fees.  Trustees' administrative fees 
aren't subject to the contribution limit.
Qualified reservist repayments.  If you are 
(or were) a member of a reserve component 
and you were ordered or called to active duty 
after September 11, 2001, you may be able to 
contribute (repay) to an IRA amounts equal to 
any qualified reservist distributions you re-
ceived. You can make these repayment contri-
butions even if they would cause your total con-
tributions to the IRA to be more than the general 
limit on contributions. To be eligible to make 
these repayment contributions, you must have 
received a qualified reservist distribution from 
an IRA or from a section 401(k) or 403(b) plan 
or similar arrangement.
For more information, see Qualified reservist 
repayments under How Much Can Be Contrib-
uted? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.
Contributions on your behalf to a tradi-
tional IRA reduce your limit for contri-
butions to a Roth IRA. (See Roth IRAs, 
later.)
General limit. For 2017, the most that can be 
contributed to your traditional IRA generally is 
the smaller of the following amounts.
$5,500 ($6,500 if you are 50 or older).
Your taxable compensation (defined ear-
lier) for the year.
This is the most that can be contributed regard-
less of whether the contributions are to one or 
more traditional IRAs or whether all or part of 
the contributions are nondeductible. (See Non-
deductible Contributions , later.) Qualified re-
servist repayments don't affect this limit.
Example 1. Betty, who is 34 years old and 
single, earned $24,000 in 2017. Her IRA contri-
butions for 2017 are limited to $5,500.
Example 2.  John, an unmarried college 
student working part time, earned $3,500 in 
CAUTION
!
2017. His IRA contributions for 2017 are limited 
to $3,500, the amount of his compensation.
Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA limit.
For 2017, if you file a joint return and your taxa-
ble compensation is less than that of your 
spouse, the most that can be contributed for the 
year to your IRA is the smaller of the following 
amounts.
1. $5,500 ($6,500 if you are 50 or older).
2. The total compensation includible in the 
gross income of both you and your spouse 
for the year, reduced by the following two 
amounts.
a. Your spouse's IRA contribution for the 
year to a traditional IRA.
b. Any contribution for the year to a Roth 
IRA on behalf of your spouse.
This means that the total combined contribu-
tions that can be made for the year to your IRA 
and your spouse's IRA can be as much as 
$11,000 ($12,000 if only one of you is 50 or 
older, or $13,000 if both of you are 50 or older).
When Can Contributions 
Be Made?
As soon as you open your traditional IRA, con-
tributions can be made to it through your 
chosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator). 
Contributions must be in the form of money 
(cash, check, or money order). Property can't 
be contributed.
Contributions must be made by due date. 
Contributions can be made to your traditional 
IRA for a year at any time during the year or by 
the due date for filing your return for that year, 
not including extensions.
Age 7012 rule. Contributions can't be made to 
your traditional IRA for the year in which you 
reach age 7012 or for any later year.
You attain age 7012 on the date that is 6 cal-
endar months after the 70th anniversary of your 
birth. If you were born on or before June 30, 
1947, you can't contribute for 2017 or any later 
year.
Designating year for which contribution is 
made. If an amount is contributed to your tradi-
tional IRA between January 1 and April 17, you 
should tell the sponsor which year (the current 
year or the previous year) the contribution is for. 
If you don't tell the sponsor which year it is for, 
the sponsor can assume, and report to the IRS, 
that the contribution is for the current year (the 
year the sponsor received it).
Filing before a contribution is made.  You 
can file your return claiming a traditional IRA 
contribution before the contribution is actually 
made. Generally, the contribution must be 
made by the due date of your return, not includ-
ing extensions.
Contributions not required.  You don't have 
to contribute to your traditional IRA for every tax 
year, even if you can.
Page 125 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 123

How Much Can You 
Deduct?
Generally, you can deduct the lesser of:
The contributions to your traditional IRA for 
the year, or
The general limit (or the Kay Bailey Hutchi-
son Spousal IRA limit, if it applies).
However, if you or your spouse was covered by 
an employer retirement plan, you may not be 
able to deduct this amount. See Limit if Covered 
by Employer Plan, later.
You may be able to claim a credit for 
contributions to your traditional IRA. 
For more information, see chapter 38.
Trustees' fees.  Trustees' administrative fees 
that are billed separately and paid in connection 
with your traditional IRA aren't deductible as 
IRA contributions. However, they may be de-
ductible as a miscellaneous itemized deduction 
on Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28.
Brokers' commissions.  Brokers' commis-
sions are part of your IRA contribution and, as 
such, are deductible subject to the limits.
Full deduction. If neither you nor your spouse 
was covered for any part of the year by an em-
ployer retirement plan, you can take a deduc-
tion for total contributions to one or more tradi-
tional IRAs of up to the lesser of:
$5,500 ($6,500 if you are age 50 or older in 
2017).
100% of your compensation.
This limit is reduced by any contributions made 
to a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.
Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA.  In the 
case of a married couple with unequal compen-
sation who file a joint return, the deduction for 
contributions to the traditional IRA of the spouse 
with less compensation is limited to the lesser 
of the following amounts.
1. $5,500 ($6,500 if the spouse with the 
lower compensation is age 50 or older in 
2017).
2. The total compensation includible in the 
gross income of both spouses for the year 
reduced by the following three amounts.
a. The IRA deduction for the year of the 
spouse with the greater compensa-
tion.
b. Any designated nondeductible contri-
bution for the year made on behalf of 
the spouse with the greater compen-
sation.
c. Any contributions for the year to a 
Roth IRA on behalf of the spouse with 
the greater compensation.
This limit is reduced by any contributions to a 
501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse with the 
lesser compensation.
Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa-
rated (and didn't remarry) before the end of the 
year, you can't deduct any contributions to your 
spouse's IRA. After a divorce or legal separa-
tion, you can deduct only contributions to your 
TIP
own IRA. Your deductions are subject to the 
rules for single individuals.
Covered by an employer retirement plan.  If 
you or your spouse was covered by an em-
ployer retirement plan at any time during the 
year for which contributions were made, your 
deduction may be further limited. This is dis-
cussed later under Limit if Covered by Em-
ployer Plan . Limits on the amount you can de-
duct don't affect the amount that can be 
contributed. See Nondeductible Contributions , 
later.
Are You Covered by an Employer 
Plan?
The Form W-2 you receive from your employer 
has a box used to indicate whether you were 
covered for the year. The “Retirement plan” box 
should be checked if you were covered.
Reservists and volunteer firefighters should 
also see Situations in Which You Aren’t Cov-
ered by an Employer Plan, later.
If you aren't certain whether you were cov-
ered by your employer's retirement plan, you 
should ask your employer.
Federal judges.  For purposes of the IRA de-
duction, federal judges are covered by an em-
ployer retirement plan.
For Which Year(s) Are You 
Covered?
Special rules apply to determine the tax years 
for which you are covered by an employer plan. 
These rules differ depending on whether the 
plan is a defined contribution plan or a defined 
benefit plan.
Tax year. Your tax year is the annual account-
ing period you use to keep records and report 
income and expenses on your income tax re-
turn. For almost all people, the tax year is the 
calendar year.
Defined contribution plan.  Generally, you 
are covered by a defined contribution plan for a 
tax year if amounts are contributed or allocated 
to your account for the plan year that ends with 
or within that tax year.
A defined contribution plan is a plan that 
provides for a separate account for each person 
covered by the plan. Types of defined contribu-
tion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo-
nus plans, and money purchase pension plans.
Defined benefit plan. If you are eligible to par-
ticipate in your employer's defined benefit plan 
for the plan year that ends within your tax year, 
you are covered by the plan. This rule applies 
even if you:
Declined to participate in the plan,
Didn't make a required contribution, or
Didn't perform the minimum service re-
quired to accrue a benefit for the year.
A defined benefit plan is any plan that isn't a 
defined contribution plan. Defined benefit plans 
include pension plans and annuity plans.
No vested interest. If you accrue a benefit for 
a plan year, you are covered by that plan even if 
you have no vested interest in (legal right to) the 
accrual.
Situations in Which You Aren’t 
Covered
Unless you are covered under another em-
ployer plan, you aren't covered by an employer 
plan if you are in one of the situations described 
below.
Social security or railroad retirement.  Cov-
erage under social security or railroad retire-
ment isn't coverage under an employer retire-
ment plan.
Benefits from a previous employer's plan. If 
you receive retirement benefits from a previous 
employer's plan, you aren't covered by that 
plan.
Reservists. If the only reason you participate 
in a plan is because you are a member of a re-
serve unit of the armed forces, you may not be 
covered by the plan. You aren't covered by the 
plan if both of the following conditions are met.
1. The plan you participate in is established 
for its employees by:
a. The United States,
b. A state or political subdivision of a 
state, or
c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b) 
above.
2. You didn't serve more than 90 days on ac-
tive duty during the year (not counting duty 
for training).
Volunteer firefighters. If the only reason you 
participate in a plan is because you are a volun-
teer firefighter, you may not be covered by the 
plan. You aren't covered by the plan if both of 
the following conditions are met.
1. The plan you participate in is established 
for its employees by:
a. The United States,
b. A state or political subdivision of a 
state, or
c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b) 
above.
2. Your accrued retirement benefits at the 
beginning of the year won't provide more 
than $1,800 per year at retirement.
Limit if Covered by Employer Plan
If either you or your spouse was covered by an 
employer retirement plan, you may be entitled 
to only a partial (reduced) deduction or no de-
duction at all, depending on your income and 
your filing status.
Your deduction begins to decrease (phase 
out) when your income rises above a certain 
amount and is eliminated altogether when it 
reaches a higher amount. These amounts vary 
depending on your filing status.
To determine if your deduction is subject to 
phaseout, you must determine your modified 
AGI and your filing status. See Filing status and 
Modified adjusted gross income (AGI) , later. 
Then use Table 17-1 or Table 17-2 to determine 
if the phaseout applies.
Page 126 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 124 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Social security recipients.  Instead of using 
Table 17-1 or Table 17-2, use the worksheets in 
Appendix B of Pub. 590-A if, for the year, all of 
the following apply.
You received social security benefits.
You received taxable compensation.
Contributions were made to your traditional 
IRA.
You or your spouse was covered by an 
employer retirement plan.
Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc-
tion, your nondeductible contribution, and the 
taxable portion, if any, of your social security 
benefits.
Deduction phaseout. If you are covered by an 
employer retirement plan and you didn't receive 
any social security retirement benefits, your IRA 
deduction may be reduced or eliminated de-
pending on your filing status and modified AGI 
as shown in Table 17-1.
If your spouse is covered.  If you aren't 
covered by an employer retirement plan, but 
your spouse is, and you didn't receive any so-
cial security benefits, your IRA deduction may 
be reduced or eliminated entirely depending on 
your filing status and modified AGI as shown in 
Table 17-2.
Filing status.  Your filing status depends pri-
marily on your marital status. For this purpose, 
you need to know if your filing status is single or 
head of household, married filing jointly or quali-
fying widow(er), or married filing separately. If 
you need more information on filing status, see 
chapter 2.
Lived apart from spouse.  If you didn't live 
with your spouse at any time during the year 
and you file a separate return, your filing status, 
for this purpose, is single.
Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). How 
you figure your modified AGI depends on 
whether you are filing Form 1040 or Form 
1040A. If you made contributions to your IRA for 
2017 and received a distribution from your IRA 
in 2017, see Pub. 590-A. You may be able to 
use Worksheet 17-1  to figure your modified 
AGI.
Don't assume that your modified AGI is 
the same as your compensation. Your 
modified AGI may include income in 
addition to your compensation (discussed ear-
lier), such as interest, dividends, and income 
from IRA distributions.
Form 1040.  If you file Form 1040, refigure 
the amount on the page 1 “adjusted gross in-
come” line without taking into account any of 
the following amounts.
IRA deduction.
Student loan interest deduction.
Domestic production activities deduction.
Foreign earned income exclusion.
Foreign housing exclusion or deduction.
Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-
est shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In-
terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings 
Bonds Issued After 1989.
Exclusion of employer-provided adoption 
benefits shown on Form 8839, Qualified 
Adoption Expenses.
This is your modified AGI.
At the time this publication was pre-
pared for printing, Congress was con-
sidering legislation that would extend 
the deduction for tuition and fees, which expired 
at the end of 2016. To see if the legislation was 
enacted, go to Recent Developments at 
IRS.gov/Pub17.
Form 1040A.  If you file Form 1040A, refig-
ure the amount on the page 1 “adjusted gross 
income” line without taking into account any of 
the following amounts.
IRA deduction.
Student loan interest deduction.
Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-
est shown on Form 8815.
This is your modified AGI.
At the time this publication was pre-
pared for printing, Congress was con-
sidering legislation that would extend 
the deduction for tuition and fees, which expired 
at the end of 2016. To see if the legislation was 
enacted, go to Recent Developments at 
IRS.gov/Pub17.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Table 17-1. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are Covered by 
Retirement Plan at Work
If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI 
affects the amount of your deduction.
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
Single
 
or
 
Head of household
 $62,000 or less a full deduction.
more than $62,000
but less than $72,000
a partial deduction.
$72,000 or more no deduction.
Married filing jointly
 
 or
 
Qualifying widow(er)
 $99,000 or less a full deduction.
more than $99,000
but less than $119,000
a partial deduction.
$119,000 or more no deduction.
Married filing 
separately2
less than $10,000 a partial deduction.
$10,000 or more no deduction.
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI), later.
2If you didn't live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this 
purpose (therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the “Single” column).
Table 17-2. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are NOT 
Covered by Retirement Plan at Work
If you aren't covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI 
affects the amount of your deduction.
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
Single,
Head of household, or
Qualifying widow(er)
any amount a full deduction.
Married filing jointly or 
separately with a spouse who 
isn't covered by a plan at work
any amount a full deduction.
Married filing jointly with a 
spouse who is covered by a plan 
at work
$186,000 or less a full deduction.
more than $186,000
but less than $196,000
a partial deduction.
$196,000 or more no deduction.
Married filing separately with a 
spouse who is covered by a plan 
at work2
less than $10,000 a partial deduction.
$10,000 or more no deduction.
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI), later.
2You are entitled to the full deduction if you didn't live with your spouse at any time during the year.
Page 127 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 125

Both contributions for 2017 and distribu-
tions in 2017. If all three of the following apply, 
any IRA distributions you received in 2017 may 
be partly tax free and partly taxable.
You received distributions in 2017 from 
one or more traditional IRAs.
You made contributions to a traditional IRA 
for 2017.
Some of those contributions may be non-
deductible contributions.
If this is your situation, you must figure the taxa-
ble part of the traditional IRA distribution before 
you can figure your modified AGI. To do this, 
you can use Worksheet 1-1, Figuring the Taxa-
ble Part of Your IRA Distribution, in Pub. 590-B.
If at least one of the above doesn't apply, 
figure your modified AGI using Worksheet 17-1.
How to figure your reduced IRA deduction. 
You can figure your reduced IRA deduction for 
either Form 1040 or Form 1040A by using the 
worksheets in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A. Also, 
the instructions for Form 1040 and Form 1040A 
include similar worksheets that you may be able 
to use instead.
Reporting Deductible 
Contributions
If you file Form 1040, enter your IRA deduction 
on line 32 of that form. If you file Form 1040A, 
enter your IRA deduction on line 17. You can't 
deduct IRA contributions on Form 1040EZ.
Nondeductible 
Contributions
Although your deduction for IRA contributions 
may be reduced or eliminated, contributions 
can be made to your IRA up to the general limit 
or, if it applies, the Kay Bailey Hutchison 
Spousal IRA limit. The difference between your 
total permitted contributions and your IRA de-
duction, if any, is your nondeductible contribu-
tion.
Example. Mike is 30 years old and single. 
In 2017, he was covered by a retirement plan at 
work. His salary was $67,000. His modified AGI 
was $80,000. Mike made a $5,500 IRA contri-
bution for 2017. Because he was covered by a 
retirement plan and his modified AGI was over 
$72,000, he can't deduct his $5,500 IRA contri-
bution. He must designate this contribution as a 
nondeductible contribution by reporting it on 
Form 8606, as explained next.
Form 8606.  To designate contributions as 
nondeductible, you must file Form 8606.
You don't have to designate a contribution 
as nondeductible until you file your tax return. 
When you file, you can even designate other-
wise deductible contributions as nondeductible.
You must file Form 8606 to report nonde-
ductible contributions even if you don't have to 
file a tax return for the year.
A Form 8606 isn't used for the year that 
you make a rollover from a qualified re-
tirement plan to a traditional IRA and 
the rollover includes nontaxable amounts. In 
those situations, a Form 8606 is completed for 
the year you take a distribution from that IRA. 
See Form 8606  under Distributions Fully or 
Partly Taxable, later.
Failure to report nondeductible contribu-
tions. If you don't report nondeductible contri-
butions, all of the contributions to your tradi-
tional IRA will be treated as deductible 
contributions when withdrawn. All distributions 
from your IRA will be taxed unless you can 
show, with satisfactory evidence, that nonde-
ductible contributions were made.
Penalty for overstatement.  If you over-
state the amount of nondeductible contributions 
on your Form 8606 for any tax year, you must 
pay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement, 
unless it was due to reasonable cause.
Penalty for failure to file Form 8606.  You 
will have to pay a $50 penalty if you don't file a 
required Form 8606, unless you can prove that 
the failure was due to reasonable cause.
Tax on earnings on nondeductible contri-
butions. As long as contributions are within 
the contribution limits, none of the earnings or 
gains on contributions (deductible or nondeduc-
tible) will be taxed until they are distributed. See 
When Can You Withdraw or Use IRA Assets , 
later.
Cost basis. You will have a cost basis in your 
traditional IRA if you made any nondeductible 
contributions. Your cost basis is the sum of the 
nondeductible contributions to your IRA minus 
CAUTION
!
any withdrawals or distributions of nondeducti-
ble contributions.
Inherited IRAs
If you inherit a traditional IRA, you are called a 
beneficiary. A beneficiary can be any person or 
entity the owner chooses to receive the benefits 
of the IRA after he or she dies. Beneficiaries of 
a traditional IRA must include in their gross in-
come any taxable distributions they receive.
Inherited from spouse.  If you inherit a tradi-
tional IRA from your spouse, you generally have 
the following three choices. You can:
1. Treat it as your own IRA by designating 
yourself as the account owner.
2. Treat it as your own by rolling it over into 
your IRA, or to the extent it is taxable, into 
a:
a. Qualified employer plan,
b. Qualified employee annuity plan (sec-
tion 403(a) plan),
c. Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 
403(b) plan), or
d. Deferred compensation plan of a 
state or local government (section 
457 plan).
3. Treat yourself as the beneficiary rather 
than treating the IRA as your own.
Treating it as your own.  You will be con-
sidered to have chosen to treat the IRA as your 
own if:
Contributions (including rollover contribu-
tions) are made to the inherited IRA, or
You don't take the required minimum distri-
bution for a year as a beneficiary of the 
IRA.
You will only be considered to have chosen to 
treat the IRA as your own if:
You are the sole beneficiary of the IRA, 
and
You have an unlimited right to withdraw 
amounts from it.
However, if you receive a distribution from 
your deceased spouse's IRA, you can roll that 
distribution over into your own IRA within the 
60-day time limit, as long as the distribution isn't 
Worksheet 17-1. Figuring Your Modified AGI
Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for traditional IRA purposes.
1. Enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from Form 1040, line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22, figured without 
taking into account the amount from Form 1040, line 32, or Form 1040A, line 17 .................... 1.  
2. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line 33, or Form 1040A, line 18 ............ 2.  
3. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Form 1040, line 35 ....................... 3.  
4. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from Form 2555, line 45, or Form 2555-EZ, 
line 18 ......................................................................... 4.  
5. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 .................................. 5.  
6. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 ............................ 6.  
7. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form 8839, line 28 .................. 7.  
8. Add lines 1 through 7. This is your modified AGI for traditional IRA purposes ...................... 8.  
Page 128 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 126 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

a required distribution, even if you aren't the 
sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse's 
IRA.
Inherited from someone other than spouse. 
If you inherit a traditional IRA from anyone other 
than your deceased spouse, you can't treat the 
inherited IRA as your own. This means that you 
can't make any contributions to the IRA. It also 
means you can't roll over any amounts into or 
out of the inherited IRA. However, you can 
make a trustee-to-trustee transfer as long as the 
IRA into which amounts are being moved is set 
up and maintained in the name of the deceased 
IRA owner for the benefit of you as beneficiary.
For more information, see the discussion of 
inherited IRAs  under Rollover From One IRA 
Into Another, later.
Can You Move Retirement 
Plan Assets?
You can transfer, tax free, assets (money or 
property) from other retirement plans (including 
traditional IRAs) to a traditional IRA. You can 
make the following kinds of transfers.
Transfers from one trustee to another.
Rollovers.
Transfers incident to a divorce.
Transfers to Roth IRAs.  Under certain condi-
tions, you can move assets from a traditional 
IRA or from a designated Roth account to a 
Roth IRA. You can also move assets from a 
qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA. See 
Can You Move Amounts Into a Roth IRA? under 
Roth IRAs, later.
Trustee-to-Trustee Transfer
A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA from 
one trustee directly to another, either at your re-
quest or at the trustee's request, isn't a rollover. 
This includes the situation where the current 
trustee issues a check to the new trustee but 
gives it to you to deposit. Because there is no 
distribution to you, the transfer is tax free. Be-
cause it isn't a rollover, it isn't affected by the 
1-year waiting period required between roll-
overs, discussed later under Rollover From One 
IRA Into Another . For information about direct 
transfers to IRAs from retirement plans other 
than IRAs, see Can You Move Retirement Plan 
Assets? in chapter 1 and Can You Move 
Amounts Into a Roth IRA?  in chapter 2 of Pub. 
590-A.
Rollovers
Generally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution to 
you of cash or other assets from one retirement 
plan that you contribute (roll over) to another re-
tirement plan. The contribution to the second 
retirement plan is called a “rollover contribu-
tion.”
Note. An amount rolled over tax free from 
one retirement plan to another is generally in-
cludible in income when it is distributed from the 
second plan.
Kinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA.  You 
can roll over amounts from the following plans 
into a traditional IRA:
A traditional IRA,
An employer's qualified retirement plan for 
its employees,
A deferred compensation plan of a state or 
local government (section 457 plan), or
A tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 
403(b) plan).
Treatment of rollovers.  You can't deduct a 
rollover contribution, but you must report the 
rollover distribution on your tax return as dis-
cussed later under Reporting rollovers from 
IRAs and under Reporting rollovers from em-
ployer plans.
Kinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA. 
You may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu-
tion from your traditional IRA into a qualified 
plan. These plans include the federal Thrift Sav-
ings Fund (for federal employees), deferred 
compensation plans of state or local govern-
ments (section 457 plans), and tax-sheltered 
annuity plans (section 403(b) plans). The part of 
the distribution that you can roll over is the part 
that would otherwise be taxable (includible in 
your income). Qualified plans may, but aren't 
required to, accept such rollovers.
Time limit for making a rollover contribu-
tion. You generally must make the rollover 
contribution by the 60th day after the day you 
receive the distribution from your traditional IRA 
or your employer's plan.
The IRS may waive the 60-day requirement 
where the failure to do so would be against 
equity or good conscience, such as in the event 
of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond 
your reasonable control. For more information, 
see Can You Move Retirement Plan Assets?  in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.
Extension of rollover period.  If an amount 
distributed to you from a traditional IRA or a 
qualified employer retirement plan is a frozen 
deposit at any time during the 60-day period al-
lowed for a rollover, special rules extend the 
rollover period. For more information, see Can 
You Move Retirement Plan Assets? in chapter 1 
of Pub. 590-A.
Rollover From One IRA Into 
Another
You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the as-
sets from one traditional IRA if you reinvest 
them within 60 days in the same or another tra-
ditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, you can't 
deduct the amount that you reinvest in an IRA.
Waiting period between rollovers.  Gener-
ally, if you make a tax-free rollover of any part of 
a distribution from a traditional IRA, you can't, 
within a 1-year period, make a tax-free rollover 
of any later distribution from that same IRA. You 
also can't make a tax-free rollover of any 
amount distributed, within the same 1-year pe-
riod, from the IRA into which you made the 
tax-free rollover.
The 1-year period begins on the date you re-
ceive the IRA distribution, not on the date you 
roll it over into an IRA. Rules apply to the num-
ber of rollovers you can have with your tradi-
tional IRAs. See Application of one-rollover limi-
tation next.
Application of one-rollover limitation.  You 
can make only one rollover from an IRA to an-
other (or the same) IRA in any 1-year period, re-
gardless of the number of IRAs you own. The 
limit applies by aggregating all of an individual's 
IRAs, including SEP and SIMPLE IRAs, as well 
as traditional and Roth IRAs, effectively treating 
them as one IRA for purposes of the limit. How-
ever, trustee-to-trustee transfers between IRAs 
aren't limited and rollovers from traditional IRAs 
to Roth IRAs (conversions) aren't limited.
Example. John has three traditional IRAs: 
IRA-1, IRA-2, and IRA-3. John didn't take any 
distributions from his IRAs in 2017. On January 
1, 2018, John took a distribution from IRA-1 and 
rolled it over into IRA-2 on the same day. For 
2018, John can't roll over any other 2018 IRA 
distribution, including a rollover distribution in-
volving IRA-3. This wouldn’t apply to a 
trustee-to-trustee transfer or a Roth IRA conver-
sion.
Partial rollovers.  If you withdraw assets from 
a traditional IRA, you can roll over part of the 
withdrawal tax free and keep the rest of it. The 
amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex-
cept for the part that is a return of nondeductible 
contributions). The amount you keep may be 
subject to the 10% additional tax on early distri-
butions, discussed later under What Acts Re-
sult in Penalties or Additional Taxes.
Required distributions.  Amounts that must 
be distributed during a particular year under the 
required distribution  rules (discussed later) 
aren't eligible for rollover treatment.
Inherited IRAs.  If you inherit a traditional IRA 
from your spouse, you generally can roll it over, 
or you can choose to make the inherited IRA 
your own. See Treating it as your own, earlier.
Not inherited from spouse.  If you inherit a 
traditional IRA from someone other than your 
spouse, you can't roll it over or allow it to re-
ceive a rollover contribution. You must withdraw 
the IRA assets within a certain period. For more 
information, see When Must You Withdraw As-
sets? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B.
Reporting rollovers from IRAs.  Report any 
rollover from one traditional IRA to the same or 
another traditional IRA on lines 15a and 15b, 
Form 1040, or lines 11a and 11b, Form 1040A, 
as follows.
Enter the total amount of the distribution on 
Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a. If 
the total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or 
Form 1040A, line 11a, was rolled over, enter 
zero on Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, 
line 11b. If the total distribution wasn't rolled 
over, enter the taxable portion of the part that 
wasn't rolled over on Form 1040, line 15b, or 
Form 1040A, line 11b. Put “Rollover” next to 
Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. 
See your tax return instructions.
If you rolled over the distribution into a quali-
fied plan (other than an IRA) or you make the 
rollover in 2018, attach a statement explaining 
what you did.
Page 129 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 127

Rollover From Employer's Plan 
Into an IRA
You can roll over into a traditional IRA all or part 
of an eligible rollover distribution you receive 
from your (or your deceased spouse's):
Employer's qualified pension, profit-shar-
ing, or stock bonus plan;
Annuity plan;
Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) 
plan); or
Governmental deferred compensation plan 
(section 457 plan).
A qualified plan is one that meets the re-
quirements of the Internal Revenue Code.
Eligible rollover distribution.  Generally, an 
eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of 
all or part of the balance to your credit in a quali-
fied retirement plan except the following.
1. A required minimum distribution (ex-
plained later under When Must You With-
draw IRA Assets? (Required Minimum 
Distributions)).
2. A hardship distribution.
3. Any of a series of substantially equal peri-
odic distributions paid at least once a year 
over:
a. Your lifetime or life expectancy,
b. The lifetimes or life expectancies of 
you and your beneficiary, or
c. A period of 10 years or more.
4. Corrective distributions of excess contri-
butions or excess deferrals, and any in-
come allocable to the excess, or of excess 
annual additions and any allocable gains.
5. A loan treated as a distribution because it 
doesn't satisfy certain requirements either 
when made or later (such as upon de-
fault), unless the participant's accrued 
benefits are reduced (offset) to repay the 
loan.
6. Dividends on employer securities.
7. The cost of life insurance coverage.
Your rollover into a traditional IRA may in-
clude both amounts that would be taxable and 
amounts that wouldn’t be taxable if they were 
distributed to you, but not rolled over. To the ex-
tent the distribution is rolled over into a tradi-
tional IRA, it isn’t includible in your income.
Any nontaxable amounts that you roll 
over into your traditional IRA become 
part of your basis (cost) in your IRAs. 
To recover your basis when you take distribu-
tions from your IRA, you must complete Form 
8606 for the year of the distribution. See Form 
8606 under Distributions Fully or Partly Taxa-
ble, later.
Rollover by nonspouse beneficiary. A direct 
transfer from a deceased employee's qualified 
pension, profit-sharing, or stock bonus plan; an-
nuity plan; tax-sheltered annuity (section 
403(b)) plan; or governmental deferred com-
pensation (section 457) plan to an IRA set up to 
receive the distribution on your behalf can be 
treated as an eligible rollover distribution if you 
TIP
are the designated beneficiary of the plan and 
not the employee's spouse. The IRA is treated 
as an inherited IRA. For more information about 
inherited IRAs, see Inherited IRAs, earlier.
Reporting rollovers from employer plans.
Enter the total distribution (before income tax or 
other deductions were withheld) on Form 1040, 
line 16a; Form 1040A, line 12a; or Form 
1040NR, line 17a. This amount should be 
shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R. From this 
amount, subtract any contributions (usually 
shown in box 5 of Form 1099-R) that were taxa-
ble to you when made. From that result, sub-
tract the amount that was rolled over either di-
rectly or within 60 days of receiving the 
distribution. Enter the remaining amount, even if 
zero, on Form 1040, line 16b; Form 1040A, 
line 12b; or Form 1040NR, line 17b. Also, enter 
"Rollover" next to Form 1040, line 16b; Form 
1040A, line 12b; or Form 1040NR, line 17b.
Transfers Incident to Divorce
If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferred 
from your spouse or former spouse to you by a 
divorce or separate maintenance decree or a 
written document related to such a decree, the 
interest in the IRA, starting from the date of the 
transfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer is 
tax free. For detailed information, see Can You 
Move Retirement Plan Assets?  in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 590-A.
Converting From Any Traditional 
IRA to a Roth IRA
Allowable conversions. You can withdraw all 
or part of the assets from a traditional IRA and 
reinvest them (within 60 days) in a Roth IRA. 
The amount that you withdraw and timely con-
tribute (convert) to the Roth IRA is called a con-
version contribution. If properly (and timely) rol-
led over, the 10% additional tax on early 
distributions won't apply. However, a part or all 
of the conversion contribution from your tradi-
tional IRA is included in your gross income.
Required distributions.  You can't convert 
amounts that must be distributed from your tra-
ditional IRA for a particular year (including the 
calendar year in which you reach age 70 12) un-
der the required distribution  rules (discussed 
later).
Income. You must include in your gross in-
come distributions from a traditional IRA that 
you would have had to include in income if you 
hadn't converted them into a Roth IRA. These 
amounts are normally included in income on 
your return for the year that you converted them 
from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA.
You don't include in gross income any part 
of a distribution from a traditional IRA that is a 
return of your basis, as discussed later.
You must file Form 8606 to report 2017 con-
versions from traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRAs 
to a Roth IRA in 2017 (unless you recharacter-
ized the entire amount) and to figure the amount 
to include in income.
If you must include any amount in your gross 
income, you may have to increase your with-
holding or make estimated tax payments. See 
chapter 4.
Recharacterizations
You may be able to treat a contribution made to 
one type of IRA as having been made to a dif-
ferent type of IRA. This is called recharacteriz-
ing the contribution. See Can You Move Retire-
ment Plan Assets?  in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A 
for more detailed information.
How to recharacterize a contribution. To re-
characterize a contribution, you generally must 
have the contribution transferred from the first 
IRA (the one to which it was made) to the sec-
ond IRA in a trustee-to-trustee transfer. If the 
transfer is made by the due date (including ex-
tensions) for your tax return for the year during 
which the contribution was made, you can elect 
to treat the contribution as having been origi-
nally made to the second IRA instead of to the 
first IRA. If you recharacterize your contribution, 
you must do all three of the following.
Include in the transfer any net income allo-
cable to the contribution. If there was a 
loss, the net income you must transfer may 
be a negative amount.
Report the recharacterization on your tax 
return for the year during which the contri-
bution was made.
Treat the contribution as having been 
made to the second IRA on the date that it 
was actually made to the first IRA.
No deduction allowed.  You can't deduct the 
contribution to the first IRA. Any net income you 
transfer with the recharacterized contribution is 
treated as earned in the second IRA.
Required notifications.  To recharacterize 
a contribution, you must notify both the trustee 
of the first IRA (the one to which the contribution 
was actually made) and the trustee of the sec-
ond IRA (the one to which the contribution is 
being moved) that you have elected to treat the 
contribution as having been made to the sec-
ond IRA rather than the first. You must make 
the notifications by the date of the transfer. Only 
one notification is required if both IRAs are 
maintained by the same trustee. The notifica-
tion(s) must include all of the following informa-
tion.
The type and amount of the contribution to 
the first IRA that is to be recharacterized.
The date on which the contribution was 
made to the first IRA and the year for which 
it was made.
A direction to the trustee of the first IRA to 
transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer the 
amount of the contribution and any net in-
come (or loss) allocable to the contribution 
to the trustee of the second IRA.
The name of the trustee of the first IRA and 
the name of the trustee of the second IRA.
Any additional information needed to make 
the transfer.
Reporting a recharacterization.  If you elect 
to recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as a 
contribution to another IRA, you must report the 
recharacterization on your tax return as directed 
by Form 8606 and its instructions. You must 
treat the contribution as having been made to 
the second IRA.
Page 130 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 128 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

When Can You Withdraw 
or Use IRA Assets?
There are rules limiting use of your IRA assets 
and distributions from it. Violation of the rules 
generally results in additional taxes in the year 
of violation. See What Acts Result in Penalties 
or Additional Taxes, later.
Contributions returned before the due date 
of return.  If you made IRA contributions in 
2017, you can withdraw them tax free by the 
due date of your return. If you have an exten-
sion of time to file your return, you can withdraw 
them tax free by the extended due date. You 
can do this if, for each contribution you with-
draw, both of the following conditions apply.
You didn't take a deduction for the contri-
bution.
You withdraw any interest or other income 
earned on the contribution. You can take 
into account any loss on the contribution 
while it was in the IRA when calculating the 
amount that must be withdrawn. If there 
was a loss, the net income earned on the 
contribution may be a negative amount.
Note. To calculate the amount you must 
withdraw, see Worksheet 1-4 under When Can 
You Withdraw or Use Assets?  in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 590-A.
Earnings includible in income.  You must 
include in income any earnings on the contribu-
tions you withdraw. Include the earnings in in-
come for the year in which you made the contri-
butions, not in the year in which you withdraw 
them.
Generally, except for any part of a with-
drawal that is a return of nondeductible 
contributions (basis), any withdrawal of 
your contributions after the due date (or exten-
ded due date) of your return will be treated as a 
taxable distribution. Excess contributions can 
also be recovered tax free as discussed under 
What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional 
Taxes, later. 
Early distributions tax.  The 10% additional 
tax on distributions made before you reach age 
5912 doesn't apply to these tax-free withdrawals 
of your contributions. However, the distribution 
of interest or other income must be reported on 
Form 5329 and, unless the distribution qualifies 
as an exception to the age 59 12 rule, it will be 
subject to this tax.
When Must You Withdraw 
IRA Assets? (Required 
Minimum Distributions)
You can't keep funds in a traditional IRA indefi-
nitely. Eventually they must be distributed. If 
there are no distributions, or if the distributions 
aren't large enough, you may have to pay a 
50% excise tax on the amount not distributed as 
required. See Excess Accumulations (Insuffi-
cient Distributions) , later. The requirements for 
distributing IRA funds differ depending on 
whether you are the IRA owner or the benefi-
ciary of a decedent's IRA.
CAUTION
!
Required minimum distribution. The amount 
that must be distributed each year is referred to 
as the required minimum distribution.
Distributions not eligible for rollover. 
Amounts that must be distributed (required min-
imum distributions) during a particular year 
aren't eligible for rollover treatment.
IRA owners.  If you are the owner of a tradi-
tional IRA, you generally must start receiving 
distributions from your IRA by April 1 of the year 
following the year in which you reach age 70 12. 
April 1 of the year following the year in which 
you reach age 70 12 is referred to as the re-
quired beginning date.
Distributions by the required beginning 
date. You must receive at least a minimum 
amount for each year starting with the year you 
reach age 7012 (your 7012 year). If you don't (or 
didn't) receive that minimum amount in your 70
12 year, then you must receive distributions for 
your 7012 year by April 1 of the next year.
If an IRA owner dies after reaching age 70
12, but before April 1 of the next year, no mini-
mum distribution is required because death oc-
curred before the required beginning date.
Even if you begin receiving distribu-
tions before you attain age 70 12, you 
must begin calculating and receiving 
required minimum distributions by your required 
beginning date.
Distributions after the required beginning 
date. The required minimum distribution for 
any year after the year you turn 70 12 must be 
made by December 31 of that later year.
Beneficiaries. If you are the beneficiary of a 
decedent's traditional IRA, the requirements for 
distributions from that IRA generally depend on 
whether the IRA owner died before or after the 
required beginning date for distributions.
More information.  For more information, in-
cluding how to figure your minimum required 
distribution each year and how to figure your re-
quired distribution if you are a beneficiary of a 
decedent's IRA, see When Must You Withdraw 
Assets? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B.
Are Distributions Taxable?
In general, distributions from a traditional IRA 
are taxable in the year you receive them.
Exceptions. Exceptions to distributions from 
traditional IRAs being taxable in the year you re-
ceive them are:
Rollovers,
Qualified charitable distributions (QCD), 
discussed later,
Tax-free withdrawals of contributions, dis-
cussed earlier, and
The return of nondeductible contributions, 
discussed later under Distributions Fully or 
Partly Taxable.
Although a conversion of a traditional 
IRA is considered a rollover for Roth 
IRA purposes, it isn't an exception to 
the rule that distributions from a traditional IRA 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
are taxable in the year you receive them. Con-
version distributions are includible in your gross 
income subject to this rule and the special rules 
for conversions explained in Converting From 
Any Traditional IRA Into a Roth IRA  under Can 
You Move Retirement Plan Assets? in chapter 1 
of Pub. 590-A.
Qualified charitable distributions (QCD).  A 
qualified charitable distribution (QCD) is gener-
ally a nontaxable distribution made directly by 
the trustee of your IRA to an organization eligi-
ble to receive tax deductible contributions. See 
Qualified Charitable Distributions  in Pub. 590-B 
for more information.
Ordinary income.  Distributions from tradi-
tional IRAs that you include in income are taxed 
as ordinary income.
No special treatment. In figuring your tax, you 
can't use the 10-year tax option or capital gain 
treatment that applies to lump-sum distributions 
from qualified retirement plans.
Distributions Fully or Partly 
Taxable
Distributions from your traditional IRA may be 
fully or partly taxable, depending on whether 
your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu-
tions.
Fully taxable.  If only deductible contributions 
were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if 
you have more than one), you have no basis in 
your IRA. Because you have no basis in your 
IRA, any distributions are fully taxable when re-
ceived. See Reporting taxable distributions on 
your return, later.
Partly taxable.  If you made nondeductible 
contributions or rolled over any after-tax 
amounts to any of your traditional IRAs, you 
have a cost basis (investment in the contract) 
equal to the amount of those contributions. 
These nondeductible contributions aren't taxed 
when they are distributed to you. They are a re-
turn of your investment in your IRA.
Only the part of the distribution that repre-
sents nondeductible contributions and rolled 
over after-tax amounts (your cost basis) is tax 
free. If nondeductible contributions have been 
made or after-tax amounts have been rolled 
over to your IRA, distributions consist partly of 
nondeductible contributions (basis) and partly 
of deductible contributions, earnings, and gains 
(if there are any). Until all of your basis has 
been distributed, each distribution is partly non-
taxable and partly taxable.
Form 8606.  You must complete Form 8606 
and attach it to your return if you receive a distri-
bution from a traditional IRA and have ever 
made nondeductible contributions or rolled over 
after-tax amounts to any of your traditional 
IRAs. Using the form, you will figure the nontax-
able distributions for 2017 and your total IRA 
basis for 2017 and earlier years.
Note. If you are required to file Form 8606, 
but you aren't required to file an income tax re-
turn, you still must file Form 8606. Send it to the 
IRS at the time and place you would otherwise 
file an income tax return.
Page 131 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 129

Distributions reported on Form 1099-R.  If 
you receive a distribution from your traditional 
IRA, you will receive Form 1099-R, Distributions 
From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or 
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
tracts, etc., or a similar statement. IRA distribu-
tions are shown in boxes 1 and 2a of Form 
1099-R. The number or letter codes in box 7 tell 
you what type of distribution you received from 
your IRA.
Withholding. Federal income tax is withheld 
from distributions from traditional IRAs unless 
you choose not to have tax withheld. See chap-
ter 4.
IRA distributions delivered outside the 
United States. In general, if you are a U.S. citi-
zen or resident alien and your home address is 
outside the United States or its possessions, 
you can't choose exemption from withholding 
on distributions from your traditional IRA.
Reporting taxable distributions on your re-
turn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ-
ing early distributions, on Form 1040, line 15b, 
or Form 1040A, line 11b (no entry is required on 
Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a). 
If only part of the distribution is taxable, enter 
the total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or 
Form 1040A, line 11a, and the taxable part on 
Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. 
You can't report distributions on Form 1040EZ.
What Acts Result in 
Penalties or Additional 
Taxes?
The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs for 
retirement savings can be offset by additional 
taxes and penalties if you don't follow the rules.
There are additions to the regular tax for us-
ing your IRA funds in prohibited transactions. 
There are also additional taxes for the following 
activities.
Investing in collectibles.
Making excess contributions.
Taking early distributions.
Allowing excess amounts to accumulate 
(failing to take required distributions).
There are penalties for overstating the 
amount of nondeductible contributions and for 
failure to file a Form 8606, if required.
Prohibited Transactions
Generally, a prohibited transaction is any im-
proper use of your traditional IRA by you, your 
beneficiary, or any disqualified person.
Disqualified persons include your fiduciary 
and members of your family (spouse, ancestor, 
lineal descendent, and any spouse of a lineal 
descendent).
The following are examples of prohibited 
transactions with a traditional IRA.
Borrowing money from it.
Selling property to it.
Using it as security for a loan.
Buying property for personal use (present 
or future) with IRA funds.
Effect on an IRA account. Generally, if you or 
your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans-
action in connection with your traditional IRA 
account at any time during the year, the ac-
count stops being an IRA as of the first day of 
that year.
Effect on you or your beneficiary.  If your ac-
count stops being an IRA because you or your 
beneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction, 
the account is treated as distributing all its as-
sets to you at their fair market values on the first 
day of the year. If the total of those values is 
more than your basis in the IRA, you will have a 
taxable gain that is includible in your income. 
For information on figuring your gain and report-
ing it in income, see Are Distributions Taxable , 
earlier. The distribution may be subject to addi-
tional taxes or penalties.
Taxes on prohibited transactions.  If some-
one other than the owner or beneficiary of a tra-
ditional IRA engages in a prohibited transaction, 
that person may be liable for certain taxes. In 
general, there is a 15% tax on the amount of the 
prohibited transaction and a 100% additional 
tax if the transaction isn't corrected.
More information.  For more information on 
prohibited transactions, see What Acts Result 
in Penalties or Additional Taxes? in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 590-A.
Investment in Collectibles
If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, the 
amount invested is considered distributed to 
you in the year invested. You may have to pay 
the 10% additional tax on early distributions , 
discussed later.
Collectibles. These include:
Artworks,
Rugs,
Antiques,
Metals,
Gems,
Stamps,
Coins,
Alcoholic beverages, and
Certain other tangible personal property.
Exception. Your IRA can invest in one-, 
one-half-, one-quarter-, or one-tenth-ounce 
U.S. gold coins, or one-ounce silver coins min-
ted by the Treasury Department. It can also in-
vest in certain platinum coins and certain gold, 
silver, palladium, and platinum bullion.
Excess Contributions
Generally, an excess contribution is the amount 
contributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the 
year that is more than the smaller of:
The maximum deductible amount for the 
year (for 2017, this is $5,500 ($6,500 if you 
are 50 or older)); or
Your taxable compensation for the year.
Tax on excess contributions.  In general, if 
the excess contributions for a year aren't with-
drawn by the date your return for the year is due 
(including extensions), you are subject to a 6% 
tax. You must pay the 6% tax each year on ex-
cess amounts that remain in your traditional IRA 
at the end of your tax year. The tax can't be 
more than 6% of the combined value of all your 
IRAs as of the end of your tax year.
Excess contributions withdrawn by due 
date of return.  You won't have to pay the 6% 
tax if you withdraw an excess contribution made 
during a tax year and you also withdraw interest 
or other income earned on the excess contribu-
tion. You must complete your withdrawal by the 
date your tax return for that year is due, includ-
ing extensions.
How to treat withdrawn contributions.
Don't include in your gross income an excess 
contribution that you withdraw from your tradi-
tional IRA before your tax return is due if both 
the following conditions are met.
No deduction was allowed for the excess 
contribution.
You withdraw the interest or other income 
earned on the excess contribution.
You can take into account any loss on the con-
tribution while it was in the IRA when calculating 
the amount that must be withdrawn. If there was 
a loss, the net income you must withdraw may 
be a negative amount.
How to treat withdrawn interest or other 
income. You must include in your gross in-
come the interest or other income that was 
earned on the excess contribution. Report it on 
your return for the year in which the excess con-
tribution was made. Your withdrawal of interest 
or other income may be subject to an additional 
10% tax on early distributions, discussed later.
Excess contributions withdrawn after due 
date of return. In general, you must include all 
distributions (withdrawals) from your traditional 
IRA in your gross income. However, if the fol-
lowing conditions are met, you can withdraw ex-
cess contributions from your IRA and not in-
clude the amount withdrawn in your gross 
income.
Total contributions (other than rollover con-
tributions) for 2017 to your IRA weren't 
more than $5,500 ($6,500 if you are 50 or 
older).
You didn't take a deduction for the excess 
contribution being withdrawn.
The withdrawal can take place at any time, 
even after the due date, including extensions, 
for filing your tax return for the year.
Excess contribution deducted in an earlier 
year. If you deducted an excess contribution in 
an earlier year for which the total contributions 
weren't more than the maximum deductible 
amount for that year (see the following table), 
you can still remove the excess from your tradi-
tional IRA and not include it in your gross in-
come. To do this, file Form 1040X for that year 
and don't deduct the excess contribution on the 
amended return. Generally, you can file an 
amended return within 3 years after you filed 
your return, or 2 years from the time the tax was 
paid, whichever is later.
Page 132 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 130 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Year(s)
Contribution
 limit
Contribution 
limit if age 
50 or older 
at the end of 
the year
2013 through 
2016 $5,500 $6,500
2008 through 
2012 $5,000 $6,000
2006 or 2007 $4,000 $5,000
2005 $4,000 $4,500
2002 through 
2004 $3,000 $3,500
1997 through 
2001 $2,000 —
before 1997 $2,250 —
Excess due to incorrect rollover informa-
tion. If an excess contribution in your tradi-
tional IRA is the result of a rollover and the ex-
cess occurred because the information the plan 
was required to give you was incorrect, you can 
withdraw the excess contribution. The limits 
mentioned above are increased by the amount 
of the excess that is due to the incorrect infor-
mation. You will have to amend your return for 
the year in which the excess occurred to correct 
the reporting of the rollover amounts in that 
year. Don't include in your gross income the 
part of the excess contribution caused by the in-
correct information.
Early Distributions
You must include early distributions of taxable 
amounts from your traditional IRA in your gross 
income. Early distributions are also subject to 
an additional 10% tax. See the discussion of 
Form 5329 under Reporting Additional Taxes , 
later, to figure and report the tax.
Early distributions defined.  Early distribu-
tions generally are amounts distributed from 
your traditional IRA account or annuity before 
you are age 5912.
Age 5912 rule. Generally, if you are under age 
5912, you must pay a 10% additional tax on the 
distribution of any assets (money or other prop-
erty) from your traditional IRA. Distributions be-
fore you are age 59 12 are called early distribu-
tions.
The 10% additional tax applies to the part of 
the distribution that you have to include in gross 
income. It is in addition to any regular income 
tax on that amount.
Exceptions. There are several exceptions 
to the age 5912 rule. Even if you receive a distri-
bution before you are age 59 12, you may not 
have to pay the 10% additional tax if you are in 
one of the following situations.
You have unreimbursed medical expenses 
that are more than 10% of your adjusted 
gross income.
The distributions aren't more than the cost 
of your medical insurance due to a period 
of unemployment.
You are totally and permanently disabled.
You are the beneficiary of a deceased IRA 
owner.
You are receiving distributions in the form 
of an annuity.
The distributions aren't more than your 
qualified higher education expenses.
You use the distributions to buy, build, or 
rebuild a first home.
The distribution is due to an IRS levy of the 
qualified plan.
The distribution is a qualified reservist dis-
tribution.
Most of these exceptions are explained under 
Early Distributions in What Acts Result in Penal-
ties or Additional Taxes?  in chapter 1 of Pub. 
590-B.
Note. Distributions that are timely and prop-
erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, aren't sub-
ject to either regular income tax or the 10% ad-
ditional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess 
contributions after the due date of your return 
are also tax free and therefore not subject to the 
10% additional tax. (See Excess contributions 
withdrawn after due date of return , earlier.) This 
also applies to transfers incident to divorce , as 
discussed earlier.
Receivership distributions.  Early distribu-
tions (with or without your consent) from sav-
ings institutions placed in receivership are sub-
ject to this tax unless one of the exceptions 
listed earlier applies. This is true even if the dis-
tribution is from a receiver that is a state 
agency.
Additional 10% tax.  The additional tax on 
early distributions is 10% of the amount of the 
early distribution that you must include in your 
gross income. This tax is in addition to any reg-
ular income tax resulting from including the dis-
tribution in income.
Nondeductible contributions.  The tax on 
early distributions doesn't apply to the part of a 
distribution that represents a return of your non-
deductible contributions (basis).
More information.  For more information on 
early distributions, see What Acts Result in 
Penalties or Additional Taxes?  in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 590-B.
Excess Accumulations
(Insufficient Distributions)
You can't keep amounts in your traditional IRA 
indefinitely. Generally, you must begin receiving 
distributions by April 1 of the year following the 
year in which you reach age 70 12. The required 
minimum distribution for any year after the year 
in which you reach age 70 12 must be made by 
December 31 of that later year.
Tax on excess.  If distributions are less than 
the required minimum distribution for the year, 
you may have to pay a 50% excise tax for that 
year on the amount not distributed as required.
Request to waive the tax.  If the excess accu-
mulation is due to reasonable error, and you 
have taken, or are taking, steps to remedy the 
insufficient distribution, you can request that the 
tax be waived. If you believe you qualify for this 
relief, attach a statement of explanation and 
complete Form 5329 as instructed under 
Waiver of tax in the Instructions for Form 5329.
Exemption from tax. If you are unable to take 
required distributions because you have a tradi-
tional IRA invested in a contract issued by an in-
surance company that is in state insurer delin-
quency proceedings, the 50% excise tax 
doesn't apply if the conditions and requirements 
of Revenue Procedure 92-10 are satisfied.
More information.  For more information on 
excess accumulations, see What Acts Result in 
Penalties or Additional Taxes?  in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 590-B.
Reporting Additional Taxes
Generally, you must use Form 5329 to report 
the tax on excess contributions, early distribu-
tions, and excess accumulations. If you must 
file Form 5329, you can't use Form 1040A or 
Form 1040EZ.
Filing a tax return.  If you must file an individ-
ual income tax return, complete Form 5329 and 
attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the total addi-
tional taxes due on Form 1040, line 59.
Not filing a tax return.  If you don't have to file 
a tax return but do have to pay one of the addi-
tional taxes mentioned earlier, file the comple-
ted Form 5329 with the IRS at the time and 
place you would have filed your Form 1040. Be 
sure to include your address on page 1 and 
your signature and date on page 2. Enclose, but 
don't attach, a check or money order payable to 
the “United States Treasury” for the tax you 
owe, as shown on Form 5329. Enter your social 
security number and “2017 Form 5329” on your 
check or money order.
Form 5329 not required.  You don't have to 
use Form 5329 if either of the following situa-
tions exists.
Distribution code 1 (early distribution) is 
correctly shown in box 7 of all your Forms 
1099-R. If you don't owe any other addi-
tional tax on a distribution, multiply the tax-
able part of the early distribution by 10% 
and enter the result on Form 1040, line 59. 
Put “No” to the left of the line to indicate 
that you don't have to file Form 5329. How-
ever, if you owe this tax and also owe any 
other additional tax on a distribution, don't 
enter this 10% additional tax directly on 
your Form 1040. You must file Form 5329 
to report your additional taxes. 
If you rolled over part or all of a distribution 
from a qualified retirement plan, the part 
rolled over isn't subject to the tax on early 
distributions.
Roth IRAs
Regardless of your age, you may be able to es-
tablish and make nondeductible contributions to 
a retirement plan called a Roth IRA.
Contributions not reported.  You don't report 
Roth IRA contributions on your return.
Page 133 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 131

What Is a Roth IRA?
A Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that, 
except as explained in this chapter, is subject to 
the rules that apply to a traditional IRA (defined 
earlier). It can be either an account or an annu-
ity. Individual retirement accounts and annuities 
are described under How Can a Traditional IRA 
Be Opened? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.
To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuity 
must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is 
opened. A deemed IRA can be a Roth IRA, but 
neither a SEP IRA nor a SIMPLE IRA can be 
designated as a Roth IRA.
Unlike a traditional IRA, you can't deduct 
contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy 
the requirements, qualified distributions  (dis-
cussed later) are tax free. Contributions can be 
made to your Roth IRA after you reach age 7012
and you can leave amounts in your Roth IRA as 
long as you live.
When Can a Roth IRA Be 
Opened?
You can open a Roth IRA at any time. However, 
the time for making contributions for any year is 
limited. See When Can You Make Contribu-
tions, later, under Can You Contribute to a Roth 
IRA.
Can You Contribute to a 
Roth IRA?
Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA if 
you have taxable compensation  (defined later) 
and your modified AGI  (defined later) is less 
than:
$196,000 for married filing jointly or qualify-
ing widow(er);
$133,000 for single, head of household, or 
married filing separately and you didn't live 
with your spouse at any time during the 
year; or
$10,000 for married filing separately and 
you lived with your spouse at any time dur-
ing the year.
You may be eligible to claim a credit for 
contributions to your Roth IRA. For 
more information, see chapter 38.
TIP
Is there an age limit for contributions? Con-
tributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard-
less of your age.
Can you contribute to a Roth IRA for your 
spouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA for 
your spouse provided the contributions satisfy 
the Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA limit (dis-
cussed in How Much Can Be Contributed?  un-
der Traditional IRAs ), you file jointly, and your 
modified AGI is less than $196,000.
Compensation. Compensation includes wa-
ges, salaries, tips, professional fees, bonuses, 
and other amounts received for providing per-
sonal services. It also includes commissions, 
self-employment income, nontaxable combat 
pay, military differential pay, and taxable ali-
mony and separate maintenance payments.
Modified AGI. Your modified AGI for Roth IRA 
purposes is your adjusted gross income (AGI) 
as shown on your return with some adjust-
ments. Use Worksheet 17-2 below to determine 
your modified AGI.
Worksheet 17-2. Modified Adjusted Gross Income for Roth IRA Purposes Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for Roth IRA purposes.
 1. Enter your adjusted gross income from Form 1040, line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22 ........ 1.  
 2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRA (other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth 
IRA (included on Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b) and a rollover from a qualified 
retirement plan to a Roth IRA (included on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, 
line 12b) .................................................................. 2.  
 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ..................................................... 3.  
 4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Form 1040, line 32, or Form 1040A, line 17 ....... 4.  
 5. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line 33, or Form 1040A, 
line 18 ................................................................... 5.  
 6. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Form 1040, line 35 ............. 6.  
 7. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from Form 2555, line 45, or Form 
2555-EZ, line 18 ............................................................ 7.  
 8. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 ......................... 8.  
 9. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 ................... 9.  
10. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form 8839, line 28 ........ 10.  
11. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 10 .......................................... 11.  
12. Enter:
• $196,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)
• $10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with your 
spouse at any time during the year
• $133,000 for all others 12.  
Is the amount on line 11 more than the amount on line 12?
If yes, then see the Note below.
If no, then the amount on line 11 is your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes.
Note. If the amount on line 11 is more than the amount on line 12 and you have other income or loss items, such as social security 
income or passive activity losses, that are subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the purpose of 
figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. (If you receive social security benefits, use Worksheet 1 in Appendix B of Pub. 
590-A to refigure your AGI.) Then go to line 3 above in this Worksheet 17-2 to refigure your modified AGI. If you don't have other 
income or loss items subject to AGI-based phaseouts, your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is the amount on line 11. 
Page 134 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 132 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

At the time this publication was pre-
pared for printing, Congress was con-
sidering legislation that would extend 
the deduction for tuition and fees, which expired 
at the end of 2016. To see if the legislation was 
enacted, go to Recent Developments at 
IRS.gov/Pub17.
How Much Can Be Contributed?
The contribution limit for Roth IRAs generally 
depends on whether contributions are made 
only to Roth IRAs or to both traditional IRAs and 
Roth IRAs.
Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made only 
to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit generally is 
the lesser of the following amounts.
$5,500 ($6,500 if you are 50 or older in 
2017).
CAUTION
!
Your taxable compensation.
However, if your modified AGI is above a cer-
tain amount, your contribution limit may be re-
duced, as explained later under Contribution 
limit reduced.
Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs.  If contribu-
tions are made to both Roth IRAs and tradi-
tional IRAs established for your benefit, your 
contribution limit for Roth IRAs generally is the 
same as your limit would be if contributions 
were made only to Roth IRAs, but then reduced 
by all contributions for the year to all IRAs other 
than Roth IRAs. Employer contributions under a 
SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan don't affect this limit.
This means that your contribution limit is 
generally the lesser of the following amounts.
$5,500 ($6,500 if you are 50 or older in 
2017) minus all contributions (other than 
employer contributions under a SEP or 
SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAs 
other than Roth IRAs.
Your taxable compensation minus all con-
tributions (other than employer contribu-
tions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for 
the year to all IRAs other than Roth IRAs.
However, if your modified AGI is above a cer-
tain amount, your contribution limit may be re-
duced, as explained next under Contribution 
limit reduced.
Contribution limit reduced.  If your modified 
AGI is above a certain amount, your contribu-
tion limit is gradually reduced. Use Table 17-3 
to determine if this reduction applies to you.
Table 17-3. Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by the amount of your modified adjusted gross income (modified AGI).
IF you have taxable compensation and 
your filing status is...
AND your modified 
AGI is... THEN...
Married filing jointly, or 
Qualifying widow(er)
less than $186,000 you can contribute up to $5,500 ($6,500 if you are 50 or 
older in 2017). 
at least $186,000
but less than $196,000
the amount you can contribute is reduced as explained 
under Contribution limit reduced in chapter 2 of Pub. 
590-A.
$196,000 or more you can't contribute to a Roth IRA.
Married filing separately and you lived 
with your spouse at any time during the year
zero (-0-) you can contribute up to $5,500 ($6,500 if you are 50 or 
older in 2017). 
more than zero (-0-)
but less than $10,000
the amount you can contribute is reduced as explained 
under Contribution limit reduced in chapter 2 of Pub. 
590-A.
$10,000 or more you can't contribute to a Roth IRA.
Single,
Head of household, or Married filing 
separately and you didn't live with your 
spouse at any time during the year
less than $118,000 you can contribute up to $5,500 ($6,500 if you are 50 or 
older in 2017). 
at least $118,000
but less than $133,000
the amount you can contribute is reduced as explained 
under Contribution limit reduced in chapter 2 of Pub. 
590-A.
$133,000 or more you can't contribute to a Roth IRA.
Figuring the reduction.  If the amount you 
can contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, see 
Worksheet 2-2 under Can You Contribute to a 
Roth IRA? in chapter 2 of Pub. 590-A for how to 
figure the reduction.
When Can You Make 
Contributions?
You can make contributions to a Roth IRA for a 
year at any time during the year or by the due 
date of your return for that year (not including 
extensions).
You can make contributions for 2017 
by the due date (not including exten-
sions) for filing your 2017 tax return.
TIP
What if You Contribute Too Much?
A 6% excise tax applies to any excess contribu-
tion to a Roth IRA.
Excess contributions.  These are the contri-
butions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equal 
the total of:
1. Amounts contributed for the tax year to 
your Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop-
erly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRA 
or properly converted from a traditional 
IRA or rolled over from a qualified retire-
ment plan, as described later) that are 
more than your contribution limit for the 
year; plus
2. Any excess contributions for the preceding 
year, reduced by the total of:
a. Any distributions out of your Roth 
IRAs for the year; plus
b. Your contribution limit for the year mi-
nus your contributions to all your IRAs 
for the year.
Withdrawal of excess contributions.  For 
purposes of determining excess contributions, 
any contribution that is withdrawn on or before 
the due date (including extensions) for filing 
your tax return for the year is treated as an 
amount not contributed. This treatment applies 
only if any earnings on the contributions are 
also withdrawn. The earnings are considered to 
have been earned and received in the year the 
excess contribution was made.
Applying excess contributions.  If contribu-
tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more 
than the limit, you can apply the excess contri-
bution in one year to a later year if the contribu-
tions for that later year are less than the maxi-
mum allowed for that year.
Page 135 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 133

Can You Move Amounts 
Into a Roth IRA?
You may be able to convert amounts from either 
a traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth 
IRA. You may be able to roll amounts over from 
a qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA. You 
may be able to recharacterize contributions 
made to one IRA as having been made directly 
to a different IRA. You can roll amounts over 
from a designated Roth account or from one 
Roth IRA to another Roth IRA.
Conversions
You can convert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. 
The conversion is treated as a rollover, regard-
less of the conversion method used. Most of the 
rules for rollovers, described earlier under Roll-
over From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi-
tional IRAs , apply to these rollovers. However, 
the 1-year waiting period doesn't apply.
Conversion methods.  You can convert 
amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA in 
any of the following ways.
Rollover. You can receive a distribution 
from a traditional IRA and roll it over (con-
tribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 days after 
the distribution.
Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can di-
rect the trustee of the traditional IRA to 
transfer an amount from the traditional IRA 
to the trustee of the Roth IRA.
Same trustee transfer. If the trustee of 
the traditional IRA also maintains the Roth 
IRA, you can direct the trustee to transfer 
an amount from the traditional IRA to the 
Roth IRA.
Same trustee.  Conversions made with the 
same trustee can be made by redesignating the 
traditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open-
ing a new account or issuing a new contract.
Rollover from a qualified retirement plan 
into a Roth IRA.  You can roll over into a Roth 
IRA all or part of an eligible rollover distribution 
you receive from your (or your deceased spou-
se's):
Employer's qualified pension, profit-shar-
ing, or stock bonus plan;
Annuity plan;
Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) 
plan); or
Governmental deferred compensation plan 
(section 457 plan).
Any amount rolled over is subject to the same 
rules as those for converting a traditional IRA 
into a Roth IRA. Also, the rollover contribution 
must meet the rollover requirements that apply 
to the specific type of retirement plan.
Income. You must include in your gross in-
come distributions from a qualified retirement 
plan that you would have had to include in in-
come if you hadn't rolled them over into a Roth 
IRA. You don't include in gross income any part 
of a distribution from a qualified retirement plan 
that is a return of basis (after-tax contributions) 
to the plan that were taxable to you when paid. 
These amounts are normally included in income 
on your return for the year you rolled them over 
from the employer plan to a Roth IRA.
If you must include any amount in your 
gross income, you may have to in-
crease your withholding or make esti-
mated tax payments. See Pub. 505, Tax With-
holding and Estimated Tax.
For more information, see Rollover From 
Employer's Plan Into a Roth IRA  in chapter 2 of 
Pub. 590-A.
Converting from a SIMPLE IRA.  Generally, 
you can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRA 
to a Roth IRA under the same rules explained 
earlier under Converting From Any Traditional 
IRA to a Roth IRA under Traditional IRAs.
However, you can't convert any amount dis-
tributed from the SIMPLE IRA during the 2-year 
period beginning on the date you first participa-
ted in any SIMPLE IRA plan maintained by your 
employer.
More information. For more detailed informa-
tion on conversions, see Can You Move 
Amounts Into a Roth IRA?  in chapter 2 in Pub. 
590-A.
Rollover From a Roth IRA
You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the as-
sets from one Roth IRA if you contribute them 
within 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of the 
rules for rollovers, explained earlier under Roll-
over From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi-
tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers.
Rollover from designated Roth account.  A 
rollover from a designated Roth account can 
only be made to another designated Roth ac-
count or to a Roth IRA. For more information 
about designated Roth accounts, see chap-
ter 10.
Are Distributions Taxable?
You don't include in your gross income qualified 
distributions or distributions that are a return of 
your regular contributions from your Roth 
IRA(s). You also don't include distributions from 
your Roth IRA that you roll over tax free into an-
other Roth IRA. You may have to include part of 
other distributions in your income. See Ordering 
rules for distributions, later.
What are qualified distributions?  A qualified 
distribution is any payment or distribution from 
your Roth IRA that meets the following require-
ments.
1. It is made after the 5-year period begin-
ning with the first taxable year for which a 
contribution was made to a Roth IRA set 
up for your benefit, and
2. The payment or distribution is:
a. Made on or after the date you reach 
age 5912,
b. Made because you are disabled,
c. Made to a beneficiary or to your es-
tate after your death, or
d. To pay up to $10,000 (lifetime limit) of 
certain qualified first-time homebuyer 
amounts. See First home under What 
Acts Result in Penalties or Additional 
CAUTION
!
Taxes? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B for 
more information.
Additional tax on distributions of conver-
sion and certain rollover contributions 
within 5-year period.  If, within the 5-year pe-
riod starting with the first day of your tax year in 
which you convert an amount from a traditional 
IRA or roll over an amount from a qualified re-
tirement plan to a Roth IRA, you take a distribu-
tion from a Roth IRA, you may have to pay the 
10% additional tax on early distributions. You 
generally must pay the 10% additional tax on 
any amount attributable to the part of the 
amount converted or rolled over (the conversion 
or rollover contribution) that you had to include 
in income. A separate 5-year period applies to 
each conversion and rollover. See Ordering 
rules for distributions , later, to determine the 
amount, if any, of the distribution that is attribut-
able to the part of the conversion or rollover 
contribution that you had to include in income.
Additional tax on other early distributions. 
Unless an exception applies, you must pay the 
10% additional tax on the taxable part of any 
distributions that aren't qualified distributions. 
See Pub. 590-B for more information.
Ordering rules for distributions.  If you re-
ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that isn't 
a qualified distribution, part of it may be taxable. 
There is a set order in which contributions (in-
cluding conversion contributions and rollover 
contributions from qualified retirement plans) 
and earnings are considered to be distributed 
from your Roth IRA. Regular contributions are 
distributed first. See Ordering Rules for Distri-
butions under Are Distributions Taxable?  in 
chapter 2 of Pub. 590-B for more information.
Must you withdraw or use Roth IRA assets?
You aren't required to take distributions from 
your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri-
bution rules that apply to traditional IRAs don't 
apply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive. 
However, after the death of a Roth IRA owner, 
certain minimum distribution rules that apply to 
traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs.
More information. For more detailed informa-
tion on Roth IRAs, see chapter 2 of Pub. 590-A 
and Pub. 590-B.
18.
Alimony
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
CAUTION
!
Page 136 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 134 Chapter 18 Alimony

other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the rules that apply if 
you pay or receive alimony. It covers the follow-
ing topics.
What payments are alimony.
What payments are not alimony, such as 
child support.
How to deduct alimony you paid.
How to report alimony you received as in-
come.
Whether you must recapture the tax bene-
fits of alimony. Recapture means adding 
back in your income all or part of a deduc-
tion you took in a prior year.
Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or 
former spouse under a divorce or separation in-
strument. It doesn’t include voluntary payments 
that aren’t made under a divorce or separation 
instrument.
Alimony is deductible by the payer, and the 
recipient must include it in income. Although 
this chapter is generally written for the payer of 
the alimony, the recipient can also use the infor-
mation to determine whether an amount re-
ceived is alimony.
To be alimony, a payment must meet certain 
requirements. There are some differences be-
tween the requirements that apply to payments 
under instruments executed after 1984 and to 
payments under instruments executed before 
1985. The general requirements that apply to 
payments regardless of when the divorce or 
separation agreement was executed and the 
specific requirements that apply to post-1984 
(and, in certain cases, some pre-1985 instru-
ments) are discussed in this chapter. If you are 
looking for information on the specific require-
ments that apply to pre-1985 instruments, get 
and keep a copy of the 2004 version of Pub. 
504. That was the last year the information on 
pre-1985 instruments was included in Pub. 504.
Use Table 18-1 in this chapter as a guide to 
determine whether certain payments are con-
sidered alimony.
Definitions. The following definitions apply 
throughout this chapter.
Spouse or former spouse.  Unless other-
wise stated, the term “spouse” includes former 
spouse.
Divorce or separation instrument.  The 
term “divorce or separation instrument” means:
A decree of divorce or separate mainte-
nance or a written instrument incident to 
that decree;
A written separation agreement; or
A decree or any type of court order requir-
ing a spouse to make payments for the 
support or maintenance of the other 
spouse. This includes a temporary decree, 
an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a 
decree of alimony pendente lite (while 
awaiting action on the final decree or 
agreement).
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Divorced or Separated Individuals
General Rules
The following rules apply to alimony regardless 
of when the divorce or separation instrument 
was executed.
Payments not alimony.  Not all payments un-
der a divorce or separation instrument are ali-
mony. Alimony doesn’t include:
Child support; 
Noncash property settlements;
Payments that are your spouse's part of 
community income, as explained under 
Community Property in Pub. 504;
Payments to keep up the payer's property; 
or
Use of the payer's property.
Payments to a third party.  Cash payments, 
checks, or money orders to a third party on be-
half of your spouse under the terms of your di-
vorce or separation instrument can be alimony, 
if they otherwise qualify. These include pay-
ments for your spouse's medical expenses, 
housing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition, 
etc. The payments are treated as received by 
your spouse and then paid to the third party.
Life insurance premiums.  Alimony includes 
premiums you must pay under your divorce or 
separation instrument for insurance on your life 
to the extent your spouse owns the policy.
Payments for jointly owned home. If your di-
vorce or separation instrument states that you 
must pay expenses for a home owned by you 
and your spouse, some of your payments may 
be alimony.
Mortgage payments. If you must pay all the 
mortgage payments (principal and interest) on a 
jointly owned home, and they otherwise qualify 
as alimony, you can deduct half of the total pay-
ments as alimony. If you itemize deductions and 
the home is a qualified home, you can claim half 
of the interest in figuring your deductible inter-
est. Your spouse must report half of the pay-
ments as alimony received. If your spouse item-
izes deductions and the home is a qualified 
home, he or she can claim half of the interest on 
the mortgage in figuring deductible interest.
Taxes and insurance.  If you must pay all 
the real estate taxes or insurance on a home 
held as tenants in common, you can deduct half 
of these payments as alimony. Your spouse 
must report half of these payments as alimony 
received. If you and your spouse itemize 
  504 
deductions, you can each claim half of the real 
estate taxes and none of the home insurance. 
If your home is held as tenants by the en-
tirety or joint tenants, none of your payments for 
taxes or insurance are alimony. But if you item-
ize deductions, you can claim all of the real es-
tate taxes and none of the home insurance.
Other payments to a third party.  If you 
made other third-party payments, see Pub. 504 
to see whether any part of the payments quali-
fies as alimony.
Instruments
Executed After 1984
The following rules for alimony apply to pay-
ments under divorce or separation instruments 
executed after 1984.
Exception for instruments executed before 
1985. There are two situations where the rules 
for instruments executed after 1984 apply to in-
struments executed before 1985.
1. A divorce or separation instrument execu-
ted before 1985 and then modified after 
1984 to specify that the after-1984 rules 
will apply.
2. A temporary divorce or separation instru-
ment executed before 1985 and incorpo-
rated into, or adopted by, a final decree 
executed after 1984 that:
a. Changes the amount or period of pay-
ment, or
b. Adds or deletes any contingency or 
condition.
For the rules for alimony payments under 
pre-1985 instruments not meeting these excep-
tions, get the 2004 version of Pub. 504 at 
IRS.gov/Pub504.
Example 1.  In November 1984, you and 
your former spouse executed a written separa-
tion agreement. In February 1985, a decree of 
divorce was substituted for the written separa-
tion agreement. The decree of divorce didn’t 
change the terms for the alimony you pay your 
former spouse. The decree of divorce is treated 
as executed before 1985. Alimony payments 
under this decree aren’t subject to the rules for 
payments under instruments executed after 
1984.
Example 2.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1  except that the decree of divorce 
changed the amount of the alimony. In this ex-
ample, the decree of divorce isn’t treated as 
executed before 1985. The alimony payments 
are subject to the rules for payments under in-
struments executed after 1984.
Alimony requirements. A payment to or for a 
spouse under a divorce or separation instru-
ment is alimony if the spouses don’t file a joint 
return with each other and all the following re-
quirements are met.
The payment is in cash.
The instrument doesn’t designate the pay-
ment as not alimony.
The spouses aren’t members of the same 
household at the time the payments are 
Page 137 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 18 Alimony Page 135

made. This requirement applies only if the 
spouses are legally separated under a de-
cree of divorce or separate maintenance.
There is no liability to make any payment 
(in cash or property) after the death of the 
recipient spouse.
The payment isn’t treated as child support. 
Each of these requirements is discussed next.
Cash payment requirement.  Only cash pay-
ments, including checks and money orders, 
qualify as alimony. The following don’t qualify 
as alimony.
Transfers of services or property (including 
a debt instrument of a third party or an an-
nuity contract).
Execution of a debt instrument by the 
payer.
The use of the payer's property.
Payments to a third party. Cash payments 
to a third party under the terms of your divorce 
or separation instrument can qualify as cash 
payments to your spouse. See Payments to a 
third party under General Rules, earlier.
Also, cash payments made to a third party at 
the written request of your spouse may qualify 
as alimony if all the following requirements are 
met.
The payments are in lieu of payments of 
alimony directly to your spouse.
The written request states that both spou-
ses intend the payments to be treated as 
alimony.
You receive the written request from your 
spouse before you file your return for the 
year you made the payments.
Payments designated as not alimony.  You 
and your spouse can designate that otherwise 
qualifying payments aren’t alimony. You do this 
by including a provision in your divorce or sepa-
ration instrument that states the payments 
aren’t deductible as alimony by you and are ex-
cludable from your spouse's income. For this 
purpose, any instrument (written statement) 
signed by both of you that makes this designa-
tion and that refers to a previous written separa-
tion agreement is treated as a written separa-
tion agreement (and therefore a divorce or 
separation instrument). If you are subject to 
temporary support orders, the designation must 
be made in the original or a later temporary sup-
port order.
Your spouse can exclude the payments 
from income only if he or she attaches a copy of 
the instrument designating them as not alimony 
to his or her return. The copy must be attached 
each year the designation applies.
Spouses can’t be members of the same 
household. Payments to your spouse while 
you are members of the same household aren’t 
alimony if you are legally separated under a de-
cree of divorce or separate maintenance. A 
home you formerly shared is considered one 
household, even if you physically separate 
yourselves in the home.
You aren’t treated as members of the same 
household if one of you is preparing to leave the 
household and does leave no later than 1 
month after the date of the payment.
Exception. If you aren’t legally separated 
under a decree of divorce or separate mainte-
nance, a payment under a written separation 
agreement, support decree, or other court order 
may qualify as alimony even if you are mem-
bers of the same household when the payment 
is made.
Liability for payments after death of recipi-
ent spouse. If any part of payments you make 
must continue to be made for any period after 
your spouse's death, that part of your payments 
isn’t alimony, whether made before or after the 
death. If all of the payments would continue, 
then none of the payments made before or after 
the death are alimony.
The divorce or separation instrument 
doesn’t have to expressly state that the pay-
ments cease upon the death of your spouse if, 
for example, the liability for continued payments 
would end under state law.
Example. You must pay your former 
spouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10 years. 
Your divorce decree states that the payments 
will end upon your former spouse's death. You 
must also pay your former spouse or your for-
mer spouse's estate $20,000 in cash each year 
for 10 years. The death of your spouse wouldn’t 
end these payments under state law.
The $10,000 annual payments may qualify 
as alimony. The $20,000 annual payments that 
don’t end upon your former spouse's death 
aren’t alimony.
Substitute payments.  If you must make 
any payments in cash or property after your 
spouse's death as a substitute for continuing 
otherwise qualifying payments before the 
death, the otherwise qualifying payments aren’t 
alimony. To the extent that your payments be-
gin, accelerate, or increase because of the 
death of your spouse, otherwise qualifying pay-
ments you made may be treated as payments 
that weren’t alimony. Whether or not such pay-
ments will be treated as not alimony depends 
on all the facts and circumstances.
Example 1.  Under your divorce decree, 
you must pay your former spouse $30,000 an-
nually. The payments will stop at the end of 6 
years or upon your former spouse's death, if 
earlier.
Your former spouse has custody of your mi-
nor children. The decree provides that if any 
child is still a minor at your spouse's death, you 
must pay $10,000 annually to a trust until the 
youngest child reaches the age of majority. The 
trust income and corpus (principal) are to be 
used for your children's benefit.
These facts indicate that the payments to be 
made after your former spouse's death are a 
substitute for $10,000 of the $30,000 annual 
payments. Of each of the $30,000 annual pay-
ments, $10,000 isn’t alimony.
Example 2.  Under your divorce decree, 
you must pay your former spouse $30,000 an-
nually. The payments will stop at the end of 15 
years or upon your former spouse's death, if 
earlier. The decree provides that if your former 
spouse dies before the end of the 15-year pe-
riod, you must pay the estate the difference be-
tween $450,000 ($30,000 × 15) and the total 
amount paid up to that time. For example, if 
your spouse dies at the end of the tenth year, 
you must pay the estate $150,000 ($450,000 − 
$300,000).
These facts indicate that the lump-sum pay-
ment to be made after your former spouse's 
death is a substitute for the full amount of the 
$30,000 annual payments. None of the annual 
Table 18-1. Alimony Requirements (Instruments Executed After 1984)
Payments ARE alimony if all of the 
following are true:
Payments are NOT alimony if any of the 
following are true:
Payments are required by a divorce or 
separation instrument.
Payments aren’t required by a divorce or 
separation instrument.
Payer and recipient spouse don’t file a joint 
return with each other.
Payer and recipient spouse file a joint return 
with each other.
Payment is in cash (including checks or money 
orders).
Payment is:
Not in cash,
A noncash property settlement,
Spouse's part of community income, or
To keep up the payer's property.
Payment isn’t designated in the instrument as 
not alimony.
Payment is designated in the instrument as 
not alimony.
Spouses legally separated under a decree of 
divorce or separate maintenance aren’t 
members of the same household.
Spouses legally separated under a decree of 
divorce or separate maintenance are 
members of the same household.
Payments aren’t required after death of the 
recipient spouse.
Payments are required after death of the 
recipient spouse.
Payment isn’t treated as child support. Payment is treated as child support.
These payments are deductible by the payer 
and includible in income by the recipient.
These payments are neither deductible by 
the payer nor includible in income by the 
recipient.
Page 138 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 136 Chapter 18 Alimony

payments are alimony. The result would be the 
same if the payment required at death were to 
be discounted by an appropriate interest factor 
to account for the prepayment.
Child support.  A payment that is specifically 
designated as child support or treated as spe-
cifically designated as child support under your 
divorce or separation instrument isn’t alimony. 
The amount of child support may vary over 
time. Child support payments aren’t deductible 
by the payer and aren’t taxable to the recipient.
Specifically designated as child support. 
A payment will be treated as specifically desig-
nated as child support to the extent that the 
payment is reduced either:
On the happening of a contingency relating 
to your child, or
At a time that can be clearly associated 
with the contingency.
A payment may be treated as specifically desig-
nated as child support even if other separate 
payments are specifically designated as child 
support.
Contingency relating to your child.  A 
contingency relates to your child if it depends 
on any event relating to that child. It doesn’t 
matter whether the event is certain or likely to 
occur. Events relating to your child include the 
child's:
Becoming employed,
Dying,
Leaving the household,
Leaving school,
Marrying, or
Reaching a specified age or income level.
Clearly associated with a contingency. 
Payments that would otherwise qualify as ali-
mony are presumed to be reduced at a time 
clearly associated with the happening of a con-
tingency relating to your child only in the follow-
ing situations.
The payments are to be reduced not more 
than 6 months before or after the date the 
child will reach 18, 21, or local age of ma-
jority.
The payments are to be reduced on two or 
more occasions that occur not more than 1 
year before or after a different one of your 
children reaches a certain age from 18 to 
24. This certain age must be the same for 
each child, but needn’t be a whole number 
of years.
In all other situations, reductions in payments 
are not treated as clearly associated with the 
happening of a contingency relating to your 
child.
Either you or the IRS can overcome the pre-
sumption in the two situations above. This is 
done by showing that the time at which the pay-
ments are to be reduced was determined inde-
pendently of any contingencies relating to your 
children. For example, if you can show that the 
period of alimony payments is customary in the 
local jurisdiction, such as a period equal to half 
of the duration of the marriage, you can over-
come the presumption and may be able to treat 
the amount as alimony.
How To Deduct 
Alimony Paid
You can deduct alimony you paid, whether or 
not you itemize deductions on your return. You 
must file Form 1040. You can’t use Form 
1040A, Form 1040EZ, or Form 1040NR.
Enter the amount of alimony you paid on 
Form 1040, line 31a. In the space provided on 
line 31b, enter the recipient’s social security 
number (SSN) or individual taxpayer identifica-
tion number (ITIN).
If you paid alimony to more than one person, 
enter the SSN or ITIN of one of the recipients. 
Show the SSN or ITIN and amount paid to each 
additional recipient on an attached statement. 
Enter your total payments on line 31a.
If you don’t provide your spouse's SSN 
or ITIN, you may have to pay a $50 
penalty and your deduction may be 
disallowed. For more information on SSNs and 
ITINs, see Social Security Number (SSN)  in 
chapter 1.
How To Report 
Alimony Received
Report alimony you received as income on 
Form 1040, line 11, or on Schedule NEC (Form 
1040NR), line 12. You can’t use Form 1040A, 
Form 1040EZ, or Form 1040NR-EZ.
You must give the person who paid the 
alimony your SSN or ITIN. If you don’t, 
you may have to pay a $50 penalty.
Recapture Rule
If your alimony payments decrease or end dur-
ing the first 3 calendar years, you may be sub-
ject to the recapture rule. If you are subject to 
this rule, you have to include in income in the 
third year part of the alimony payments you pre-
viously deducted. Your spouse can deduct in 
the third year part of the alimony payments he 
or she previously included in income.
The 3-year period starts with the first calen-
dar year you make a payment qualifying as ali-
mony under a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance or a written separation agreement. 
Don’t include any time in which payments were 
being made under temporary support orders. 
The second and third years are the next 2 cal-
endar years, whether or not payments are 
made during those years.
The reasons for a reduction or end of ali-
mony payments that can require a recapture in-
clude:
A change in your divorce or separation in-
strument,
A failure to make timely payments,
A reduction in your ability to provide sup-
port, or
A reduction in your spouse's support 
needs.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
When to apply the recapture rule.  You are 
subject to the recapture rule in the third year if 
the alimony you pay in the third year decreases 
by more than $15,000 from the second year or 
the alimony you pay in the second and third 
years decreases significantly from the alimony 
you pay in the first year.
When you figure a decrease in alimony, 
don’t include the following amounts.
Payments made under a temporary sup-
port order.
Payments required over a period of at least 
3 calendar years that vary because they 
are a fixed part of your income from a busi-
ness or property, or from compensation for 
employment or self-employment.
Payments that decrease because of the 
death of either spouse or the remarriage of 
the spouse receiving the payments before 
the end of the third year.
Figuring the recapture.  You can use Work-
sheet 1 in Pub. 504 to figure recaptured ali-
mony.
Including the recapture in income.  If you 
must include a recaptured amount in income, 
show it on Form 1040, line 11 (“Alimony re-
ceived”). Cross out “received” and enter “recap-
ture.” On the dotted line next to the amount, en-
ter your spouse's last name and SSN or ITIN.
Deducting the recapture. If you can deduct a 
recaptured amount, show it on Form 1040, 
line 31a (“Alimony paid”). Cross out “paid” and 
enter “recapture.” In the space provided, enter 
your spouse's SSN or ITIN.
19.
Education-
Related
Adjustments
Introduction
This chapter discusses the education-related 
adjustments you can deduct in figuring your ad-
justed gross income.
This chapter covers the student loan interest 
deduction, tuition and fees deduction, and the 
deduction for educator expenses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Tax Benefits for Education  970
Page 139 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 137

What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Student loan interest deduction.  For 2017, 
the amount of your student loan interest deduc-
tion is gradually reduced (phased out) if your 
MAGI is between $65,000 and $80,000 
($135,000 and $165,000 if you file a joint re-
turn). You can't claim the deduction if your 
MAGI is $80,000 or more ($165,000 or more if 
you file a joint return).
Tuition and fees deduction.  The tuition and 
fees deduction has expired and you can no lon-
ger take this deduction. If extended (see Cau-
tion above), information about this deduction 
will be available in the Recent Developments at 
IRS.gov/Pub17.
Student Loan Interest 
Deduction
Generally, personal interest you pay, other than 
certain mortgage interest, isn't deductible on 
your tax return. However, if your modified adjus-
ted gross income (MAGI) is less than $80,000 
($165,000 if filing a joint return), you may be al-
lowed a special deduction for paying interest on 
a student loan (also known as an education 
loan) used for higher education. For most tax-
payers, MAGI is the adjusted gross income as 
figured on their federal income tax return before 
subtracting any deduction for student loan inter-
est. This deduction can reduce the amount of 
your income subject to tax by up to $2,500. Ta-
ble 19-1 summarizes the features of the student 
loan interest deduction.
CAUTION
!
Table 19-1. Student Loan Interest 
Deduction at a Glance
Don’t rely on this table alone.
Refer to the text for more details.
Feature Description
Maximum 
benefit
You can reduce your income 
subject to tax by up to $2,500. 
Loan 
qualifications
Your student loan:
• Must have been taken out 
solely to pay qualified 
education expenses, and
• Can't be from a related 
person or made under a 
qualified employer plan. 
Student 
qualifications
The student must be:
• You, your spouse, or your 
dependent (as defined 
later for this purpose); and
• Enrolled at least half-time 
in a program leading to a 
degree, certificate, or 
other recognized 
educational credential at 
an eligible educational 
institution. 
Limit on 
modified 
adjusted 
gross income 
(MAGI)
$165,000 if married filing a 
joint return; 
$80,000 if single, head of 
household, or qualifying 
widow(er). 
Student Loan Interest 
Defined
Student loan interest is interest you paid during 
the year on a qualified student loan. It includes 
both required and voluntary interest payments.
Qualified Student Loan
This is a loan you took out solely to pay quali-
fied education expenses (defined later) that 
were:
For you, your spouse, or a person who was 
your dependent (as defined later for this 
purpose) when you took out the loan;
Paid or incurred within a reasonable period 
of time before or after you took out the 
loan; and
For education provided during an aca-
demic period for an eligible student.
Loans from the following sources aren't 
qualified student loans.
A related person.
A qualified employer plan.
Your dependent.  Generally, your dependent 
is someone who is either a:
Qualifying child, or
Qualifying relative.
You can find more information about de-
pendents in chapter 3.
For this purpose, the term “dependent” also 
includes any person you could have claimed as 
a dependent on your return except that:
You, or your spouse if filing jointly, could 
be claimed as a dependent of another tax-
payer;
The person filed a joint return; or
The person had gross income for the year 
that was equal to or more than the exemp-
tion amount for the year ($4,050 for 2017).
Reasonable period of time.  Qualified educa-
tion expenses are treated as paid or incurred 
within a reasonable period of time before or af-
ter you take out the loan if they are paid with the 
proceeds of student loans that are part of a fed-
eral postsecondary education loan program.
Even if not paid with the proceeds of that 
type of loan, the expenses are treated as paid 
or incurred within a reasonable period of time if 
both of the following requirements are met.
The expenses relate to a specific aca-
demic period.
The loan proceeds are disbursed within a 
period that begins 90 days before the start 
of that academic period and ends 90 days 
after the end of that academic period.
If neither of the above situations applies, the 
reasonable period of time usually is determined 
based on all the relevant facts and circumstan-
ces.
Academic period.  An academic period in-
cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other 
period of study (such as a summer school ses-
sion) as reasonably determined by an educa-
tional institution. If an educational institution 
uses credit hours or clock hours and doesn't 
have academic terms, each payment period 
can be treated as an academic period.
Eligible student.  An eligible student is a stu-
dent who was enrolled at least half-time in a 
program leading to a degree, certificate, or 
other recognized educational credential.
Enrolled at least half-time.  A student was 
enrolled at least half-time if the student was tak-
ing at least half the normal full-time work load 
for his or her course of study.
The standard for what is half of the normal 
full-time work load is determined by each eligi-
ble educational institution. However, the stand-
ard may not be lower than any of those estab-
lished by the U.S. Department of Education 
under the Higher Education Act of 1965.
Related person.  You can't deduct interest on 
a loan you get from a related person. Related 
persons include:
Your spouse;
Your brothers and sisters;
Your half brothers and half sisters;
Your ancestors (parents, grandparents, 
etc.);
Your lineal descendants (children, grand-
children, etc.); and
Certain corporations, partnerships, trusts, 
and exempt organizations.
Page 140 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 138 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Qualified employer plan.  You can't deduct 
interest on a loan made under a qualified em-
ployer plan or under a contract purchased un-
der such a plan.
Qualified Education Expenses
For purposes of the student loan interest de-
duction, these expenses are the total costs of 
attending an eligible educational institution. 
They include amounts paid for the following 
items.
Tuition and fees.
Room and board.
Books, supplies, and equipment.
Other necessary expenses (such as trans-
portation).
The cost of room and board qualifies only to 
the extent it isn't more than:
The allowance for room and board, as de-
termined by the eligible educational institu-
tion, that was included in the cost of at-
tendance (for federal financial aid 
purposes) for a particular academic period 
and living arrangement of the student; or
If greater, the actual amount charged if the 
student is residing in housing owned or op-
erated by the eligible educational institu-
tion.
Eligible educational institution.  An eligible 
educational institution is generally any accredi-
ted public, nonprofit, or proprietary (privately 
owned profit-making) college, university, voca-
tional school, or other postsecondary educa-
tional institution. Also, the institution must be eli-
gible to participate in a student aid program 
administered by the U.S. Department of Educa-
tion. Virtually all accredited postsecondary insti-
tutions meet this definition. 
An eligible educational institution also in-
cludes certain educational institutions located 
outside the United States that are eligible to 
participate in the U.S. Department of Educa-
tion's Federal Student Aid (FSA) programs.
For purposes of the student loan interest de-
duction, an eligible educational institution also 
includes an institution conducting an internship 
or residency program leading to a degree or 
certificate from an institution of higher educa-
tion, a hospital, or a health care facility that of-
fers postgraduate training.
An educational institution must meet the 
above criteria only during the academic pe-
riod(s) for which the student loan was incurred. 
The deductibility of interest on the loan isn't af-
fected by the institution's subsequent loss of eli-
gibility.
The educational institution should be 
able to tell you if it is an eligible educa-
tional institution.
Adjustments to qualified education expen-
ses. You must reduce your qualified education 
expenses by certain tax-free items (such as the 
tax-free part of scholarships and fellowship 
grants). See chapter 4 of Pub. 970 for details.
TIP
Include as Interest
In addition to simple interest on the loan, if all 
other requirements are met, the items dis-
cussed below can be student loan interest.
Loan origination fee.  In general, this is a 
one-time fee charged by the lender when a loan 
is made. To be deductible as interest, a loan 
origination fee must be for the use of money 
rather than for property or services (such as 
commitment fees or processing costs) provided 
by the lender. A loan origination fee treated as 
interest accrues over the life of the loan.
Capitalized interest.  This is unpaid interest 
on a student loan that is added by the lender to 
the outstanding principal balance of the loan.
Interest on revolving lines of credit.  This in-
terest, which includes interest on credit card 
debt, is student loan interest if the borrower 
uses the line of credit (credit card) only to pay 
qualified education expenses. See Qualified 
Education Expenses, earlier.
Interest on refinanced and consolidated 
student loans.  This includes interest on a 
loan used solely to refinance a qualified student 
loan of the same borrower. It also includes a 
single consolidation loan used solely to refi-
nance two or more qualified student loans of the 
same borrower.
If you refinance a qualified student loan 
for more than your original loan and 
you use the additional amount for any 
purpose other than qualified education expen-
ses, you can't deduct any interest paid on the 
refinanced loan.
Don’t Include as Interest
You can't claim a student loan interest deduc-
tion for any of the following items.
Interest you paid on a loan if, under the 
terms of the loan, you aren't legally obliga-
ted to make interest payments.
Loan origination fees that are payments for 
property or services provided by the 
lender, such as commitment fees or pro-
cessing costs.
Interest you paid on a loan to the extent 
payments were made through your partici-
pation in the National Health Service 
Corps Loan Repayment Program (the 
“NHSC Loan Repayment Program”) or cer-
tain other loan repayment assistance pro-
grams. For more information, see Student 
Loan Repayment Assistance in chapter 5 
of Pub. 970. 
Can You Claim the 
Deduction?
Generally, you can claim the deduction if all of 
the following requirements are met.
Your filing status is any filing status except 
married filing separately.
No one else is claiming an exemption for 
you on his or her tax return.
You are legally obligated to pay interest on 
a qualified student loan.
CAUTION
!
You paid interest on a qualified student 
loan.
Interest paid by others.  If you are the person 
legally obligated to make interest payments and 
someone else makes a payment of interest on 
your behalf, you are treated as receiving the 
payments from the other person and, in turn, 
paying the interest. See chapter 4 of Pub. 970 
for more information.
No Double Benefit Allowed
You can't deduct as interest on a student loan 
any amount that is an allowable deduction un-
der any other provision of the tax law (for exam-
ple, home mortgage interest).
How Much Can You 
Deduct?
Your student loan interest deduction is gener-
ally the smaller of:
$2,500, or
The interest you paid during the tax year.
However, the amount determined above is 
phased out (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is 
between $65,000 and $80,000 ($135,000 and 
$165,000 if you file a joint return). You can't 
take a student loan interest deduction if your 
MAGI is $80,000 or more ($165,000 or more if 
you file a joint return). For details on figuring 
your MAGI, see chapter 4 of Pub. 970.
How Do You Figure the 
Deduction?
Generally, you figure the deduction using the 
Student Loan Interest Deduction Worksheet in 
the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions. 
However, if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ, 
or 4563, or you are excluding income from sour-
ces within Puerto Rico, you must complete 
Worksheet 4-1 in chapter 4 of Pub. 970.
To help you figure your student loan interest 
deduction, you should receive Form 1098-E, 
Student Loan Interest Statement. Generally, an 
institution (such as a bank or governmental 
agency) that received interest payments of 
$600 or more during 2017 on one or more quali-
fied student loans must send Form 1098-E (or 
an acceptable substitute) to each borrower by 
January 31, 2018.
For qualified student loans taken out before 
September 1, 2004, the institution is required to 
include on Form 1098-E only payments of sta-
ted interest. Other interest payments, such as 
certain loan origination fees and capitalized in-
terest, may not appear on the form you receive. 
However, if you pay qualifying interest that isn't 
included on Form 1098-E, you can also deduct 
those amounts. For information on allocating 
payments between interest and principal, see 
chapter 4 of Pub. 970. 
To claim the deduction, enter the allowable 
amount on Form 1040, line 33; or Form 1040A, 
line 18.
Page 141 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 139

Educator Expenses
If you were an eligible educator in 2017, you 
can deduct up to $250 of qualified expenses 
you paid in 2017 as an adjustment to gross in-
come on Form 1040, line 23, rather than as a 
miscellaneous itemized deduction. If you file 
Form 1040A, you can deduct these expenses 
on line 16. If you and your spouse are filing 
jointly and both of you were eligible educators, 
the maximum deduction is $500. However, nei-
ther spouse can deduct more than $250 of his 
or her qualified expenses.
Eligible educator.  An eligible educator is a 
kindergarten through grade 12 teacher, instruc-
tor, counselor, principal, or aide in school for at 
least 900 hours during a school year.
Qualified expenses.  Qualified expenses in-
clude ordinary and necessary expenses paid in 
connection with books, supplies, equipment (in-
cluding computer equipment, software, and 
services), and other materials used in the class-
room. An ordinary expense is one that is com-
mon and accepted in your educational field. A 
necessary expense is one that is helpful and 
appropriate for your profession as an educator. 
An expense doesn’t have to be required to be 
considered necessary.
Qualified expenses also include those ex-
penses you incur while participating in profes-
sional development courses related to the cur-
riculum in which you provide instruction. It also 
includes those expenses related to those stu-
dents for whom you provide that instruction.
Qualified expenses don’t include expenses 
for home schooling or for nonathletic supplies 
for courses in health or physical education. You 
must reduce your qualified expenses by the fol-
lowing amounts.
Excludable U.S. series EE and I savings 
bond interest from Form 8815.
Nontaxable qualified state tuition program 
earnings.
Nontaxable earnings from Coverdell edu-
cation savings accounts.
Any reimbursements you received for 
those expenses that weren’t reported to 
you on your Form W-2, box 1.
Educator expenses over limit.  If you were 
an educator in 2017 and you had qualified ex-
penses that you can’t take as an adjustment to 
gross income, you can deduct the rest as an 
itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit.
Page 142 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 140 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Part Five.
Standard 
Deduction and 
Itemized 
Deductions
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to 
subtract the deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract 
either the standard deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized deductions 
are deductions for certain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 
1040). The 10 chapters in this part discuss the standard deduction, each 
itemized deduction, and a limit on some of your itemized deductions if your 
adjusted gross income is more than a certain amount. See chapter 20 for 
the factors to consider when deciding whether to take the standard 
deduction or itemized deductions.
20.
Standard 
Deduction
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Standard deduction increased.  The stand-
ard deduction for taxpayers who don't itemize 
their deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) is 
higher for 2017 than it was for 2016. The 
amount depends on your filing status. You can 
use the 2017 Standard Deduction Tables in this 
chapter to figure your standard deduction.
In addition to the annual increase due to in-
flation adjustments, your 2017 standard deduc-
tion is increased by any net disaster loss due to 
Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Maria. To claim the 
increased standard deduction, you must file 
Form 1040. See Pub. 976 for more information.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following topics.
How to figure the amount of your standard 
deduction.
The standard deduction for dependents.
CAUTION
!
Who should itemize deductions.
Most taxpayers have a choice of either tak-
ing a standard deduction or itemizing their de-
ductions. If you have a choice, you can use the 
method that gives you the lower tax.
The standard deduction is a dollar amount 
that reduces your taxable income. It is a benefit 
that eliminates the need for many taxpayers to 
itemize actual deductions, such as medical ex-
penses, charitable contributions, and taxes, on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). The standard deduc-
tion is higher for taxpayers who:
Are 65 or older, or
Are blind.
You benefit from the standard deduc-
tion if your standard deduction is more 
than the total of your allowable item-
ized deductions.
Persons not eligible for the standard de-
duction. Your standard deduction is zero and 
you should itemize any deductions you have if:
Your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, and your spouse itemizes deduc-
tions on his or her return;
You are filing a tax return for a short tax 
year because of a change in your annual 
accounting period; or
You are a nonresident or dual-status alien 
during the year. You are considered a 
dual-status alien if you were both a nonres-
ident and resident alien during the year.
If you are a nonresident alien who is married 
to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of 
the year, you can choose to be treated as a 
U.S. resident. (See Pub. 519.) If you make this 
choice, you can take the standard deduction.
If an exemption for you can be claimed 
on another person's return (such as 
your parents' return), your standard de-
duction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-
tion for Dependents, later.
Standard Deduction 
Amount
The standard deduction amount depends on 
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or 
blind, and whether another taxpayer can claim 
TIP
CAUTION
!
an exemption for you. Generally, the standard 
deduction amounts are adjusted each year for 
inflation. The standard deduction amounts for 
most people are shown in Table 20-1.
Decedent's final return. The standard deduc-
tion for a decedent's final tax return is the same 
as it would have been had the decedent contin-
ued to live. However, if the decedent wasn't 65 
or older at the time of death, the higher stand-
ard deduction for age can't be claimed.
Higher Standard 
Deduction
for Age (65 or Older)
If you are age 65 or older on the last day of the 
year and don't itemize deductions, you are enti-
tled to a higher standard deduction. You are 
considered 65 on the day before your 65th 
birthday. Therefore, you can take a higher 
standard deduction for 2017 if you were born 
before January 2, 1953.
Use Table 20-2  to figure the standard de-
duction amount.
Death of a taxpayer. If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2017, see Death 
of taxpayer in Pub. 501 before using Table 20-2 
or Table 20-3.
Higher Standard 
Deduction
for Blindness
If you are blind on the last day of the year and 
you don't itemize deductions, you are entitled to 
a higher standard deduction.
Not totally blind. If you aren't totally blind, you 
must get a certified statement from an eye doc-
tor (ophthalmologist or optometrist) that:
You can't see better than 20/200 in the bet-
ter eye with glasses or contact lenses, or
Your field of vision is 20 degrees or less.
If your eye condition isn't likely to improve 
beyond these limits, the statement should in-
clude this fact. Keep the statement in your re-
cords.
If your vision can be corrected beyond these 
limits only by contact lenses that you can wear 
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers, 
Page 143 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 141

you can take the higher standard deduction for 
blindness if you otherwise qualify.
Spouse 65 or Older or 
Blind
You can take the higher standard deduction if 
your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
You file a joint return, or
You file a separate return and can claim an 
exemption for your spouse because your 
spouse had no gross income and can't be 
claimed as a dependent by another tax-
payer.
Death of a spouse.  If your spouse died in 
2017 before reaching age 65, you can't take a 
higher standard deduction because of your 
spouse. Even if your spouse was born before 
January 2, 1953, he or she isn't considered 65 
or older at the end of 2017 unless he or she was 
65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before his or her 65th birthday.
Example. Your spouse was born on Febru-
ary 14, 1952, and died on February 13, 2017. 
Your spouse is considered age 65 at the time of 
death. However, if your spouse died on Febru-
ary 12, 2017, your spouse isn't considered age 
65 at the time of death and isn't 65 or older at 
the end of 2017.
You can't claim the higher standard de-
duction for an individual other than 
yourself and your spouse.
Higher Standard 
Deduction for Net Disaster 
Loss
Your standard deduction is increased by any 
net disaster loss due to Hurricane Harvey, Irma, 
or Maria.
See Pub. 976 for more information on how 
to figure your increased standard deduction and 
how to report it on Form 1040.
Examples
The following examples illustrate how to deter-
mine your standard deduction using Tables 
20-1 and 20-2.
Example 1.  Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are 
filing a joint return for 2017. Neither is blind, and 
neither can be claimed as a dependent. They 
decide not to itemize their deductions. They use 
Table 20-1 . Their standard deduction is 
$12,700.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 except that Larry is blind at the end 
of 2017. Larry and Donna use Table 20-2. Their 
standard deduction is $13,950.
Example 3. Bill and Lisa are filing a joint re-
turn for 2017. Both are over age 65. Neither is 
blind, and neither can be claimed as a depend-
ent. If they don't itemize deductions, they use 
CAUTION
!
Table 20-2 . Their standard deduction is 
$15,200.
Standard Deduction
for Dependents
The standard deduction for an individual who 
can be claimed as a dependent on another per-
son's tax return is generally limited to the 
greater of:
$1,050, or
The individual's earned income for the year 
plus $350 (but not more than the regular 
standard deduction amount, generally 
$6,350).
However, if the individual is 65 or older or 
blind, the standard deduction may be higher.
If you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) can be 
claimed as a dependent on someone else's re-
turn, use Table 20-3 to determine your standard 
deduction.
Earned income defined.  Earned income is 
salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and 
other amounts received as pay for work you ac-
tually perform.
For purposes of the standard deduction, 
earned income also includes any part of a taxa-
ble scholarship or fellowship grant. See Schol-
arships and fellowships  in chapter 12 for more 
information on what qualifies as a scholarship 
or fellowship grant.
Example 1.  Michael is 16 years old and 
single. His parents can claim an exemption for 
him on their 2017 tax return. He has interest in-
come of $780 and wages of $150. He has no 
itemized deductions. Michael uses Table 20-3 
to find his standard deduction. He enters $150 
(his earned income) on line 1, $500 ($150 + 
$350) on line 3, $1,050 (the larger of $500 and 
$1,050) on line 5, and $6,350 on line 6. His 
standard deduction, on line 7a, is $1,050 (the 
smaller of $1,050 and $6,350).
Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col-
lege student, can be claimed as a dependent 
on his parents' 2017 tax return. Joe is married 
and files a separate return. His wife doesn't 
itemize deductions on her separate return. Joe 
has $1,500 in interest income and wages of 
$3,800. He has no itemized deductions. Joe 
finds his standard deduction by using Ta-
ble 20-3. He enters his earned income, $3,800, 
on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and enters 
$4,150 on line 3. On line 5, he enters $4,150, 
the larger of lines 3 and 4. Because Joe is mar-
ried filing a separate return, he enters $6,350 on 
line 6. On line 7a, he enters $4,150 as his 
standard deduction because it is smaller than 
$6,350, the amount on line 6.
Example 3.  Amy, who is single, can be 
claimed as a dependent on her parents' 2017 
tax return. She is 18 years old and blind. She 
has interest income of $1,300 and wages of 
$2,900. She has no itemized deductions. Amy 
uses Table 20-3 to find her standard deduction. 
She enters her wages of $2,900 on line 1. She 
adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $3,250 ($2,900 + 
$350) on line 3. On line 5, she enters $3,250, 
the larger of lines 3 and 4. Because she is sin-
gle, Amy enters $6,350 on line 6. She enters 
$3,250 on line 7a. This is the smaller of the 
amounts on lines 5 and 6. Because she 
checked the box in the top part of the work-
sheet, indicating she is blind, she enters $1,550 
on line 7b. She then adds the amounts on lines 
7a and 7b and enters her standard deduction of 
$4,800 on line 7c.
Example 4. Ed is 18 years old and single. 
His parents can claim an exemption for him on 
their 2017 tax return. He has wages of $7,000, 
interest income of $500, and a business loss of 
$3,000. He has no itemized deductions. Ed 
uses Table 20-3  to figure his standard deduc-
tion. He enters $4,000 ($7,000 - $3,000) on 
line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $4,350 
on line 3. On line 5, he enters $4,350, the larger 
of lines 3 and 4. Because he is single, Ed enters 
$6,350 on line 6. On line 7a, he enters $4,350 
as his standard deduction because it is smaller 
than $6,350, the amount on line 6.
Who Should Itemize
You should itemize deductions if your total de-
ductions are more than the standard deduction 
amount. Also, you should itemize if you don't 
qualify for the standard deduction, as discussed 
earlier under Persons not eligible for the stand-
ard deduction.
You should first figure your itemized deduc-
tions and compare that amount to your stand-
ard deduction to make sure you are using the 
method that gives you the greater benefit.
You may be subject to a limit on some 
of your itemized deductions if your ad-
justed gross income is more than 
$261,500 if single; $287,650 if head of house-
hold; $313,800 if married filing jointly or qualify-
ing widow(er); or $156,900 if married filing sep-
arately. See chapter 29  or the Instructions for 
Schedule A (Form 1040) for more information 
on figuring the correct amount of your itemized 
deductions.
When to itemize.  You may benefit from 
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040) if you:
Don't qualify for the standard deduction, or 
the amount you can claim is limited;
Had large uninsured medical and dental 
expenses during the year;
Paid interest and taxes on your home;
Had large unreimbursed employee busi-
ness expenses or other miscellaneous de-
ductions;
Had large uninsured casualty or theft los-
ses;
Made large contributions to qualified chari-
ties; or
Have total itemized deductions that are 
more than the standard deduction to which 
you otherwise are entitled.
These deductions are explained in chapters 
21–28.
If you decide to itemize your deductions, 
complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form 
CAUTION
!
Page 144 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 142 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, 
line 29, on Form 1040, line 40.
Electing to itemize for state tax or other 
purposes. Even if your itemized deductions 
are less than your standard deduction, you can 
elect to itemize deductions on your federal re-
turn rather than take the standard deduction. 
You may want to do this if, for example, the tax 
benefit of itemizing your deductions on your 
state tax return is greater than the tax benefit 
you lose on your federal return by not taking the 
standard deduction. To make this election, you 
must check the box on line 30 of Schedule A.
Changing your mind. If you don't itemize your 
deductions and later find that you should have 
itemized—or if you itemize your deductions and 
later find you shouldn't have—you can change 
your return by filing Form 1040X, Amended 
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. See Amen-
ded Returns and Claims for Refund in chapter 1 
for more information on amended returns.
Married persons who filed separate re-
turns. You can change methods of taking de-
ductions only if you and your spouse both make 
the same changes. Both of you must file a con-
sent to assessment for any additional tax either 
one may owe as a result of the change.
You and your spouse can use the method 
that gives you the lower total tax, even though 
one of you may pay more tax than you would 
have paid by using the other method. You both 
must use the same method of claiming deduc-
tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other 
should itemize because he or she won't qualify 
for the standard deduction. See Persons not eli-
gible for the standard deduction, earlier.
Page 145 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 143

2017 Standard Deduction Tables
CAUTION
!
If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you can't take the standard deduction 
even if you were born before January 2, 1953, or are blind.
Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*Table 20-1.
IF your filing status is... THEN your standard deduction is...
Single or Married filing separately $ 6,350
Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)  12,700
Head of household   9,350
*Don't use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1953, are blind, or if someone else can claim you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) as a dependent. Use Table 20-2 or 
20-3 instead.
Standard Deduction Chart for People Born Before January 2, 1953, or Who Are Blind*Table 20-2.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You: Born before January 2, 1953 
 Blind 
Your spouse, if claiming spouse's exemption: Born before January 2, 1953 
 Blind 
Total number of boxes checked 
IF 
your filing status is...
AND
the number in the box above is...
THEN
your standard deduction is...
Single 1 $  7,900
2    9,450
Married filing jointly 1 $13,950
or Qualifying 2   15,200
widow(er) 3   16,450
4   17,700
Married filing 1 $  7,600
separately 2    8,850
3   10,100
4   11,350
Head of household 1 $10,900
2   12,450
*If someone else can claim you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) as a dependent, use Table 20-3 instead. 
Standard Deduction Worksheet for Dependents
Use this worksheet only if someone else can claim you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) as a dependent.
Table 20-3.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You: Born before January 2, 1953 
 Blind 
Your spouse, if claiming spouse's exemption: Born before January 2, 1953 
 Blind 
Total number of boxes checked 
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If none, enter -0-. 1.  
2. Additional amount. 2. $350
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.  
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $1,050
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.  
6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status. 
Single or Married filing separately—$6,350
Married filing jointly—$12,700
Head of household—$9,350
6.  
7. Standard deduction. 
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after January 1, 1953, and not blind, stop here. This is your 
standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to line 7b. 7a.  
b. If born before January 2, 1953, or blind, multiply $1,550 ($1,250 if married) by the number in the box above. 7b.  
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard deduction for 2017. 7c.  
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also includes any 
taxable scholarship or fellowship grant.
Page 146 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 144 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

21.
Medical and 
Dental Expenses
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Medical and dental expenses.  Beginning 
January 1, 2017, you can deduct only the part 
of your medical and dental expenses that ex-
ceeds 10% of your adjusted gross income 
(AGI). The 7.5% rate available for certain tax-
payers has expired, however, at the time this 
publication went to print, Congress was consid-
ering legislation that would extend the 7.5% 
rate. To see if this legislation was enacted, go 
to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/Pub17.
Standard mileage rate. The standard mileage 
rate allowed for operating expenses for a car 
when you use it for medical reasons is 17 cents 
per mile. See Transportation under What Medi-
cal Expenses Are Includible.
Introduction
This chapter will help you determine the follow-
ing.
What medical expenses are.
What expenses you can include this year.
How much of the expenses you can de-
duct.
Whose medical expenses you can include.
What medical expenses are includible.
How to treat reimbursements.
How to report the deduction on your tax re-
turn.
How to report impairment-related work ex-
penses.
How to report health insurance costs if you 
are self-employed.
CAUTION
!
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Medical and Dental Expenses
Health Savings Accounts and Other 
Tax-Favored Health Plans
Form (and Instructions)
U.S. Individual Tax Return
Itemized 
Deductions
Health Coverage Tax Credit
Premium Tax Credit (PTC)
What Are Medical 
Expenses?
Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, 
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of dis-
ease, and the costs for treatments affecting any 
part or function of the body. These expenses in-
clude payments for legal medical services ren-
dered by physicians, surgeons, dentists, and 
other medical practitioners. They include the 
costs of equipment, supplies, and diagnostic 
devices needed for these purposes.
Medical care expenses must be primarily to 
alleviate or prevent a physical or mental disabil-
ity or illness. They don't include expenses that 
are merely beneficial to general health, such as 
vitamins or a vacation.
Medical expenses include the premiums 
you pay for insurance that covers the expenses 
of medical care, and the amounts you pay for 
transportation to get medical care. Medical ex-
penses also include amounts paid for qualified 
long-term care services and limited amounts 
paid for any qualified long-term care insurance 
contract.
What Expenses Can 
You Include This Year?
You can include only the medical and dental ex-
penses you paid this year, regardless of when 
the services were provided. If you pay medical 
expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver 
the check generally is the date of payment. If 
you use a “pay-by-phone” or “online” account to 
pay your medical expenses, the date reported 
on the statement of the financial institution 
showing when payment was made is the date of 
payment. If you use a credit card, include medi-
cal expenses you charge to your credit card in 
the year the charge is made, not when you ac-
tually pay the amount charged.
Separate returns. If you and your spouse live 
in a noncommunity property state and file sepa-
rate returns, each of you can include only the 
medical expenses each actually paid. Any med-
ical expenses paid out of a joint checking ac-
count in which you and your spouse have the 
same interest are considered to have been paid 
equally by each of you, unless you can show 
otherwise.
  502 
  969 
  1040
  Schedule A (Form 1040) 
  8885
  8962
Community property states.  If you and 
your spouse live in a community property state 
and file separate returns, or are registered do-
mestic partners in Nevada, Washington, or Cali-
fornia, any medical expenses paid out of com-
munity funds are divided equally. Each of you 
should include half the expenses. If medical ex-
penses are paid out of the separate funds of 
one individual, only the individual who paid the 
medical expenses can include them. If you live 
in a community property state, and aren't filing a 
joint return, see Pub. 555.
How Much of the 
Expenses Can You 
Deduct?
Generally, you can deduct on Schedule A 
(Form 1040) only the amount of your medical 
and dental expenses that is more than 10% of 
your adjusted gross income (AGI), found on 
Form 1040, line 38.
The 7.5% adjusted gross income (AGI) 
threshold for deducting medical and 
dental expenses has expired, however, 
at the time this publication went to print, Con-
gress was considering legislation that would 
permit certain individuals to deduct medical ex-
penses that exceed 7.5% of their AGI. To see if 
this legislation was enacted, go to Recent De-
velopments at IRS.gov/Pub17.
Whose Medical 
Expenses
Can You Include?
You can generally include medical expenses 
you pay for yourself, as well as those you pay 
for someone who was your spouse or your de-
pendent either when the services were provi-
ded or when you paid for them. There are differ-
ent rules for decedents and for individuals who 
are the subject of multiple support agreements. 
See Support claimed under a multiple support 
agreement, later.
Spouse
You can include medical expenses you paid for 
your spouse. To include these expenses, you 
must have been married either at the time your 
spouse received the medical services or at the 
time you paid the medical expenses.
Example 1.  Mary received medical treat-
ment before she married Bill. Bill paid for the 
treatment after they married. Bill can include 
these expenses in figuring his medical expense 
deduction even if Bill and Mary file separate re-
turns.
If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill couldn't 
include Mary's expenses in his separate return. 
Mary would include the amounts she paid dur-
ing the year in her separate return. If they filed a 
joint return, the medical expenses both paid 
during the year would be used to figure their 
medical expense deduction.
CAUTION
!
Page 147 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 145

Example 2.  This year, John paid medical 
expenses for his wife Louise, who died last 
year. John married Belle this year and they file 
a joint return. Because John was married to 
Louise when she received the medical services, 
he can include those expenses in figuring his 
medical expense deduction for this year.
Dependent
You can include medical expenses you paid for 
your dependent. For you to include these ex-
penses, the person must have been your de-
pendent either at the time the medical services 
were provided or at the time you paid the ex-
penses. A person generally qualifies as your 
dependent for purposes of the medical expense 
deduction if both of the following requirements 
are met.
1. The person was a qualifying child (defined 
later) or a qualifying relative (defined 
later); and
2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national, 
or a resident of the United States, Canada, 
or Mexico. If your qualifying child was 
adopted, see Exception for adopted child 
next.
You can include medical expenses you paid for 
an individual that would have been your de-
pendent except that:
1. He or she received gross income of 
$4,050 or more in 2017;
2. He or she filed a joint return for 2017; or
3. You, or your spouse if filing jointly, could 
be claimed as a dependent on someone 
else's 2017 return.
Exception for adopted child.  If you are a 
U.S. citizen or U.S. national and your adopted 
child lived with you as a member of your house-
hold for 2017, that child doesn't have to be a 
U.S. citizen or national or a resident of the Uni-
ted States, Canada, or Mexico.
Qualifying Child
A qualifying child is a child who:
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 
child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis-
ter, half brother, half sister, or a descend-
ant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild, niece, or nephew);
2. Was:
a. Under age 19 at the end of 2017 and 
younger than you (or your spouse, if 
filing jointly);
b. Under age 24 at the end of 2017, a 
full-time student, and younger than 
you (or your spouse, if filing jointly); or
c. Any age and permanently and totally 
disabled;
3. Lived with you for more than half of 2017;
4. Didn't provide over half of his or her own 
support for 2017; and
5. Didn't file a joint return, or, if he or she did, 
it was only to claim a refund.
Adopted child. A legally adopted child is trea-
ted as your own child. This includes a child law-
fully placed with you for legal adoption.
You can include medical expenses that you 
paid for a child before adoption if the child quali-
fied as your dependent when the medical serv-
ices were provided or when the expenses were 
paid.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other 
persons for medical expenses they paid under 
an agreement with you, you are treated as hav-
ing paid those expenses provided you clearly 
substantiate that the payment is directly attribut-
able to the medical care of the child.
But if you pay the agency or other person for 
medical care that was provided and paid for be-
fore adoption negotiations began, you can't in-
clude them as medical expenses.
You may be able to take an adoption 
credit for other expenses related to an 
adoption. See the Instructions for Form 
8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for more 
information.
Child of divorced or separated parents.  For 
purposes of the medical and dental expenses 
deduction, a child of divorced or separated pa-
rents can be treated as a dependent of both pa-
rents. Each parent can include the medical ex-
penses he or she pays for the child, even if the 
other parent claims the child's dependency ex-
emption, if:
1. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half the year,
2. The child receives over half of his or her 
support during the year from his or her pa-
rents, and
3. The child's parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement, or
c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 
months of the year.
This doesn't apply if the child's exemption is be-
ing claimed under a multiple support agreement 
(discussed later).
Qualifying Relative
A qualifying relative is a person:
1. Who is your:
a. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, 
or a descendant of any of them (for 
example, your grandchild);
b. Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, 
or a son or daughter of any of them;
c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sib-
ling of either of them (for example, 
your grandmother, grandfather, aunt, 
or uncle);
d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, 
stepmother, son-in-law, daugh-
ter-in-law, father-in-law, 
mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sis-
ter-in-law; or
TIP
e. Any other person (other than your 
spouse) who lived with you all year as 
a member of your household if your 
relationship didn't violate local law;
2. Who wasn't a qualifying child (see Qualify-
ing Child, earlier) of any other person for 
2017; and
3. For whom you provided over half of the 
support in 2017. But see Child of divorced 
or separated parents, earlier, and Support 
claimed under a multiple support agree-
ment next.
Support claimed under a multiple support 
agreement. If you are considered to have pro-
vided more than half of a qualifying relative's 
support under a multiple support agreement, 
you can include medical expenses you pay for 
that person. A multiple support agreement is 
used when two or more people provide more 
than half of a person's support, but no one 
alone provides more than half.
Any medical expenses paid by others who 
joined you in the agreement can't be included 
as medical expenses by anyone. However, you 
can include the entire unreimbursed amount 
you paid for medical expenses.
Example. You and your three brothers 
each provide one-fourth of your mother's total 
support. Under a multiple support agreement, 
you treat your mother as your dependent. You 
paid all of her medical expenses. Your brothers 
repaid you for three-fourths of these expenses. 
In figuring your medical expense deduction, you 
can include only one-fourth of your mother's 
medical expenses. Your brothers can't include 
any part of the expenses. However, if you and 
your brothers share the nonmedical support 
items and you separately pay all of your moth-
er's medical expenses, you can include the un-
reimbursed amount you paid for her medical ex-
penses in your medical expenses.
Decedent
Medical expenses paid before death by the de-
cedent are included in figuring any deduction 
for medical and dental expenses on the dece-
dent's final income tax return. This includes ex-
penses for the decedent's spouse and depend-
ents as well as for the decedent.
The survivor or personal representative of a 
decedent can choose to treat certain expenses 
paid by the decedent's estate for the decedent's 
medical care as paid by the decedent at the 
time the medical services were provided. The 
expenses must be paid within the 1-year period 
beginning with the day after the date of death. If 
you are the survivor or personal representative 
making this choice, you must attach a state-
ment to the decedent's Form 1040 (or the dece-
dent's amended return, Form 1040X) saying 
that the expenses haven't been and won't be 
claimed on the estate tax return.
Qualified medical expenses paid be-
fore death by the decedent aren't de-
ductible if paid with a tax-free distribu-
tion from any Archer MSA, Medicare Advantage 
MSA, or health savings account.
Amended returns and claims for refund are 
discussed in chapter 1.
CAUTION
!
Page 148 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 146 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

What if you pay medical expenses of a de-
ceased spouse or dependent?  If you paid 
medical expenses for your deceased spouse or 
dependent, include them as medical expenses 
on your Schedule A (Form 1040) in the year 
paid, whether they are paid before or after the 
decedent's death. The expenses can be inclu-
ded if the person was your spouse or depend-
ent either at the time the medical services were 
provided or at the time you paid the expenses.
What Medical 
Expenses Are 
Includible?
Use Table 21-1 , later, as a guide to determine 
which medical and dental expenses you can in-
clude on Schedule A (Form 1040).
This table doesn't include all possible medi-
cal expenses. To determine if an expense not 
listed can be included in figuring your medical 
expense deduction, see What Are Medical Ex-
penses, earlier.
Insurance Premiums
You can include in medical expenses insurance 
premiums you pay for policies that cover medi-
cal care. Medical care policies can provide pay-
ment for treatment that includes:
Hospitalization, surgical services, X-rays;
Prescription drugs and insulin;
Dental care;
Replacement of lost or damaged contact 
lenses; and
Long-term care (subject to additional limi-
tations). See Qualified Long-Term Care In-
surance Contracts in Pub. 502.
If you have a policy that provides payments 
for other than medical care, you can include the 
premiums for the medical care part of the policy 
if the charge for the medical part is reasonable. 
The cost of the medical part must be separately 
stated in the insurance contract or given to you 
in a separate statement.
Premium tax credit.  When figuring the 
amount of insurance premiums you can deduct 
on Schedule A, don't include the amount of net 
premium tax credit you are claiming on Form 
1040.
If advance payments of the premium tax 
credit were made, or you think you may be eligi-
ble to claim a premium tax credit, fill out Form 
8962 before filling out Schedule A. See Pub. 
502 for more information on how to figure your 
deduction.
Health coverage tax credit.  If, during 2017, 
you were an eligible trade adjustment assis-
tance (TAA) recipient, an alternative TAA 
(ATAA) recipient, reemployment TAA (RTAA) 
recipient, or Pension Benefit Guaranty Corpora-
tion (PBGC) payee, you must complete Form 
8885 before completing Schedule A, line 1. 
When figuring the amount of insurance premi-
ums you can deduct on Schedule A, do not in-
clude any of the following.
Any amounts you included on Form 8885, 
line 4, or on Form 14095, The Health Cov-
erage Tax Credit (HCTC) Reimbursement 
Request Form, to receive a reimbursement 
of the HCTC during the year.
Any qualified health insurance coverage 
premiums you paid to "U.S. Treas-
ury—HCTC" for eligible coverage months 
for which you received the benefit of the 
advance monthly payment program.
Any advance monthly payments from your 
health plan administrator received from the 
IRS, as shown on Form 1099-H, Health 
Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance 
Payments.
Employer-sponsored health insurance plan. 
Don't include in your medical and dental expen-
ses any insurance premiums paid by an em-
ployer-sponsored health insurance plan unless 
the premiums are included on your Form W-2. 
Also, don't include any other medical and dental 
expenses paid by the plan unless the amount 
paid is included on your Form W-2.
Example. You are a federal employee par-
ticipating in the premium conversion plan of the 
Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) pro-
gram. Your share of the FEHB premium is paid 
by making a pre-tax reduction in your salary. 
Because you are an employee whose insur-
ance premiums are paid with money that is 
never included in your gross income, you can't 
deduct the premiums paid with that money.
Long-term care services.  Contributions 
made by your employer to provide coverage for 
qualified long-term care services under a flexi-
ble spending or similar arrangement must be in-
cluded in your income. This amount will be re-
ported as wages on your Form W-2.
Retired public safety officers. If you are a re-
tired public safety officer, don't include as medi-
cal expenses any health or long-term care pre-
miums that you elected to have paid with 
tax-free distributions from your retirement plan. 
This applies only to distributions that would oth-
erwise be included in income.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). 
If you have medical expenses that are reim-
bursed by a health reimbursement arrange-
ment, you can't include those expenses in your 
medical expenses. This is because an HRA is 
funded solely by the employer.
Medicare A.  If you are covered under social 
security (or if you are a government employee 
who paid Medicare tax), you are enrolled in 
Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare A 
isn't a medical expense.
If you aren't covered under social security 
(or weren't a government employee who paid 
Medicare tax), you can voluntarily enroll in Med-
icare A. In this situation, you can include the 
premiums you paid for Medicare A as a medical 
expense. 
Medicare B. Medicare B is supplemental med-
ical insurance. Premiums you pay for Medicare 
B are a medical expense. Check the informa-
tion you received from the Social Security Ad-
ministration to find out your premium.
Medicare D.  Medicare D is a voluntary pre-
scription drug insurance program for persons 
with Medicare A or B. You can include as a 
medical expense premiums you pay for Medi-
care D.
Prepaid insurance premiums. Premiums you 
pay before you are age 65 for insurance for 
medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your 
dependents after you reach age 65 are medical 
care expenses in the year paid if they are:
Payable in equal yearly installments, or 
more often; and
Payable for at least 10 years, or until you 
reach age 65 (but not for less than 5 
years).
Unused sick leave used to pay premiums.
You must include in gross income cash pay-
ments you receive at the time of retirement for 
unused sick leave. You also must include in 
gross income the value of unused sick leave 
that, at your option, your employer applies to 
the cost of your continuing participation in your 
employer's health plan after you retire. You can 
include this cost of continuing participation in 
the health plan as a medical expense.
If you participate in a health plan where your 
employer automatically applies the value of un-
used sick leave to the cost of your continuing 
participation in the health plan (and you don't 
have the option to receive cash), don't include 
the value of the unused sick leave in gross in-
come. You can't include this cost of continuing 
participation in that health plan as a medical ex-
pense.
Meals and Lodging
You can include in medical expenses the cost 
of meals and lodging at a hospital or similar in-
stitution if a principal reason for being there is to 
get medical care. See Nursing home, later.
You may be able to include in medical ex-
penses the cost of lodging not provided in a 
hospital or similar institution. You can include 
the cost of such lodging while away from home 
if all of the following requirements are met.
The lodging is primarily for and essential to 
medical care.
The medical care is provided by a doctor in 
a licensed hospital or in a medical care fa-
cility related to, or the equivalent of, a li-
censed hospital.
The lodging isn't lavish or extravagant un-
der the circumstances.
There is no significant element of personal 
pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the 
travel away from home.
The amount you include in medical expenses 
for lodging can't be more than $50 for each 
night for each person. You can include lodging 
for a person traveling with the person receiving 
the medical care. For example, if a parent is 
traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per night 
can be included as a medical expense for lodg-
ing. Meals aren't included.
Nursing home. You can include in medical ex-
penses the cost of medical care in a nursing 
home, home for the aged, or similar institution, 
for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. 
This includes the cost of meals and lodging in 
the home if a principal reason for being there is 
to get medical care.
Page 149 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 147

Don't include the cost of meals and lodging 
if the reason for being in the home is personal. 
You can, however, include in medical expenses 
the part of the cost that is for medical or nursing 
care.
Transportation
Include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
transportation primarily for, and essential to, 
medical care. You can include:
Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambu-
lance service;
Transportation expenses of a parent who 
must go with a child who needs medical 
care;
Transportation expenses of a nurse or 
other person who can give injections, med-
ications, or other treatment required by a 
patient who is traveling to get medical care 
and is unable to travel alone; and
Transportation expenses for regular visits 
to see a mentally ill dependent, if these vis-
its are recommended as a part of treat-
ment.
Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket 
expenses, such as the cost of gas and oil, when 
you use your car for medical reasons. You can't 
include depreciation, insurance, general repair, 
or maintenance expenses.
If you don't want to use your actual expen-
ses for 2017, you can use the standard medical 
mileage rate of 17 cents per mile.
You can also include parking fees and tolls. 
You can add these fees and tolls to your medi-
cal expenses whether you use actual expenses 
or use the standard mileage rate.
Example. In 2017, Bill Jones drove 2,800 
miles for medical reasons. He spent $400 for 
gas, $30 for oil, and $100 for tolls and parking. 
He wants to figure the amount he can include in 
medical expenses both ways to see which 
gives him the greater deduction.
He figures the actual expenses first. He 
adds the $400 for gas, the $30 for oil, and the 
$100 for tolls and parking for a total of $530.
He then figures the standard mileage 
amount. He multiplies 2,800 miles by 17 cents 
per mile for a total of $476. He then adds the 
$100 tolls and parking for a total of $576.
Bill includes the $576 of car expenses with 
his other medical expenses for the year be-
cause the $576 is more than the $530 he fig-
ured using actual expenses.
Transportation expenses you can't include. 
You can't include in medical expenses the cost 
of transportation in the following situations.
Going to and from work, even if your condi-
tion requires an unusual means of trans-
portation.
Travel for purely personal reasons to an-
other city for an operation or other medical 
care.
Travel that is merely for the general im-
provement of one's health.
The costs of operating a specially equip-
ped car for other than medical reasons.
Disabled Dependent
Care Expenses
Some disabled dependent care expenses may 
qualify as either:
Medical expenses, or
Work-related expenses for purposes of 
taking a credit for dependent care. (See 
chapter 32 and Pub. 503, Child and De-
pendent Care Expenses.)
You can choose to apply them either way as 
long as you don't use the same expenses to 
claim both a credit and a medical expense de-
duction.
How Do You Treat 
Reimbursements?
You can include in medical expenses only 
those amounts paid during the taxable year for 
which you received no insurance or other reim-
bursement.
Table 21-1. Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist. See Pub. 502 for more information about these and other 
expenses.
You can include: You can't include:
Bandages
Birth control pills prescribed 
by your doctor
Body scan
Braille books
Breast pump and supplies
Capital expenses for 
equipment or improvements 
to your home needed for 
medical care (see 
Worksheet A, Capital 
Expense Worksheet, in 
Pub. 502)
Diagnostic devices
Expenses of an organ donor
Eye surgery (to promote the 
correct function of the eye)
Fertility enhancement, 
certain procedures
Guide dogs or other animals 
aiding the blind, deaf, and 
disabled
Hospital services fees (lab 
work, therapy, nursing 
services, surgery, etc.)
Lead-based paint removal 
Legal abortion
Legal operation to prevent 
having children such as a 
vasectomy or tubal ligation
Long-term care contracts, 
qualified 
Meals and lodging provided 
by a hospital during medical 
treatment
Medical services fees (from 
doctors, dentists, surgeons, 
specialists, and other 
medical practitioners)
Medicare Part D premiums
Medical and hospital 
insurance premiums
Nursing services
Oxygen equipment and 
oxygen
Part of life-care fee paid to 
retirement home designated 
for medical care
Physical examination
Pregnancy test kit
Prescription medicines 
(prescribed by a doctor) and 
insulin
Psychiatric and 
psychological treatment 
Social security tax, 
Medicare tax, FUTA, and 
state employment tax for 
worker providing medical 
care (see Wages for nursing 
services below)
Special items (artificial 
limbs, false teeth, 
eyeglasses, contact lenses, 
hearing aids, crutches, 
wheelchair, etc.)
Special education for 
mentally or physically 
disabled persons
Stop-smoking programs
Transportation for needed 
medical care
Treatment at a drug or 
alcohol center (includes 
meals and lodging provided 
by the center)
Wages for nursing services
Weight loss, certain 
expenses for obesity
Baby sitting and childcare
Bottled water
Contributions to Archer 
MSAs (see Pub. 969)
Diaper service
Expenses for your general 
health (even if following your 
doctor's advice) such as—
—Health club dues
—Household help (even if 
recommended by a doctor)
—Social activities, such as 
dancing or swimming lessons
—Trip for general health 
improvement
Flexible spending account 
reimbursements for medical 
expenses (if contributions 
were on a pre-tax basis) 
Funeral, burial, or cremation 
expenses
Health savings account 
payments for medical 
expenses 
Operation, treatment, or 
medicine that is illegal under 
federal or state law
Life insurance or income 
protection policies, or 
policies providing payment 
for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.
Maternity clothes
Medical insurance 
included in a car insurance 
policy covering all persons 
injured in or by your car
Medicine you buy without 
a prescription
Nursing care for a healthy 
baby
Prescription drugs you 
brought in (or ordered 
shipped) from another 
country, in most cases 
Nutritional supplements, 
vitamins, herbal 
supplements, “natural 
medicines,” etc., unless 
recommended by a 
medical practitioner as a 
treatment for a specific 
medical condition 
diagnosed by a physician
Surgery for purely 
cosmetic reasons 
Toothpaste, toiletries, 
cosmetics, etc.
Teeth whitening
Weight-loss expenses not 
for the treatment of obesity 
or other disease
Page 150 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 148 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Insurance Reimbursement
You must reduce your total medical expenses 
for the year by all reimbursements for medical 
expenses that you receive from insurance or 
other sources during the year. This includes 
payments from Medicare.
Even if a policy provides reimbursement for 
only certain specific medical expenses, you 
must use amounts you receive from that policy 
to reduce your total medical expenses, includ-
ing those it doesn't reimburse.
Example. You have insurance policies that 
cover your hospital and doctors' bills but not 
your nursing bills. The insurance you receive for 
the hospital and doctors' bills is more than their 
charges. In figuring your medical deduction, you 
must reduce the total amount you spent for 
medical care by the total amount of insurance 
you received, even if the policies don't cover 
some of your medical expenses.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). 
A health reimbursement arrangement is an em-
ployer-funded plan that reimburses employees 
for medical care expenses and allows unused 
amounts to be carried forward. An HRA is fun-
ded solely by the employer and the reimburse-
ments for medical expenses, up to a maximum 
dollar amount for a coverage period, aren't in-
cluded in your income.
Other reimbursements.  Generally, you don't 
reduce medical expenses by payments you re-
ceive for:
Permanent loss or loss of use of a member 
or function of the body (loss of limb, sight, 
hearing, etc.) or disfigurement to the extent 
the payment is based on the nature of the 
injury without regard to the amount of time 
lost from work; or
Loss of earnings.
You must, however, reduce your medical 
expenses by any part of these payments that is 
designated for medical costs. See How Do You 
Figure and Report the Deduction on Your Tax 
Return, later.
For how to treat damages received for per-
sonal injury or sickness, see Damages for Per-
sonal Injuries, later.
You don't have a medical deduction if you 
are reimbursed for all of your medical expenses 
for the year.
Excess reimbursement.  If you are reim-
bursed more than your medical expenses, you 
may have to include the excess in income. You 
may want to use Figure 21-A to help you decide 
if any of your reimbursement is taxable.
Premiums paid by you.  If you pay either 
the entire premium for your medical insurance 
or all of the costs of a plan similar to medical in-
surance and your insurance payments or other 
reimbursements are more than your total medi-
cal expenses for the year, you have an excess 
reimbursement. Generally, you don't include the 
excess reimbursement in your gross income.
Premiums paid by you and your employer. 
If both you and your employer contribute to your 
medical insurance plan and your employer's 
contributions aren't included in your gross in-
come, you must include in your gross income 
the part of your excess reimbursement that is 
from your employer's contribution.
See Pub. 502 to figure the amount of the ex-
cess reimbursement you must include in gross 
income.
Reimbursement in a later year.  If you are re-
imbursed in a later year for medical expenses 
you deducted in an earlier year, you generally 
must report the reimbursement as income up to 
the amount you previously deducted as medical 
expenses.
However, don't report as income the amount 
of reimbursement you received up to the 
amount of your medical deductions that didn't 
reduce your tax for the earlier year. For more in-
formation about the recovery of an amount that 
you claimed as an itemized deduction in an ear-
lier year, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries  in 
chapter 12. 
Medical expenses not deducted.  If you 
didn't deduct a medical expense in the year you 
paid it because your medical expenses weren't 
more than 10% of your AGI, or because you 
didn't itemize deductions, don't include the re-
imbursement up to the amount of the expense 
in income. However, if the reimbursement is 
more than the expense, see Excess reimburse-
ment, earlier.
Example. In 2017, you had $500 of medical 
expenses. You can't deduct the $500 because 
it is less than 10% of your AGI. If, in a later year, 
you are reimbursed for any of the $500 in medi-
cal expenses, you don't include the amount re-
imbursed in your gross income.
Damages for Personal 
Injuries
If you receive an amount in settlement of a per-
sonal injury suit, part of that award may be for 
medical expenses that you deducted in an ear-
lier year. If it is, you must include that part in 
your income in the year you receive it to the ex-
tent it reduced your taxable income in the ear-
lier year. See Reimbursement in a Later Year , 
discussed under How Do You Treat Reimburse-
ments, earlier.
Future medical expenses.  If you receive an 
amount in settlement of a damage suit for per-
sonal injuries, part of that award may be for fu-
ture medical expenses. If it is, you must reduce 
any future medical expenses for these injuries 
until the amount you received has been com-
pletely used.
Figure 21-A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Was any part of your 
premiums paid by 
your employer?
NONE of the excess 
reimbursement is 
taxable.
Were your employer’s 
contributions to your 
premiums included in 
your income?
Did you pay any part 
of the premiums?
ALL of the excess 
reimbursement is 
taxable.
PART of the excess 
reimbursement is 
taxable.*
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Page 151 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 149

How Do You Figure 
and Report the 
Deduction on Your Tax 
Return?
Once you have determined which medical ex-
penses you can include, you figure and report 
the deduction on your tax return.
What Tax Form Do You 
Use?
You report your medical expense deduction on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). You can't claim medi-
cal expenses on Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. 
If you need more information on itemized de-
ductions or you aren't sure if you can itemize, 
see chapter 20.
Impairment-Related
Work Expenses
If you are a person with a disability, you can 
take a business deduction for expenses that are 
necessary for you to be able to work. If you take 
a business deduction for impairment-related 
work expenses, they aren't subject to the 10% 
limit that applies to medical expenses.
You have a disability if you have:
A physical or mental disability (for exam-
ple, blindness or deafness) that function-
ally limits your being employed; or
A physical or mental impairment (for exam-
ple, a sight or hearing impairment) that 
substantially limits one or more of your ma-
jor life activities, such as performing man-
ual tasks, walking, speaking, breathing, 
learning, or working.
Impairment-related expenses defined.  Im-
pairment-related expenses are those ordinary 
and necessary business expenses that are:
Necessary for you to do your work satis-
factorily;
For goods and services not required or 
used, other than incidentally, in your per-
sonal activities; and
Not specifically covered under other in-
come tax laws.
Where to report. If you are self-employed, de-
duct the business expenses on the appropriate 
form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E, or F) used to report 
your business income and expenses.
If you are an employee, complete Form 
2106, Employee Business Expenses; or Form 
2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Employee Business 
Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form 1040) 
that part of the amount on Form 2106 or Form 
2106-EZ that is related to your impairment. 
Also, enter on Schedule A (Form 1040) the 
amount that is unrelated to your impairment. 
Your impairment-related work expenses aren't 
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income 
limit that applies to other employee business 
expenses.
Example. You are blind. You must use a 
reader to do your work. You use the reader both 
during your regular working hours at your place 
of work and outside your regular working hours 
away from your place of work. The reader's 
services are only for your work. You can deduct 
your expenses for the reader as business ex-
penses.
Health Insurance Costs 
for Self-Employed 
Persons
If you were self-employed and had a net profit 
for the year, you may be able to deduct, as an 
adjustment to income, amounts paid for medi-
cal and qualified long-term care insurance on 
behalf of yourself, your spouse, your depend-
ents, and your children who were under age 27 
at the end of 2017. For this purpose, you were 
self-employed if you were a general partner (or 
a limited partner receiving guaranteed pay-
ments) or you received wages from an S corpo-
ration in which you were more than a 2% share-
holder. The insurance plan must be established 
under your trade or business and the deduction 
can't be more than your earned income from 
that trade or business.
You can't deduct payments for medical in-
surance for any month in which you were eligi-
ble to participate in a health plan subsidized by 
your employer, your spouse's employer, or an 
employer of your dependent or your child under 
age 27 at the end of 2017. You can't deduct 
payments for a qualified long-term care insur-
ance contract for any month in which you were 
eligible to participate in a long-term care insur-
ance plan subsidized by your employer or your 
spouse's employer.
If you qualify to take the deduction, use the 
Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction 
Worksheet in the Instructions for Form 1040 to 
figure the amount you can deduct. But if any of 
the following applies, don't use that worksheet. 
Instead, use the worksheet in Pub. 535, Busi-
ness Expenses, to figure your deduction.
You had more than one source of income 
subject to self-employment tax.
You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-
come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned 
Income Exclusion.
You are using amounts paid for qualified 
long-term care insurance to figure the de-
duction.
Use Pub. 974 instead of the worksheet in the In-
structions for Form 1040 if you, your spouse, or 
a dependent enrolled in health insurance 
through the Health Insurance Marketplace and 
you are claiming the premium tax credit.
Note. If, during 2017, you are completing 
the Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction 
Worksheet in your tax return instructions and 
you were an eligible trade adjustment assis-
tance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAA (ATAA) 
recipient, reemployment TAA (RTAA) recipient, 
or Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation 
(PBGC) payee, you must complete Form 8885 
before completing that worksheet. When 
figuring the amount to enter on line 1 of the 
worksheet, do not include any of the following.
Any amounts you included on Form 8885, 
line 4, or on Form 14095, The Health Cov-
erage Tax Credit (HCTC) Reimbursement 
Request Form, to receive a reimbursement 
of the HCTC during the year.
Any qualified health insurance coverage 
premiums you paid to "U.S. Treas-
ury—HCTC" for eligible coverage months 
for which you received the benefit of the 
advance monthly payment program.
Any advance monthly payments your 
health plan administrator received from the 
IRS, as shown on Form 1099-H, Health 
Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance 
Payments.
Don't include amounts paid for health insur-
ance coverage with retirement plan distributions 
that were tax free because you are a retired 
public safety officer.
Where to report.  You take this deduction on 
Form 1040. If you itemize your deductions and 
don't claim 100% of your self-employed health 
insurance on Form 1040, you can generally in-
clude any remaining premiums with all other 
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
subject to the 10% limit. See Self-Employed 
Health Insurance Deduction  in Pub. 535 and 
Medical and Dental Expenses  in the Instruc-
tions for Schedule A (Form 1040), for more in-
formation.
22.
Taxes
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can't be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
This chapter discusses which taxes you can de-
duct if you itemize deductions on Schedule A 
CAUTION
!
Page 152 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 150 Chapter 22 Taxes

(Form 1040). It also explains which taxes you 
can deduct on other schedules or forms and 
which taxes you cannot deduct.
This chapter covers the following topics.
Income taxes (federal, state, local, and for-
eign).
General sales taxes (state and local).
Real estate taxes (state, local, and for-
eign).
Personal property taxes (state and local).
Taxes and fees you cannot deduct.
Use Table 22-1  as a guide to determine 
which taxes you can deduct.
The end of the chapter contains a section 
that explains which forms you use to deduct dif-
ferent types of taxes.
Business taxes. You can deduct certain taxes 
only if they are ordinary and necessary expen-
ses of your trade or business or of producing in-
come. For information on these taxes, see Pub. 
535, Business Expenses.
State or local taxes.  These are taxes im-
posed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions, or 
any of their political subdivisions (such as a 
county or city), or by the District of Columbia.
Indian tribal government.  An Indian tribal 
government recognized by the Secretary of the 
Treasury as performing substantial government 
functions will be treated as a state for purposes 
of claiming a deduction for taxes. Income taxes, 
real estate taxes, and personal property taxes 
imposed by that Indian tribal government (or by 
any of its subdivisions that are treated as politi-
cal subdivisions of a state) are deductible.
General sales taxes.  These are taxes im-
posed at one rate on retail sales of a broad 
range of classes of items.
Foreign taxes. These are taxes imposed by a 
foreign country or any of its political subdivi-
sions.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
Tax Information for Homeowners
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized 
Deductions
Supplemental 
Income and Loss
Foreign Tax Credit
Tests To Deduct
Any Tax
The following two tests must be met for you to 
deduct any tax.
The tax must be imposed on you.
You must pay the tax during your tax year.
The tax must be imposed on you.  In gen-
eral, you can deduct only taxes imposed on 
you.
  514 
  530 
  Schedule A (Form 1040) 
  Schedule E (Form 1040) 
  1116 
Generally, you can deduct property taxes 
only if you are an owner of the property. If your 
spouse owns the property and pays the real es-
tate taxes, the taxes are deductible on your 
spouse's separate return or on your joint return.
You must pay the tax during your tax year.
If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can de-
duct only those taxes you actually paid during 
your tax year. If you pay your taxes by check 
and the check is honored by your financial insti-
tution, the day you mail or deliver the check is 
the date of payment. If you use a pay-by-phone 
account (such as a credit card or electronic 
funds withdrawal), the date reported on the 
statement of the financial institution showing 
when payment was made is the date of pay-
ment. If you contest a tax liability and are a cash 
basis taxpayer, you can deduct the tax only in 
the year you actually pay it (or transfer money 
or other property to provide for satisfaction of 
the contested liability). See Pub. 538, Account-
ing Periods and Methods, for details.
If you use an accrual method of accounting, 
see Pub. 538 for more information.
Income Taxes
This section discusses the deductibility of state 
and local income taxes (including employee 
contributions to state benefit funds) and foreign 
income taxes.
State and Local Income 
Taxes
You can deduct state and local income taxes.
Exception. You can’t deduct state and local in-
come taxes you pay on income that is exempt 
from federal income tax, unless the exempt in-
come is interest income. For example, you can’t 
deduct the part of a state's income tax that is on 
a cost-of-living allowance exempt from federal 
income tax.
What To Deduct
Your deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti-
mated tax payments, or other tax payments as 
follows.
Withheld taxes. You can deduct state and lo-
cal income taxes withheld from your salary in 
the year they are withheld. Your Form(s) W-2 
will show these amounts. Forms W-2G, 
1099-G, 1099-R, and 1099-MISC may also 
show state and local income taxes withheld.
Estimated tax payments. You can deduct es-
timated tax payments you made during the year 
to a state or local government. However, you 
must have a reasonable basis for making the 
estimated tax payments. Any estimated state or 
local tax payments that aren’t made in good 
faith at the time of payment aren’t deductible.
Example. You made an estimated state in-
come tax payment. However, the estimate of 
your state tax liability shows that you will get a 
refund of the full amount of your estimated pay-
ment. You had no reasonable basis to believe 
you had any additional liability for state income 
taxes and you can’t deduct the estimated tax 
payment.
Refund applied to taxes. You can deduct any 
part of a refund of prior-year state or local in-
come taxes that you chose to have credited to 
your 2017 estimated state or local income 
taxes.
Don’t reduce your deduction by either of the 
following items.
Any state or local income tax refund (or 
credit) you expect to receive for 2017.
Any refund of (or credit for) prior-year state 
and local income taxes you actually re-
ceived in 2017.
However, part or all of this refund (or credit) 
may be taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state 
or local income taxes, later.
Separate federal returns.  If you and your 
spouse file separate state, local, and federal in-
come tax returns, each of you can deduct on 
your federal return only the amount of your own 
state and local income tax that you paid during 
the tax year.
Joint state and local returns.  If you and 
your spouse file joint state and local returns and 
separate federal returns, each of you can de-
duct on your separate federal return a part of 
the total state and local income taxes paid dur-
ing the tax year. You can deduct only the 
amount of the total taxes that is proportionate to 
your gross income compared to the combined 
gross income of you and your spouse. How-
ever, you can’t deduct more than the amount 
you actually paid during the year. You can avoid 
this calculation if you and your spouse are 
jointly and individually liable for the full amount 
of the state and local income taxes. If so, you 
and your spouse can deduct on your separate 
federal returns the amount you each actually 
paid.
Joint federal return.  If you file a joint federal 
return, you can deduct the total of the state and 
local income taxes both of you paid.
Contributions to state benefit funds.  As an 
employee, you can deduct mandatory contribu-
tions to state benefit funds withheld from your 
wages that provide protection against loss of 
wages. For example, certain states require em-
ployees to make contributions to state funds 
providing disability or unemployment insurance 
benefits. Mandatory payments made to the fol-
lowing state benefit funds are deductible as 
state income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 5.
Alaska Unemployment Compensation 
Fund.
California Nonoccupational Disability Ben-
efit Fund.
New Jersey Nonoccupational Disability 
Benefit Fund.
New Jersey Unemployment Compensation 
Fund.
New York Nonoccupational Disability Ben-
efit Fund.
Pennsylvania Unemployment Compensa-
tion Fund.
Page 153 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 151

Rhode Island Temporary Disability Benefit 
Fund.
Washington State Supplemental Work-
men's Compensation Fund.
Employee contributions to private or 
voluntary disability plans aren’t deduc-
tible.
Refund (or credit) of state or local income 
taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for) 
state or local income taxes in a year after the 
year in which you paid them, you may have to 
include the refund in income on Form 1040, 
line 10, in the year you receive it. This includes 
refunds resulting from taxes that were overwith-
held, applied from a prior year return, not fig-
ured correctly, or figured again because of an 
amended return. If you didn’t itemize your de-
ductions in the previous year, don’t include the 
refund in income. If you deducted the taxes in 
the previous year, include all or part of the re-
fund on Form 1040, line 10, in the year you re-
ceive the refund. For a discussion of how much 
to include, see Recoveries in chapter 12.
Foreign Income Taxes
Generally, you can take either a deduction or a 
credit for income taxes imposed on you by a 
foreign country or a U.S. possession. However, 
you can’t take a deduction or credit for foreign 
income taxes paid on income that is exempt 
from U.S. tax under the foreign earned income 
exclusion or the foreign housing exclusion. For 
information on these exclusions, see Pub. 54, 
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens 
Abroad. For information on the foreign tax 
credit, see Pub. 514.
State and Local 
General Sales Taxes
You can elect to deduct state and local general 
sales taxes, instead of state and local income 
taxes, as an itemized deduction on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 5b. You can use either your 
actual expenses or the state and local sales tax 
tables to figure your sales tax deduction.
Actual expenses.  Generally, you can deduct 
the actual state and local general sales taxes 
(including compensating use taxes) if the tax 
rate was the same as the general sales tax rate.
Food, clothing, and medical supplies. 
Sales taxes on food, clothing, and medical sup-
plies are deductible as a general sales tax even 
if the tax rate was less than the general sales 
tax rate.
Motor vehicles. Sales taxes on motor vehi-
cles are deductible as a general sales tax even 
if the tax rate was less than the general sales 
tax rate. However, if you paid sales tax on a 
motor vehicle at a rate higher than the general 
sales tax, you can deduct only the amount of 
the tax that you would have paid at the general 
sales tax rate on that vehicle. Include any state 
and local general sales taxes paid for a leased 
motor vehicle. For purposes of this section, mo-
tor vehicles include cars, motorcycles, motor 
homes, recreational vehicles, sport utility vehi-
cles, trucks, vans, and off-road vehicles.
CAUTION
!
If you use the actual expenses method, 
you must have receipts to show the 
general sales taxes paid.
Trade or business items.  Don't include 
sales taxes paid on items used in your trade or 
business on Schedule A (Form 1040). Instead, 
go to the instructions for the form you are using 
to report business income and expenses to see 
if you can deduct these taxes.
Optional sales tax tables.  Instead of using 
your actual expenses, you can figure your state 
and local general sales tax deduction using the 
state and local sales tax tables in the Instruc-
tions for Schedule A (Form 1040). You may 
also be able to add the state and local general 
sales taxes paid on certain specified items.
Your applicable table amount is based on 
the state where you live, your income, and the 
number of exemptions claimed on your tax re-
turn. Your income is your adjusted gross in-
come plus any nontaxable items such as the 
following.
Tax-exempt interest.
Veterans’ benefits.
Nontaxable combat pay.
Workers’ compensation.
Nontaxable part of social security and rail-
road retirement benefits.
Nontaxable part of IRA, pension, or annuity 
distributions, excluding rollovers.
Public assistance payments.
If you lived in different states during the 
same tax year, you must prorate your applica-
ble table amount for each state based on the 
days you lived in each state. See the Instruc-
tions for Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5, for de-
tails.
Real Estate Taxes
Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local, 
or foreign taxes on real property levied for the 
general public welfare. You can deduct these 
taxes only if they are assessed uniformly 
against all property under the jurisdiction of the 
taxing authority. The proceeds must be for gen-
eral community or governmental purposes and 
not be a payment for a special privilege granted 
or service rendered to you.
Deductible real estate taxes generally don’t 
include taxes charged for local benefits and im-
provements that increase the value of the prop-
erty. They also don’t include itemized charges 
for services (such as trash collection) assessed 
against specific property or certain people, 
even if the charge is paid to the taxing authority. 
For more information about taxes and charges 
that aren’t deductible, see Real Estate-Related 
Items You Can’t Deduct, later.
Tenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous-
ing corporation.  Generally, if you are a ten-
ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing corpo-
ration, you can deduct the amount paid to the 
corporation that represents your share of the 
real estate taxes the corporation paid or incur-
red for your dwelling unit. The corporation 
should provide you with a statement showing 
CAUTION
!
your share of the taxes. For more information, 
see Special Rules for Cooperatives in Pub. 530.
Division of real estate taxes between buy-
ers and sellers.  If you bought or sold real es-
tate during the year, the real estate taxes must 
be divided between the buyer and the seller.
The buyer and the seller must divide the real 
estate taxes according to the number of days in 
the real property tax year (the period to which 
the tax is imposed relates) that each owned the 
property. The seller is treated as paying the 
taxes up to, but not including, the date of sale. 
The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin-
ning with the date of sale. This applies regard-
less of the lien dates under local law. Generally, 
this information is included on the settlement 
statement provided at the closing.
If you (the seller) can’t deduct taxes until 
they are paid because you use the cash method 
of accounting, and the buyer of your property is 
personally liable for the tax, you are considered 
to have paid your part of the tax at the time of 
the sale. This lets you deduct the part of the tax 
to the date of sale even though you didn’t ac-
tually pay it. However, you must also include 
the amount of that tax in the selling price of the 
property. The buyer must include the same 
amount in his or her cost of the property.
You figure your deduction for taxes on each 
property bought or sold during the real property 
tax year as follows.
Worksheet 22-1. Figuring 
Your Real Estate Tax 
Deduction
Keep for Your Records
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for the 
real property tax year ..........  
2. Enter the number of days in the real 
property tax year that you owned the 
property .................  
3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, 
divide line 2 by 366) ........... .    
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your 
deduction. Enter it on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 6 ...............
Note. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property you bought 
or sold during the real property tax year. Your total deduction is 
the sum of the line 4 amounts for all of the properties.
Real estate taxes for prior years. Don’t di-
vide delinquent taxes between the buyer and 
seller if the taxes are for any real property tax 
year before the one in which the property is 
sold. Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delin-
quent taxes, the buyer can’t deduct them. The 
buyer must add them to the cost of the property. 
The seller can deduct these taxes paid by the 
buyer. However, the seller must include them in 
the selling price.
Examples. The following examples illustrate 
how real estate taxes are divided between 
buyer and seller.
Example 1.  Dennis and Beth White's real 
property tax year for both their old home and 
their new home is the calendar year, with pay-
ment due August 1. The tax on their old home, 
sold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their new 
home, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis and 
Beth are considered to have paid a proportion-
ate share of the real estate taxes on the old 
home even though they didn’t actually pay them 
Page 154 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 152 Chapter 22 Taxes

to the taxing authority. On the other hand, they 
can claim only a proportionate share of the 
taxes they paid on their new property even 
though they paid the entire amount.
Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur-
ing the real property tax year for 126 days (Jan-
uary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). They 
figure their deduction for taxes on their old 
home as follows.
Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your 
Real Estate Tax Deduction — 
Taxes on Old Home
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for the 
real property tax year ......... $620 
2. Enter the number of days in the real 
property tax year that you owned the 
property ................ 126 
3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, 
divide line 2 by 366) .......... .3452 
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your 
deduction. Enter it on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 6 .............. $214 
Since the buyers of their old home paid all of 
the taxes, Dennis and Beth also include the 
$214 in the selling price of the old home. (The 
buyers add the $214 to their cost of the home.)
Dennis and Beth owned their new home 
during the real property tax year for 243 days 
(May 3 to December 31, including their date of 
purchase). They figure their deduction for taxes 
on their new home as follows.
Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your 
Real Estate Tax Deduction — 
Taxes on New Home
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for the 
real property tax year ......... $732 
2. Enter the number of days in the real 
property tax year that you owned the 
property ................ 243 
3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, 
divide line 2 by 366) .......... .6658 
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your 
deduction. Enter it on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 6 .............. $487 
Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes on 
the new home, they add $245 ($732 paid less 
$487 deduction) to their cost of the new home. 
(The sellers add this $245 to their selling price 
and deduct the $245 as a real estate tax.)
Dennis and Beth's real estate tax deduction 
for their old and new homes is the sum of $214 
and $487, or $701. They will enter this amount 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6.
Example 2.  George and Helen Brown 
bought a new home on May 3, 2017. Their real 
property tax year for the new home is the calen-
dar year. Real estate taxes for 2016 were as-
sessed in their state on January 1, 2017. The 
taxes became due on May 31, 2017, and Octo-
ber 31, 2017.
The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due af-
ter the date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 
2016 were $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 
2017, and $340 on October 31, 2017. These 
taxes were for the 2016 real property tax year. 
The Browns cannot deduct them since they 
didn’t own the property until 2017. Instead, they 
must add $680 to the cost of their new home.
In January 2018, the Browns receive their 
2017 property tax statement for $752, which 
they will pay in 2018. The Browns owned their 
new home during the 2017 real property tax 
year for 243 days (May 3 to December 31). 
They will figure their 2018 deduction for taxes 
as follows.
Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your 
Real Estate Tax Deduction — 
Taxes on New Home
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for the 
real property tax year ......... $752 
2. Enter the number of days in the real 
property tax year that you owned the 
property ................ 243 
3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, 
divide line 2 by 366) .......... .6658 
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your 
deduction. Claim it on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 6 ........... $501
The remaining $251 ($752 paid less $501 de-
duction) of taxes paid in 2018, along with the 
$680 paid in 2017, is added to the cost of their 
new home.
Because the taxes up to the date of sale are 
considered paid by the seller on the date of 
sale, the seller is entitled to a 2017 tax deduc-
tion of $931. This is the sum of the $680 for 
2016 and the $251 for the 122 days the seller 
owned the home in 2017. The seller must also 
include the $931 in the selling price when he or 
she figures the gain or loss on the sale. The 
seller should contact the Browns in January 
2018 to find out how much real estate tax is due 
for 2017.
Form 1099-S.  For certain sales or ex-
changes of real estate, the person responsible 
for closing the sale (generally the settlement 
agent) prepares Form 1099-S, Proceeds From 
Real Estate Transactions, to report certain infor-
mation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop-
erty. Box 2 of Form 1099-S is for the gross pro-
ceeds from the sale and should include the 
portion of the seller's real estate tax liability that 
the buyer will pay after the date of sale. The 
buyer includes these taxes in the cost basis of 
the property, and the seller both deducts this 
amount as a tax paid and includes it in the sales 
price of the property.
For a real estate transaction that involves a 
home, any real estate tax the seller paid in ad-
vance but that is the liability of the buyer ap-
pears on Form 1099-S, box 6. The buyer de-
ducts this amount as a real estate tax, and the 
seller reduces his or her real estate tax deduc-
tion (or includes it in income) by the same 
amount. See Refund (or rebate), later.
Taxes placed in escrow.  If your monthly 
mortgage payment includes an amount placed 
in escrow (put in the care of a third party) for 
real estate taxes, you may not be able to deduct 
the total amount placed in escrow. You can de-
duct only the real estate tax that the third party 
actually paid to the taxing authority. If the third 
party doesn’t notify you of the amount of real 
estate tax that was paid for you, contact the 
third party or the taxing authority to find the 
proper amount to show on your return.
Tenants by the entirety.  If you and your 
spouse held property as tenants by the entirety 
and you file separate federal returns, each of 
you can deduct only the taxes each of you paid 
on the property.
Divorced individuals. If your divorce or sepa-
ration agreement states that you must pay the 
real estate taxes for a home owned by you and 
your spouse, part of your payments may be de-
ductible as alimony and part as real estate 
taxes. See Taxes and insurance  in chapter 18 
for more information.
Ministers' and military housing allowances.
If you are a minister or a member of the uni-
formed services and receive a housing allow-
ance that you can exclude from income, you still 
can deduct all of the real estate taxes you pay 
on your home.
Refund (or rebate).  If you received a refund 
or rebate in 2017 of real estate taxes you paid 
in 2017, you must reduce your deduction by the 
amount refunded to you. If you received a re-
fund or rebate in 2017 of real estate taxes you 
deducted in an earlier year, you generally must 
include the refund or rebate in income in the 
year you receive it. However, the amount you 
include in income is limited to the amount of the 
deduction that reduced your tax in the earlier 
year. For more information, see Recoveries in 
chapter 12.
Real Estate-Related Items 
You Can’t Deduct
Payments for the following items generally 
aren’t deductible as real estate taxes.
Taxes for local benefits.
Itemized charges for services (such as 
trash and garbage pickup fees).
Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).
Rent increases due to higher real estate 
taxes.
Homeowners' association charges.
Taxes for local benefits.  Deductible real es-
tate taxes generally don’t include taxes charged 
for local benefits and improvements tending to 
increase the value of your property. These in-
clude assessments for streets, sidewalks, water 
mains, sewer lines, public parking facilities, and 
similar improvements. You should increase the 
basis of your property by the amount of the as-
sessment.
Local benefit taxes are deductible only if 
they are for maintenance, repair, or interest 
charges related to those benefits. If only a part 
of the taxes is for maintenance, repair, or inter-
est, you must be able to show the amount of 
that part to claim the deduction. If you can’t de-
termine what part of the tax is for maintenance, 
repair, or interest, none of it is deductible.
Page 155 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 153

Taxes for local benefits may be inclu-
ded in your real estate tax bill. If your 
taxing authority (or mortgage lender) 
doesn’t furnish you a copy of your real estate 
tax bill, ask for it. You should use the rules 
above to determine if the local benefit tax is de-
ductible. Contact the taxing authority if you 
need additional information about a specific 
charge on your real estate tax bill.
Itemized charges for services.  An itemized 
charge for services assessed against specific 
property or certain people isn’t a tax, even if the 
charge is paid to the taxing authority. For exam-
ple, you can’t deduct the charge as a real estate 
tax if it is:
A unit fee for the delivery of a service (such 
as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000 gal-
lons of water you use),
A periodic charge for a residential service 
(such as a $20 per month or $240 annual 
fee charged to each homeowner for trash 
collection), or
A flat fee charged for a single service pro-
vided by your government (such as a $30 
charge for mowing your lawn because it 
CAUTION
!
was allowed to grow higher than permitted 
under your local ordinance).
You must look at your real estate tax 
bill to determine if any nondeductible 
itemized charges, such as those listed 
above, are included in the bill. If your taxing au-
thority (or mortgage lender) doesn’t furnish you 
a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it.
Exception. Service charges used to main-
tain or improve services (such as trash collec-
tion or police and fire protection) are deductible 
as real estate taxes if:
The fees or charges are imposed at a like 
rate against all property in the taxing juris-
diction;
The funds collected are not earmarked; in-
stead, they are commingled with general 
revenue funds; and
Funds used to maintain or improve serv-
ices are not limited to or determined by the 
amount of these fees or charges collected.
Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).  Transfer 
taxes and similar taxes and charges on the sale 
of a personal home aren’t deductible. If they are 
paid by the seller, they are expenses of the sale 
CAUTION
!
and reduce the amount realized on the sale. If 
paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost 
basis of the property.
Rent increase due to higher real estate 
taxes. If your landlord increases your rent in 
the form of a tax surcharge because of in-
creased real estate taxes, you can’t deduct the 
increase as taxes.
Homeowners' association charges.  These 
charges aren’t deductible because they are im-
posed by the homeowners' association, rather 
than the state or local government.
Personal Property 
Taxes
Personal property tax is deductible if it is a state 
or local tax that is:
Charged on personal property;
Based only on the value of the personal 
property; and
Charged on a yearly basis, even if it is col-
lected more or less than once a year.
Table 22-1.  Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
Type of Tax You Can Deduct You Can’t Deduct
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or 
business or of producing income.
Fees and charges that aren’t expenses of your trade or 
business or of producing income, such as fees for 
driver's licenses, car inspections, parking, or 
charges for water bills (see Taxes and Fees You 
Can’t Deduct).
Fines and penalties.
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes.
Employee contributions to state funds listed under 
Contributions to state benefit funds. 
Employee contributions to private or voluntary 
disability plans. 
State and local general sales taxes if you choose to 
deduct state and local income taxes. 
General Sales Taxes State and local general sales taxes, including 
compensating use taxes. 
State and local income taxes if you choose to deduct 
state and local general sales taxes.
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business. Federal excise taxes, such as tax on gasoline, that 
aren’t expenses of your trade or business or of 
producing income.
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty income. Per capita taxes.
Occupational taxes. See chapter 28.
One-half of self-employment tax paid. 
Personal Property 
Taxes
State and local personal property taxes. Customs duties that aren’t expenses of your trade or 
business or of producing income.
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Real estate taxes that are treated as imposed on 
someone else (see Division of real estate taxes 
between buyers and sellers).
Foreign real estate taxes. Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions). See Real 
Estate-Related Items You Can’t Deduct.
Tenant's share of real estate taxes paid by 
cooperative housing corporation. 
Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions). See 
Real Estate-Related Items You Can’t Deduct.
Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
Homeowners' association charges.
Page 156 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 154 Chapter 22 Taxes

A tax that meets the above requirements 
can be considered charged on personal prop-
erty even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. 
For example, a yearly tax based on value quali-
fies as a personal property tax even if it is called 
a registration fee and is for the privilege of reg-
istering motor vehicles or using them on the 
highways.
If the tax is partly based on value and partly 
based on other criteria, it may qualify in part.
Example. Your state charges a yearly mo-
tor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 
50 cents per hundredweight. You paid $32 
based on the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 
lbs.) of your car. You can deduct $15 (1% × 
$1,500) as a personal property tax because it is 
based on the value. The remaining $17 ($.50 × 
34), based on the weight, isn’t deductible.
Taxes and Fees
You Can’t Deduct
Many federal, state, and local government 
taxes aren’t deductible because they don’t fall 
within the categories discussed earlier. Other 
taxes and fees, such as federal income taxes, 
aren’t deductible because the tax law specifi-
cally prohibits a deduction for them. See Ta-
ble 22-1.
Taxes and fees that are generally not de-
ductible include the following items.
Employment taxes. This includes social 
security, Medicare, and railroad retirement 
taxes withheld from your pay. However, 
one-half of self-employment tax you pay is 
deductible. In addition, the social security 
and other employment taxes you pay on 
the wages of a household worker may be 
included in medical expenses that you can 
deduct, or child care expenses that allow 
you to claim the child and dependent care 
credit. For more information, see chapters 
21 and 32. 
Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes-
sion taxes. However, you can deduct the 
estate tax attributable to income in respect 
of a decedent if you, as a beneficiary, must 
include that income in your gross income. 
In that case, deduct the estate tax as a 
miscellaneous deduction that isn’t subject 
to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. 
For more information, see Pub. 559, Survi-
vors, Executors, and Administrators. 
Federal income taxes. This includes in-
come taxes withheld from your pay.
Fines and penalties. You can’t deduct 
fines and penalties paid to a government 
for violation of any law, including related 
amounts forfeited as collateral deposits. 
Gift taxes.
License fees. You can’t deduct license 
fees for personal purposes (such as mar-
riage, driver's, and pet license fees). 
Per capita taxes. You can’t deduct state 
or local per capita taxes.
Many taxes and fees other than those listed 
above are also nondeductible, unless they are 
ordinary and necessary expenses of a business 
or income producing activity. For other nonde-
ductible items, see Real Estate-Related Items 
You Can’t Deduct, earlier.
Where To Deduct
You deduct taxes on the following schedules.
State and local income taxes.  These taxes 
are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 5, even if your only source of income is 
from business, rents, or royalties. Check box a 
on line 5.
General sales taxes.  Sales taxes are deduc-
ted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5. You 
must check box b on line 5. If you elect to de-
duct sales taxes, you can’t deduct state and lo-
cal income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 5, box a.
Foreign income taxes.  Generally, income 
taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. pos-
session can be claimed as an itemized deduc-
tion on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8, or as a 
credit against your U.S. income tax on Form 
1040, line 48. To claim the credit, you may have 
to complete and attach Form 1116. For more in-
formation, see chapter 38 , the Form 1040 in-
structions, or Pub. 514.
Real estate taxes and personal property 
taxes. Real estate and personal property taxes 
are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), lines 
6 and 7, respectively, unless they are paid on 
property used in your business, in which case 
they are deducted on Schedule C, Sched-
ule C-EZ, or Schedule F (Form 1040). Taxes on 
property that produces rent or royalty income 
are deducted on Schedule E (Form 1040).
Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half of your 
self-employment tax on Form 1040, line 27.
Other taxes. All other deductible taxes are de-
ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8.
23.
Interest 
Expense
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return, including 
CAUTION
!
the itemized deduction for mortgage insur-
ance premiums.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To find out whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Mortgage insurance premiums.  The item-
ized deduction for mortgage insurance premi-
ums has expired.
Introduction
This chapter discusses what interest expenses 
you can deduct. Interest is the amount you pay 
for the use of borrowed money.
The following are types of interest you can 
deduct as itemized deductions on Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
Home mortgage interest, including certain 
points.
Investment interest.
This chapter explains these deductions. It also 
explains where to deduct other types of interest 
and lists some types of interest you can't de-
duct.
Use Table 23-1  to find out where to get 
more information on various types of interest, 
including investment interest.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
Investment Income and Expenses
Home Mortgage
Interest
Generally, home mortgage interest is any inter-
est you pay on a loan secured by your home 
(main home or a second home). The loan may 
be a mortgage to buy your home, a second 
mortgage, a line of credit, or a home equity 
loan.
You can deduct home mortgage interest if 
all the following conditions are met.
You file Form 1040 and itemize deductions 
on Schedule A (Form 1040).
The mortgage is a secured debt on a quali-
fied home in which you have an ownership 
interest. (Generally, your mortgage is a se-
cured debt if you put your home up as col-
lateral to protect the interest of the lender. 
The term “qualified home” means your 
main home or second home. For details, 
see Pub. 936.)
Both you and the lender must intend that the 
loan be repaid.
Amount Deductible
In most cases, you can deduct all of your home 
mortgage interest. How much you can deduct 
  936 
  550 
Page 157 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 155

depends on the date of the mortgage, the 
amount of the mortgage, and how you use the 
mortgage proceeds.
Fully deductible interest.  If all of your mort-
gages fit into one or more of the following three 
categories at all times during the year, you can 
deduct all of the interest on those mortgages. (If 
any one mortgage fits into more than one cate-
gory, add the debt that fits in each category to 
your other debt in the same category.)
The three categories are as follows.
1. Mortgages you took out on or before Octo-
ber 13, 1987 (called grandfathered debt).
2. Mortgages you (or your spouse if married 
filing a joint return) took out after October 
13, 1987, to buy, build, or improve your 
home (called home acquisition debt), but 
only if throughout 2017 these mortgages 
plus any grandfathered debt totaled $1 
million or less ($500,000 or less if married 
filing separately).
3. Mortgages you (or your spouse if married 
filing a joint return) took out after October 
13, 1987, that are home equity debt but 
that aren’t home acquisition debt, but only 
if throughout 2017 these mortgages to-
taled $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if 
married filing separately) and totaled no 
more than the fair market value of your 
home reduced by (1) and (2).
The dollar limits for the second and third cate-
gories apply to the combined mortgages on 
your main home and second home.
See Part II of Pub. 936 for more detailed 
definitions of grandfathered, home acquisition, 
and home equity debt.
You can use Figure 23-A  to check whether 
your home mortgage interest is fully deductible. 
Limits on deduction.  You can't fully deduct 
interest on a mortgage that doesn't fit into any 
of the three categories listed earlier. If this ap-
plies to you, see Part II of Pub. 936 to figure the 
amount of interest you can deduct.
Special Situations
This section describes certain items that can be 
included as home mortgage interest and others 
that can't. It also describes certain special situa-
tions that may affect your deduction.
Late payment charge on mortgage pay-
ment. You can deduct as home mortgage in-
terest a late payment charge if it wasn't for a 
specific service performed in connection with 
your mortgage loan.
Mortgage prepayment penalty. If you pay off 
your home mortgage early, you may have to 
pay a penalty. You can deduct that penalty as 
home mortgage interest provided the penalty 
isn't for a specific service performed or cost in-
curred in connection with your mortgage loan.
Sale of home.  If you sell your home, you can 
deduct your home mortgage interest (subject to 
any limits that apply) paid up to, but not includ-
ing, the date of sale.
Example. John and Peggy Harris sold their 
home on May 7. Through April 30, they made 
home mortgage interest payments of $1,220. 
The settlement sheet for the sale of the home 
showed $50 interest for the 6-day period in May 
up to, but not including, the date of sale. Their 
mortgage interest deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 
+ $50).
Prepaid interest.  If you pay interest in ad-
vance for a period that goes beyond the end of 
the tax year, you must spread this interest over 
the tax years to which it applies. You can de-
duct in each year only the interest that qualifies 
as home mortgage interest for that year. How-
ever, there is an exception that applies to 
points, discussed later.
Mortgage interest credit. You may be able to 
claim a mortgage interest credit if you were is-
sued a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) by a 
state or local government. Figure the credit on 
Form 8396, Mortgage Interest Credit. If you 
take this credit, you must reduce your mortgage 
interest deduction by the amount of the credit.
For more information on the credit, see 
chapter 38.
Ministers' and military housing allowance.
If you are a minister or a member of the uni-
formed services and receive a housing allow-
ance that isn't taxable, you can still deduct your 
home mortgage interest.
Hardest Hit Fund and Emergency Home-
owners' Loan Programs. You can use a spe-
cial method to figure your deduction for mort-
gage interest and real estate taxes on your 
main home if you meet the following two condi-
tions.
1. You received assistance under:
a. A State Housing Finance Agency 
(State HFA) Hardest Hit Fund pro-
gram in which program payments 
could be used to pay mortgage inter-
est, or
b. An Emergency Homeowners' Loan 
Program administered by the Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment (HUD) or a state.
2. You meet the rules to deduct all of the 
mortgage interest on your loan and all of 
the real estate taxes on your main home.
If you meet these conditions, then you can de-
duct all of the payments you actually made dur-
ing the year to your mortgage servicer, the 
State HFA, or HUD on the home mortgage (in-
cluding the amount shown on box 3 of Form 
1098-MA, Mortgage Assistance Payments), but 
not more than the sum of the amounts shown 
on Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, in 
box 1 (mortgage interest received from 
payer(s)/borrower(s)) and box 11 (real property 
taxes). However, you aren't required to use this 
special method to figure your deduction for 
mortgage interest and real estate taxes on your 
main home.
Mortgage assistance payments under sec-
tion 235 of the National Housing Act.  If you 
qualify for mortgage assistance payments for 
lower-income families under section 235 of the 
National Housing Act, part or all of the interest 
on your mortgage may be paid for you. You 
can’t deduct the interest that is paid for you.
No other effect on taxes.  Don't include 
these mortgage assistance payments in your in-
come. Also, don't use these payments to re-
duce other deductions, such as real estate 
taxes.
Divorced or separated individuals.  If a di-
vorce or separation agreement requires you or 
your spouse or former spouse to pay home 
mortgage interest on a home owned by both of 
you, the payment of interest may be alimony. 
See the discussion of Payments for jointly 
owned home in chapter 18.
Redeemable ground rents.  If you make an-
nual or periodic rental payments on a redeema-
ble ground rent, you can deduct them as mort-
gage interest.
Payments made to end the lease and to buy 
the lessor's entire interest in the land aren't de-
ductible as mortgage interest. For more infor-
mation, see Pub. 936.
Nonredeemable ground rents.  Payments 
on a nonredeemable ground rent aren't mort-
gage interest. You can deduct them as rent if 
they are a business expense or if they are for 
rental property.
Reverse mortgages. A reverse mortgage is a 
loan where the lender pays you (in a lump sum, 
a monthly advance, a line of credit, or a combi-
nation of all three) while you continue to live in 
your home. With a reverse mortgage, you retain 
title to your home. Depending on the plan, your 
reverse mortgage becomes due with interest 
when you move, sell your home, reach the end 
of a pre-selected loan period, or die. Because 
reverse mortgages are considered loan advan-
ces and not income, the amount you receive 
isn't taxable. Any interest (including original is-
sue discount) accrued on a reverse mortgage 
isn't deductible until the loan is paid in full. Your 
deduction may be limited because a reverse 
mortgage loan generally is subject to the limit 
on Home Equity Debt discussed in Pub. 936.
Rental payments. If you live in a house before 
final settlement on the purchase, any payments 
you make for that period are rent and not inter-
est. This is true even if the settlement papers 
call them interest. You can't deduct these pay-
ments as home mortgage interest.
Mortgage proceeds invested in tax-exempt 
securities. You can't deduct the home mort-
gage interest on grandfathered debt or home 
equity debt if you used the proceeds of the 
mortgage to buy securities or certificates that 
produce tax-free income. “Grandfathered debt” 
and “home equity debt” are defined earlier un-
der Amount Deductible.
Refunds of interest. If you receive a refund of 
interest in the same tax year you paid it, you 
must reduce your interest expense by the 
amount refunded to you. If you receive a refund 
of interest you deducted in an earlier year, you 
generally must include the refund in income in 
the year you receive it. However, you need to 
include it only up to the amount of the deduction 
that reduced your tax in the earlier year. This is 
true whether the interest overcharge was refun-
ded to you or was used to reduce the outstand-
ing principal on your mortgage. If you need to 
include the refund in income, report it on Form 
1040, line 21.
Page 158 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 156 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Figure 23-A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
2 
Start Here:
No
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before October 13, 1987?
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You don’t need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
3
2 
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married /f_iling separately) may qualify as home equity debt if they aren’t more than the total home equity
debt limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
Do you meet the conditions  to deduct home
mortgage interest?
Yes
You can’t deduct the interest payments as
home mortgage interest.
4
No
You must itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). The loan must be a secured debt on a quali/f_ied home. See Home Mortgage Interest.
See Table 23-1 for where to deduct other types of interest payments.
4
3
2
1
1
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home.)
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after 
October 13, 1987, used to buy, build, or improve 
the main home secured by that main home 
mortgage or used to buy, build, or improve the 
second home secured by that second home 
mortgage, or both?
Were your (or your spouse’s if married /f_iling a joint 
return) grandfathered debt plus home acquisition 
debt balances $1,000,000 or less  ($500,000 or 
less if married /f_iling separately) at all times during 
the year?
Were your (or your spouse’s if married /f_iling a joint 
return) mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less 
($500,000 or less if married /f_iling separately) at all 
times during the year? 
Were your (or your spouse’s if married /f_iling a joint 
return) home equity debt balances $100,000 or 
less  ($50,000 or less if married /f_iling separately) 
at all times during the year?
Were your (or your spouse’s if married /f_iling a joint 
return) total mortgage balances $100,000 or less 
($50,000 or less if married /f_iling separately) at all 
times during the year?
Page 159 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 157

If you received a refund of interest you over-
paid in an earlier year, you generally will receive 
a Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, 
showing the refund in box 4. For information 
about Form 1098, see Form 1098, Mortgage In-
terest Statement, later.
For more information on how to treat refunds 
of interest deducted in earlier years, see Recov-
eries in chapter 12.
Points
The term “points” is used to describe certain 
charges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrower 
to obtain a home mortgage. Points may also be 
called loan origination fees, maximum loan 
charges, loan discount, or discount points.
A borrower is treated as paying any points 
that a home seller pays for the borrower's mort-
gage. See Points paid by the seller, later.
General Rule
You generally can't deduct the full amount of 
points in the year paid. Because they are pre-
paid interest, you generally deduct them ratably 
over the life (term) of the mortgage. See Deduc-
tion Allowed Ratably next.
For exceptions to the general rule, see De-
duction Allowed in Year Paid, later.
Deduction Allowed Ratably
If you don't meet the tests listed under Deduc-
tion Allowed in Year Paid  next, the loan isn't a 
home improvement loan, or you choose not to 
deduct your points in full in the year paid, you 
can deduct the points ratably (equally) over the 
life of the loan if you meet all the following tests.
1. You use the cash method of accounting. 
This means you report income in the year 
you receive it and deduct expenses in the 
year you pay them. Most individuals use 
this method.
2. Your loan is secured by a home. (The 
home doesn't need to be your main 
home.)
3. Your loan period isn't more than 30 years.
4. If your loan period is more than 10 years, 
the terms of your loan are the same as 
other loans offered in your area for the 
same or longer period.
5. Either your loan amount is $250,000 or 
less, or the number of points isn’t more 
than:
a. 4, if your loan period is 15 years or 
less; or
b. 6, if your loan period is more than 15 
years.
Deduction Allowed in Year Paid
You can fully deduct points in the year paid if 
you meet all the following tests. (You can use 
Figure 23-B  as a quick guide to see whether 
your points are fully deductible in the year paid.)
1. Your loan is secured by your main home. 
(Your main home is the one you ordinarily 
live in most of the time.)
2. Paying points is an established business 
practice in the area where the loan was 
made.
3. The points paid weren't more than the 
points generally charged in that area.
4. You use the cash method of accounting. 
This means you report income in the year 
you receive it and deduct expenses in the 
year you pay them. (If you want more in-
formation about this method, see Account-
ing Methods in chapter 1.)
5. The points weren't paid in place of 
amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa-
rately on the settlement statement, such 
as appraisal fees, inspection fees, title 
fees, attorney fees, and property taxes.
6. The funds you provided at or before clos-
ing, plus any points the seller paid, were at 
least as much as the points charged. The 
funds you provided aren't required to have 
been applied to the points. They can in-
clude a down payment, an escrow de-
posit, earnest money, and other funds you 
paid at or before closing for any purpose. 
You can’t have borrowed these funds from 
your lender or mortgage broker.
7. You use your loan to buy or build your 
main home.
8. The points were figured as a percentage 
of the principal amount of the mortgage.
9. The amount is clearly shown on the settle-
ment statement (such as the Settlement 
Statement, Form HUD-1) as points 
charged for the mortgage. The points may 
be shown as paid from either your funds or 
the seller's.
Note. If you meet all of these tests, you can 
choose to either fully deduct the points in the 
year paid, or deduct them over the life of the 
loan.
Home improvement loan.  You can also fully 
deduct in the year paid points paid on a loan to 
improve your main home, if tests (1) through (6) 
are met.
Second home.  You can’t fully deduct 
in the year paid points you pay on 
loans secured by your second home. 
You can deduct these points only over the life of 
the loan.
Refinancing. Generally, points you pay to refi-
nance a mortgage aren't deductible in full in the 
year you pay them. This is true even if the new 
mortgage is secured by your main home.
However, if you use part of the refinanced 
mortgage proceeds to improve your main home 
and you meet the first 6 tests listed under De-
duction Allowed in Year Paid , earlier, you can 
fully deduct the part of the points related to the 
improvement in the year you paid them with 
your own funds. You can deduct the rest of the 
points over the life of the loan.
Example 1. In 2001, Bill Fields got a mort-
gage to buy a home. In 2017, Bill refinanced 
that mortgage with a 15-year $100,000 mort-
gage loan. The mortgage is secured by his 
home. To get the new loan, he had to pay three 
CAUTION
!
points ($3,000). Two points ($2,000) were for 
prepaid interest, and one point ($1,000) was 
charged for services, in place of amounts that 
ordinarily are stated separately on the settle-
ment statement. Bill paid the points out of his 
private funds, rather than out of the proceeds of 
the new loan. The payment of points is an es-
tablished practice in the area, and the points 
charged aren't more than the amount generally 
charged there. Bill's first payment on the new 
loan was due July 1. He made six payments on 
the loan in 2017 and is a cash-basis taxpayer.
Bill used the funds from the new mortgage 
to repay his existing mortgage. Although the 
new mortgage loan was for Bill's continued 
ownership of his main home, it wasn't for the 
purchase or improvement of that home. He 
can't deduct all of the points in 2017. He can 
deduct two points ($2,000) ratably over the life 
of the loan. He deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷ 180 
months) × 6 payments] of the points in 2017. 
The other point ($1,000) was a fee for services 
and isn't deductible.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that Bill used $25,000 of the 
loan proceeds to improve his home and 
$75,000 to repay his existing mortgage. Bill de-
ducts 25% ($25,000 ÷ $100,000) of the points 
($2,000) in 2017. His deduction is $500 ($2,000 
× 25% (0.25)).
Bill also deducts the ratable part of the re-
maining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must be 
spread over the life of the loan. This is $50 
[($1,500 ÷ 180 months) × 6 payments] in 2017. 
The total amount Bill deducts in 2017 is $550 
($500 + $50).
Special Situations
This section describes certain special situations 
that may affect your deduction of points.
Original issue discount (OID).  If you don't 
qualify to either deduct the points in the year 
paid or deduct them ratably over the life of the 
loan, or if you choose not to use either of these 
methods, the points reduce the issue price of 
the loan. This reduction results in OID, which is 
discussed in chapter 4 of Pub. 535.
Amounts charged for services.  Amounts 
charged by the lender for specific services con-
nected to the loan aren't interest. Examples of 
these charges include the following.
Appraisal fees.
Notary fees.
Preparation costs for the mortgage note or 
deed of trust.
Mortgage insurance premiums.
VA funding fees.
You can't deduct these amounts as points ei-
ther in the year paid or over the life of the mort-
gage.
Points paid by the seller.  The term “points” 
includes loan placement fees that the seller 
pays to the lender to arrange financing for the 
buyer.
Treatment by seller.  The seller can't de-
duct these fees as interest. But they are a sell-
ing expense that reduces the amount realized 
Page 160 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 158 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Figure 23-B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Start Here:
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Is the payment of points an established 
business practice in your area? 
Were the points paid more than the amount 
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Were the points paid in place of amounts that 
ordinarily are separately stated on the 
settlement sheet?
Were the funds you provided (other than those 
you borrowed from your lender or mortgage 
broker), plus any points the seller paid, at least 
as much as the points charged?*
Did you take out the loan to improve your 
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build 
your main home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of 
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on 
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
You can’t fully deduct the points this year. See 
the discussion on Points. 
* The funds you provided aren’t required to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, earnest money, and 
 other funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Page 161 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 159

by the seller. See chapter 15 for information on 
selling your home.
Treatment by buyer.  The buyer reduces 
the basis of the home by the amount of the 
seller-paid points and treats the points as if he 
or she had paid them. If all the tests under De-
duction Allowed in Year Paid , earlier, are met, 
the buyer can deduct the points in the year 
paid. If any of those tests aren't met, the buyer 
deducts the points over the life of the loan.
For information about basis, see chapter 13.
Funds provided are less than points.  If you 
meet all the tests in Deduction Allowed in Year 
Paid, earlier, except that the funds you provided 
were less than the points charged to you (test 
(6)), you can deduct the points in the year paid, 
up to the amount of funds you provided. In addi-
tion, you can deduct any points paid by the 
seller.
Example 1. When you took out a $100,000 
mortgage loan to buy your home in December, 
you were charged one point ($1,000). You meet 
all the tests for deducting points in the year 
paid, except the only funds you provided were a 
$750 down payment. Of the $1,000 charged for 
points, you can deduct $750 in the year paid. 
You spread the remaining $250 over the life of 
the mortgage.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that the person who sold you 
your home also paid one point ($1,000) to help 
you get your mortgage. In the year paid, you 
can deduct $1,750 ($750 of the amount you 
were charged plus the $1,000 paid by the 
seller). You spread the remaining $250 over the 
life of the mortgage. You must reduce the basis 
of your home by the $1,000 paid by the seller.
Excess points. If you meet all the tests in De-
duction Allowed in Year Paid , earlier, except 
that the points paid were more than generally 
paid in your area (test (3)), you deduct in the 
year paid only the points that are generally 
charged. You must spread any additional points 
over the life of the mortgage.
Mortgage ending early.  If you spread your 
deduction for points over the life of the mort-
gage, you can deduct any remaining balance in 
the year the mortgage ends. However, if you re-
finance the mortgage with the same lender, you 
can't deduct any remaining balance of spread 
points. Instead, deduct the remaining balance 
over the term of the new loan.
A mortgage may end early due to a prepay-
ment, refinancing, foreclosure, or similar event.
Example. Dan paid $3,000 in points in 
2006 that he had to spread out over the 15-year 
life of the mortgage. He deducts $200 in points 
per year. Through 2016, Dan has deducted 
$2,200 of the points.
Dan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2017. He 
can deduct the remaining $800 of points in 
2017.
Limits on deduction.  You can't fully deduct 
points paid on a mortgage unless the mortgage 
fits into one of the categories listed earlier under 
Fully deductible interest . See Pub. 936 for de-
tails.
Form 1098, Mortgage 
Interest Statement
If you paid $600 or more of mortgage interest 
(including certain points) during the year on any 
one mortgage, you generally will receive a Form 
1098 or a similar statement from the mortgage 
holder. You will receive the statement if you pay 
interest to a person (including a financial institu-
tion or a cooperative housing corporation) in the 
course of that person's trade or business. A 
governmental unit is a person for purposes of 
furnishing the statement.
The statement for each year should be sent 
to you by January 31 of the following year. A 
copy of this form will also be sent to the IRS.
The statement will show the total interest 
you paid during the year, and if you purchased 
a main home during the year, it also will show 
the deductible points paid during the year, in-
cluding seller-paid points. However, it shouldn't 
show any interest that was paid for you by a 
government agency.
As a general rule, Form 1098 will include 
only points that you can fully deduct in the year 
paid. However, certain points not included on 
Form 1098 also may be deductible, either in the 
year paid or over the life of the loan. See Points, 
earlier, to determine whether you can deduct 
points not shown on Form 1098.
Prepaid interest on Form 1098.  If you pre-
paid interest in 2017 that accrued in full by Jan-
uary 15, 2018, this prepaid interest may be in-
cluded in box 1 of Form 1098. However, you 
can't deduct the prepaid amount for January 
2018 in 2017. (See Prepaid interest , earlier.) 
You will have to figure the interest that accrued 
for 2018 and subtract it from the amount in 
box 1. You will include the interest for January 
2018 with the other interest you pay for 2018. 
See How To Report, later.
Refunded interest. If you received a refund of 
mortgage interest you overpaid in an earlier 
year, you generally will receive a Form 1098 
showing the refund in box 4. See Refunds of in-
terest, earlier.
Investment Interest
This section discusses interest expenses you 
may be able to deduct as an investor.
If you borrow money to buy property you 
hold for investment, the interest you pay is in-
vestment interest. You can deduct investment 
interest subject to the limit discussed later. 
However, you can't deduct interest you incurred 
to produce tax-exempt income. Nor can you de-
duct interest expenses on straddles.
Investment interest doesn't include any 
qualified home mortgage interest or any interest 
taken into account in figurng income or loss 
from a passive activity.
Investment Property
Property held for investment includes property 
that produces interest, dividends, annuities, or 
royalties not derived in the ordinary course of a 
trade or business. It also includes property that 
produces gain or loss (not derived in the 
ordinary course of a trade or business) from the 
sale or trade of property producing these types 
of income or held for investment (other than an 
interest in a passive activity). Investment prop-
erty also includes an interest in a trade or busi-
ness activity in which you didn't materially par-
ticipate (other than a passive activity).
Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.
To determine your investment interest, combine 
your share of investment interest from a part-
nership, S corporation, estate, or trust with your 
other investment interest.
Allocation of Interest 
Expense
If you borrow money for business or personal 
purposes as well as for investment, you must al-
locate the debt among those purposes. Only 
the interest expense on the part of the debt 
used for investment purposes is treated as in-
vestment interest. The allocation isn't affected 
by the use of property that secures the debt.
Limit on Deduction
Generally, your deduction for investment inter-
est expense is limited to the amount of your net 
investment income.
You can carry over the amount of invest-
ment interest that you couldn't deduct because 
of this limit to the next tax year. The interest car-
ried over is treated as investment interest paid 
or accrued in that next year.
You can carry over disallowed investment 
interest to the next tax year even if it's more 
than your taxable income in the year the interest 
was paid or accrued.
Net Investment Income
Determine the amount of your net investment 
income by subtracting your investment expen-
ses (other than interest expense) from your in-
vestment income.
Investment income.  This generally includes 
your gross income from property held for invest-
ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, 
and royalties). Investment income doesn't in-
clude Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also 
doesn't include qualified dividends or net capital 
gain unless you choose to include them.
Choosing to include qualified dividends. 
Investment income generally doesn't include 
qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 8 . 
However, you can choose to include all or part 
of your qualified dividends in investment in-
come.
You make this choice by completing Form 
4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.
If you choose to include any amount of your 
qualified dividends in investment income, you 
must reduce your qualified dividends that are 
eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by 
the same amount.
Choosing to include net capital gain.  In-
vestment income generally doesn't include net 
capital gain from disposing of investment prop-
erty (including capital gain distributions from 
mutual funds). However, you can choose to 
Page 162 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 160 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

include all or part of your net capital gain in in-
vestment income.
You make this choice by completing Form 
4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.
If you choose to include any amount of your 
net capital gain in investment income, you must 
reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for 
the lower capital gains tax rates by the same 
amount.
Before making either choice, consider 
the overall effect on your tax liability. 
Compare your tax if you make one or 
both of these choices with your tax if you don't 
make either choice.
Investment income of child reported on pa-
rent's return. Investment income includes the 
part of your child's interest and dividend income 
that you choose to report on your return. If the 
child doesn't have qualified dividends, Alaska 
Permanent Fund dividends, or capital gain dis-
tributions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form 
8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter-
est and Dividends.
Child's qualified dividends.  If part of the 
amount you report is your child's qualified divi-
dends, that part (which is reported on Form 
1040, line 9b) generally doesn't count as invest-
ment income. However, you can choose to in-
clude all or part of it in investment income, as 
explained under Choosing to include qualified 
dividends, earlier.
Your investment income also includes the 
amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, 
the reduced amount figured next under Child's 
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends).
Child's Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends. If part of the amount you report is your 
child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that 
part doesn't count as investment income. To fig-
ure the amount of your child's income that you 
can consider your investment income, start with 
the amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that 
amount by a percentage that is equal to the 
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by 
the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtract 
the result from the amount on Form 8814, 
line 12.
Child's capital gain distributions. If part of 
the amount you report is your child's capital 
gain distributions, that part (which is reported 
on Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13) 
generally doesn't count as investment income. 
However, you can choose to include all or part 
of it in investment income, as explained in 
Choosing to include net capital gain, earlier.
Your investment income also includes the 
amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, 
the reduced amount figured under Child's 
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).
Investment expenses.  Investment expenses 
are your allowed deductions (other than interest 
expense) directly connected with the production 
of investment income. Investment expenses 
that are included as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040) are al-
lowable deductions after applying the 2% limit 
that applies to miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tions. Use the smaller of:
The investment expenses included on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23; or
TIP
The amount on Schedule A, line 27.
Losses from passive activities.  Income or 
expenses that you used in figuring income or 
loss from a passive activity aren't included in 
determining your investment income or invest-
ment expenses (including investment interest 
expense). See Pub. 925, Passive Activity and 
At-Risk Rules, for information about passive ac-
tivities.
Form 4952
Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense 
Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-
ment interest.
Exception to use of Form 4952.  You don't 
have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to your 
return if you meet all of the following tests.
Your investment interest expense isn't 
more than your investment income from in-
terest and ordinary dividends minus any 
qualified dividends.
You don't have any other deductible in-
vestment expenses.
You have no carryover of investment inter-
est expense from 2016.
If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct all 
of your investment interest.
More Information
For more information on investment interest, 
see Interest Expenses in chapter 3 of Pub. 550.
Items You
Can’t Deduct
Some interest payments aren't deductible. Cer-
tain expenses similar to interest also aren't de-
ductible. Nondeductible expenses include the 
following items.
Personal interest (discussed later). 
Service charges (however, see Other Ex-
penses (Line 23) in chapter 28). 
Annual fees for credit cards. 
Loan fees. 
Credit investigation fees. 
Mortgage insurance premiums.
VA funding fees.
Interest to purchase or carry tax-exempt 
securities. 
Penalties. You can't deduct fines and penal-
ties paid to a government for violations of law, 
regardless of their nature.
Personal Interest
Personal interest isn't deductible. Personal in-
terest is any interest that isn't home mortgage 
interest, investment interest, business interest, 
or other deductible interest. It includes the fol-
lowing items.
Interest on car loans (unless you use the 
car for business).
Interest on federal, state, or local income 
tax. 
Finance charges on credit cards, retail in-
stallment contracts, and revolving charge 
accounts incurred for personal expenses. 
Late payment charges by a public utility. 
You may be able to deduct interest you 
pay on a qualified student loan. For de-
tails, see Pub. 970, Tax Benefits for 
Education.
Allocation of Interest
If you use the proceeds of a loan for more than 
one purpose (for example, personal and busi-
ness), you must allocate the interest on the loan 
to each use. However, you don't have to allo-
cate home mortgage interest if it is fully deducti-
ble, regardless of how the funds are used.
You allocate interest (other than fully deduc-
tible home mortgage interest) on a loan in the 
same way as the loan itself is allocated. You do 
this by tracing disbursements of the debt pro-
ceeds to specific uses. For details on how to do 
this, see chapter 4 of Pub. 535.
How To Report
You must file Form 1040 to deduct any home 
mortgage interest expense on your tax return. 
Where you deduct your interest expense gener-
ally depends on how you use the loan pro-
ceeds. See Table 23-1 for a summary of where 
to deduct your interest expense.
Home mortgage interest and points. Deduct 
the home mortgage interest and points reported 
to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 10. If you paid more deductible inter-
est to the financial institution than the amount 
shown on Form 1098, show the larger deducti-
ble amount on line 10. Attach a statement ex-
plaining the difference and print “See attached” 
next to line 10.
Deduct home mortgage interest that wasn't 
reported to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 11. If you paid home mort-
gage interest to the person from whom you 
bought your home, show that person's name, 
address, and taxpayer identification number 
(TIN) on the dotted lines next to line 11. The 
seller must give you this number and you must 
give the seller your TIN. A Form W-9, Request 
for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certifi-
cation, can be used for this purpose. Failure to 
meet any of these requirements may result in a 
$50 penalty for each failure. The TIN can be ei-
ther a social security number, an individual tax-
payer identification number (issued by the IRS), 
or an employer identification number. See So-
cial Security Number (SSN)  in chapter 1 for 
more information about TINs.
If you can take a deduction for points that 
weren't reported to you on Form 1098, deduct 
those points on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 12.
More than one borrower.  If you and at 
least one other person (other than your spouse 
if you file a joint return) were liable for and paid 
interest on a mortgage that was for your home, 
and the other person received a Form 1098 
TIP
Page 163 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 161

showing the interest that was paid during the 
year, attach a statement to your return explain-
ing this. Show how much of the interest each of 
you paid, and give the name and address of the 
person who received the form. Deduct your 
share of the interest on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 11, and print “See attached” next to 
the line.
Similarly, if you are the payer of record on a 
mortgage on which there are other borrowers 
entitled to a deduction for the interest shown on 
the Form 1098 you received, deduct only your 
share of the interest on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 10. You should let each of the other 
borrowers know what his or her share is.
Mortgage proceeds used for business or 
investment. If your home mortgage interest 
deduction is limited, but all or part of the mort-
gage proceeds were used for business, invest-
ment, or other deductible activities, see Ta-
ble 23-1 . It shows where to deduct the part of 
your excess interest that is for those activities.
Investment interest. Deduct investment inter-
est, subject to certain limits discussed in Pub. 
550, on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 14.
Amortization of bond premium.  There are 
various ways to treat the premium you pay to 
buy taxable bonds. See Bond Premium Amorti-
zation in Pub. 550.
Income-producing rental or royalty interest.
Deduct interest on a loan for income-producing 
rental or royalty property that isn't used in your 
business in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040).
Example. You rent out part of your home 
and borrow money to make repairs. You can 
deduct only the interest payment for the rented 
part in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). De-
duct the rest of the interest payment on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040) if it is deductible home mort-
gage interest.
Table 23-1.  Where To Deduct Your Interest Expense
IF you have ... THEN deduct it on ...
AND for more 
information go to ...
deductible student loan interest Form 1040, line 33, or 
Form 1040A, line 18
Pub. 970.
deductible home mortgage interest and 
points reported on Form 1098
Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 10
Pub. 936.
deductible home mortgage interest not 
reported on Form 1098
Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 11
Pub. 936. 
deductible points not reported on Form 
1098
Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 12
Pub. 936. 
deductible investment interest (other 
than incurred to produce rents or 
royalties)
Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 14
Pub. 550.
deductible business interest (non-farm) Schedule C or C-EZ 
(Form 1040)
Pub. 535.
deductible farm business interest Schedule F (Form 1040) Pub. 225 and Pub. 535.
deductible interest incurred to produce 
rents or royalties
Schedule E (Form 1040) Pub. 527 and Pub. 535.
personal interest not deductible.
Page 164 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 162 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

24.
Contributions
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can't be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Disaster relief.  The Disaster Tax Relief and 
Airport and Airway Extension Act of 2017 pro-
vides tax relief for persons affected by Hurri-
cane Harvey, Irma, and Maria. Under the Act, 
you may be able to claim a deduction in excess 
of the usual limits shown in Limits on Deduc-
tions in this chapter. However, you cannot de-
duct contributions earmarked for relief of a par-
ticular individual or family. See Pub. 976, 
Disaster Relief, for more information.
Introduction
This chapter explains how to claim a deduction 
for your charitable contributions. It discusses 
the following topics.
The types of organizations to which you 
can make deductible charitable contribu-
tions.
The types of contributions you can deduct.
How much you can deduct.
What records you must keep.
How to report your charitable contributions.
A charitable contribution is a donation or gift 
to, or for the use of, a qualified organization. It is 
voluntary and is made without getting, or ex-
pecting to get, anything of equal value.
Form 1040 required.  To deduct a charitable 
contribution, you must file Form 1040 and item-
ize deductions on Schedule A. The amount of 
your deduction may be limited if certain rules 
and limits explained in this chapter apply to you. 
The limits are explained in detail in Pub. 526.
CAUTION
!
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Charitable Contributions
Determining the Value of Donated 
Property
Disaster Relief
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized 
Deductions
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Organizations That 
Qualify To Receive 
Deductible 
Contributions
You can deduct your contributions only if you 
make them to a qualified organization. Most or-
ganizations other than churches and govern-
ments must apply to the IRS to become a quali-
fied organization. 
How to check whether an organization can 
receive deductible charitable contributions. 
You can ask any organization whether it is a 
qualified organization, and most will be able to 
tell you. Or, use the Exempt Organizations Se-
lect Check tool at IRS.gov/EOSelectCheck. 
This online tool will enable you to search for 
qualified organizations.
Types of Qualified 
Organizations
Generally, only the following types of organiza-
tions can be qualified organizations.
1. A community chest, corporation, trust, 
fund, or foundation organized or created in 
or under the laws of the United States, any 
state, the District of Columbia, or any pos-
session of the United States (including
Puerto Rico). It must, however, be organ-
ized and operated only for charitable, reli-
gious, scientific, literary, or educational 
purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty 
to children or animals. Certain organiza-
tions that foster national or international 
amateur sports competition also qualify.
2. War veterans' organizations, including 
posts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foundations, 
organized in the United States or any of its 
possessions (including Puerto Rico).
3. Domestic fraternal societies, orders, and 
associations operating under the lodge 
system. (Your contribution to this type of 
organization is deductible only if it is to be 
used solely for charitable, religious, scien-
tific, literary, or educational purposes, or 
for the prevention of cruelty to children or 
animals.)
4. Certain nonprofit cemetery companies or 
corporations. (Your contribution to this 
type of organization isn't deductible if it 
  526
  561
  976
  Schedule A (Form 1040) 
  8283
can be used for the care of a specific lot or 
mausoleum crypt.)
5. The United States or any state, the District 
of Columbia, a U.S. possession (including 
Puerto Rico), a political subdivision of a 
state or U.S. possession, or an Indian 
tribal government or any of its subdivisions 
that perform substantial government func-
tions. (Your contribution to this type of or-
ganization is only deductible if it is to be 
used solely for public purposes.)
Examples. The following list gives some ex-
amples of qualified organizations.
Churches, a convention or association of 
churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, 
and other religious organizations.
Most nonprofit charitable organizations, 
such as the American Red Cross and the 
United Way. 
Most nonprofit educational organizations, 
including the Boy Scouts of America, Girl 
Scouts of America, colleges, and muse-
ums. This also includes nonprofit daycare 
centers that provide childcare to the gen-
eral public if substantially all the childcare 
is provided to enable parents and guardi-
ans to be gainfully employed. However, if 
your contribution is a substitute for tuition 
or other enrollment fee, it isn't deductible 
as a charitable contribution, as explained 
later under Contributions You Can't De-
duct. 
Nonprofit hospitals and medical research 
organizations. 
Utility company emergency energy pro-
grams, if the utility company is an agent for 
a charitable organization that assists indi-
viduals with emergency energy needs. 
Nonprofit volunteer fire companies. 
Nonprofit organizations that develop and 
maintain public parks and recreation facili-
ties.
Civil defense organizations. 
Certain foreign charitable organizations.
Under income tax treaties with Canada, Israel, 
and Mexico, you may be able to deduct contri-
butions to certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican 
charitable organizations. Generally, you must 
have income from sources in that country. For 
additional information on the deduction of con-
tributions to Canadian charities, see Pub. 597, 
Information on the United States - Canada In-
come Tax Treaty. If you need more information 
on how to figure your contribution to Mexican 
and Israeli charities, see Pub. 526.
Contributions
You Can Deduct
Generally, you can deduct contributions of 
money or property you make to, or for the use 
of, a qualified organization. A contribution is “for 
the use of” a qualified organization when it is 
held in a legally enforceable trust for the quali-
fied organization or in a similar legal arrange-
ment. The contributions must be made to a 
qualified organization and not set aside for use 
by a specific person.
Page 165 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 163

If you give property to a qualified organiza-
tion, you generally can deduct the fair market 
value of the property at the time of the contribu-
tion. See Contributions of Property, later, in this 
chapter.
Your deduction for charitable contributions 
generally can't be more than 50% of your adjus-
ted gross income (AGI), but in some cases 20% 
and 30% limits may apply. See Limits on De-
ductions, later.
In addition, the total of your charitable contri-
bution deduction and certain other itemized de-
ductions may be limited. See chapter 29.
Table 24-1  gives examples of contributions 
you can and can't deduct.
Contributions From
Which You Benefit
If you receive a benefit as a result of making a 
contribution to a qualified organization, you can 
deduct only the amount of your contribution that 
is more than the value of the benefit you re-
ceive. Also see Contributions From Which You 
Benefit under Contributions You Can't Deduct , 
later.
If you pay more than fair market value to a 
qualified organization for goods or services, the 
excess may be a charitable contribution. For 
the excess amount to qualify, you must pay it 
with the intent to make a charitable contribution.
Example 1.  You pay $65 for a ticket to a 
dinner dance at a church. Your entire $65 pay-
ment goes to the church. The ticket to the din-
ner dance has a fair market value of $25. When 
you buy your ticket, you know that its value is 
less than your payment. To figure the amount of 
your charitable contribution, subtract the value 
of the benefit you receive ($25) from your total 
payment ($65). You can deduct $40 as a contri-
bution to the church.
Example 2.  At a fundraising auction con-
ducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a week's 
stay at a beach house. The amount you pay is 
no more than the fair rental value. You haven't 
made a deductible charitable contribution.
Athletic events. If you make a payment to, or 
for the benefit of, a college or university and, as 
a result, you receive the right to buy tickets to 
an athletic event in the athletic stadium of the 
college or university, you can deduct 80% of the 
payment as a charitable contribution.
If any part of your payment is for tickets 
(rather than the right to buy tickets), 100% of 
that part isn't deductible. Subtract the price of 
the tickets from your payment. You can deduct 
80% of the remaining amount as a charitable 
contribution.
Example 1. You pay $300 a year for mem-
bership in a university's athletic scholarship pro-
gram. The only benefit of membership is that 
you have the right to buy one season ticket for a 
seat in a designated area of the stadium at the 
university's home football games. You can de-
duct $240 (80% of $300) as a charitable contri-
bution.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 except your $300 payment includes 
the purchase of one season ticket for the stated 
ticket price of $120. You must subtract the 
usual price of a ticket ($120) from your $300 
payment. The result is $180. Your deductible 
charitable contribution is $144 (80% of $180).
Charity benefit events.  If you pay a qualified 
organization more than fair market value for the 
right to attend a charity ball, banquet, show, 
sporting event, or other benefit event, you can 
deduct only the amount that is more than the 
value of the privileges or other benefits you re-
ceive.
If there is an established charge for the 
event, that charge is the value of your benefit. If 
there is no established charge, the reasonable 
value of the right to attend the event is the value 
of your benefit. Whether you use the tickets or 
other privileges has no effect on the amount 
you can deduct. However, if you return the 
ticket to the qualified organization for resale, 
you can deduct the entire amount you paid for 
the ticket.
Even if the ticket or other evidence of 
payment indicates that the payment is 
a “contribution,” this doesn't mean you 
can deduct the entire amount. If the ticket 
shows the price of admission and the amount of 
the contribution, you can deduct the contribu-
tion amount.
Example. You pay $40 to see a special 
showing of a movie for the benefit of a qualified 
organization. Printed on the ticket is “Contribu-
tion—$40.” If the regular price for the movie is 
$8, your contribution is $32 ($40 payment − $8 
regular price).
CAUTION
!
Membership fees or dues.  You may be able 
to deduct membership fees or dues you pay to 
a qualified organization. However, you can de-
duct only the amount that is more than the value 
of the benefits you receive.
You can't deduct dues, fees, or assess-
ments paid to country clubs and other social or-
ganizations. They aren't qualified organizations.
Certain membership benefits can be dis-
regarded. Both you and the organization can 
disregard the following membership benefits if 
you receive them in return for an annual pay-
ment of $75 or less.
1. Any rights or privileges, other than those 
discussed under Athletic events, earlier, 
that you can use frequently while you are a 
member, such as:
a. Free or discounted admission to the 
organization's facilities or events,
b. Free or discounted parking,
c. Preferred access to goods or serv-
ices, and
d. Discounts on the purchase of goods 
and services.
2. Admission, while you are a member, to 
events open only to members of the or-
ganization, if the organization reasonably 
projects that the cost per person (exclud-
ing any allocated overhead) isn't more 
than $10.70.
Token items.  You don't have to reduce your 
contribution by the value of any benefit you re-
ceive if both of the following are true.
Table 24-1. Examples of Charitable Contributions—A Quick Check
Use the following lists for a quick check of whether you can deduct a contribution. See the 
rest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that may apply.
Deductible As
Charitable Contributions
Not Deductible
As Charitable Contributions
Money or property you give to:
Churches, synagogues, temples, 
mosques, and other religious 
organizations
Federal, state, and local governments, if 
your contribution is solely for public 
purposes (for example, a gift to reduce 
the public debt or maintain a public park)
Nonprofit schools and hospitals
The Salvation Army, American Red 
Cross, CARE, Goodwill Industries, 
United Way, Boy Scouts of America, Girl 
Scouts of America, Boys and Girls Clubs 
of America, etc.
War veterans' groups
 
Expenses paid for a student living with you, 
sponsored by a qualified organization
 
Out-of-pocket expenses when you serve a 
qualified organization as a volunteer
Money or property you give to:
Civic leagues, social and sports 
clubs, labor unions, and chambers of 
commerce
Foreign organizations (except certain 
Canadian, Israeli, and Mexican 
charities)
Groups that are run for personal profit
Groups whose purpose is to lobby for 
law changes
Homeowners' associations
Individuals
Political groups or candidates for 
public office
 
Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets
 
Dues, fees, or bills paid to country clubs, 
lodges, fraternal orders, or similar groups
 
Tuition
 
Value of your time or services
 
Value of blood given to a blood bank
Page 166 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 164 Chapter 24 Contributions

1. You receive only a small item or other ben-
efit of token value.
2. The qualified organization correctly deter-
mines that the value of the item or benefit 
you received isn't substantial and informs 
you that you can deduct your payment in 
full.
Written statement.  A qualified organization 
must give you a written statement if you make a 
payment of more than $75 that is partly a contri-
bution and partly for goods or services. The 
statement must say that you can deduct only 
the amount of your payment that is more than 
the value of the goods or services you received. 
It must also give you a good faith estimate of 
the value of those goods or services.
The organization can give you the statement 
either when it solicits or when it receives the 
payment from you.
Exception. An organization won't have to 
give you this statement if one of the following is 
true.
1. The organization is:
a. A governmental organization descri-
bed in (5) under Types of Qualified 
Organizations, earlier; or
b. An organization formed only for reli-
gious purposes, and the only benefit 
you receive is an intangible religious 
benefit (such as admission to a reli-
gious ceremony) that generally isn't 
sold in commercial transactions out-
side the donative context.
2. You receive only items whose value isn't 
substantial as described under Token 
items, earlier.
3. You receive only membership benefits that 
can be disregarded, as described under 
Membership fees or dues, earlier.
Expenses Paid for Student 
Living With You
You may be able to deduct some expenses of 
having a student live with you. You can deduct 
qualifying expenses for a foreign or American 
student who:
1. Lives in your home under a written agree-
ment between you and a qualified organi-
zation as part of a program of the organi-
zation to provide educational opportunities 
for the student,
2. Isn't your relative or dependent, and
3. Is a full-time student in the twelfth or any 
lower grade at a school in the United 
States.
You can deduct up to $50 a month for 
each full calendar month the student 
lives with you. Any month when condi-
tions 1 through 3 are met for 15 days or more 
counts as a full month.
For additional information, see Expenses 
Paid for Student Living With You in Pub. 526.
Mutual exchange program.  You can't deduct 
the costs of a foreign student living in your 
home under a mutual exchange program 
through which your child will live with a family in 
a foreign country.
Out-of-Pocket Expenses in 
Giving Services
Although you can't deduct the value of your 
services given to a qualified organization, you 
may be able to deduct some amounts you pay 
in giving services to a qualified organization. 
The amounts must be:
Unreimbursed;
Directly connected with the services;
Expenses you had only because of the 
services you gave; and
Not personal, living, or family expenses.
TIP
Table 24-2 contains questions and answers 
that apply to some individuals who volunteer 
their services.
Conventions. If a qualified organization se-
lects you to attend a convention as its represen-
tative, you can deduct unreimbursed expenses 
for travel, including reasonable amounts for 
meals and lodging, while away from home over-
night in connection with the convention. How-
ever, see Travel, later.
You can't deduct personal expenses for 
sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tickets, or 
nightclubs. You also can't deduct transporta-
tion, meals and lodging, and other expenses for 
your spouse or children.
You can't deduct your travel expenses in at-
tending a church convention if you go only as a 
member of your church rather than as a chosen 
representative. You can, however, deduct unre-
imbursed expenses that are directly connected 
with giving services for your church during the 
convention.
Uniforms. You can deduct the cost and up-
keep of uniforms that aren't suitable for every-
day use and that you must wear while perform-
ing donated services for a charitable 
organization.
Foster parents. You may be able to deduct as 
a charitable contribution some of the costs of 
being a foster parent (foster care provider) if 
you have no profit motive in providing the foster 
care and aren't, in fact, making a profit. A quali-
fied organization must select the individuals you 
take into your home for foster care.
You can deduct expenses that meet both of 
the following requirements.
1. They are unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex-
penses to feed, clothe, and care for the 
foster child.
2. They are incurred primarily to benefit the 
qualified organization.
Unreimbursed expenses that you can't de-
duct as charitable contributions may be consid-
ered support provided by you in determining 
Table 24-2. Volunteers' Questions and Answers
If you volunteer for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules explained in this chapter 
also apply. See, in particular, Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services. 
Question Answer
I volunteer 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified organization. 
The receptionist is paid $10 an hour for the same work. Can I deduct 
$60 a week for my time? 
 
No, you can't deduct the value of your time or services.
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car 
expenses for these trips?
Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly related 
to getting to and from the place where you volunteer. If you don't 
want to figure your actual costs, you can deduct 14 cents for each 
mile.
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse's aide at a hospital. Can I deduct 
the cost of the uniforms I must wear?
Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your uniforms 
if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms aren't suitable 
for everyday use, and you must wear them when volunteering.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I volunteer for a 
qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs?
No, you can't deduct payments for childcare expenses as a 
charitable contribution, even if you would be unable to volunteer 
without childcare. (If you have childcare expenses so you can work 
for pay, see chapter 32.)
Page 167 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 165

whether you can claim the foster child as a de-
pendent. For details, see chapter 3.
Example. You cared for a foster child be-
cause you wanted to adopt her, not to benefit 
the agency that placed her in your home. Your 
unreimbursed expenses aren't deductible as 
charitable contributions.
Car expenses. You can deduct as a charitable 
contribution any unreimbursed out-of-pocket 
expenses, such as the cost of gas and oil, that 
are directly related to the use of your car in giv-
ing services to a charitable organization. You 
can't deduct general repair and maintenance 
expenses, depreciation, registration fees, or the 
costs of tires or insurance.
If you don't want to deduct your actual ex-
penses, you can use a standard mileage rate of 
14 cents a mile to figure your contribution.
You can deduct parking fees and tolls 
whether you use your actual expenses or the 
standard mileage rate.
You must keep reliable written records of 
your car expenses. For more information, see 
Car expenses under Records To Keep, later.
Travel. Generally, you can claim a charitable 
contribution deduction for travel expenses nec-
essarily incurred while you are away from home 
performing services for a charitable organiza-
tion only if there is no significant element of per-
sonal pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the 
travel. This applies whether you pay the expen-
ses directly or indirectly. You are paying the ex-
penses indirectly if you make a payment to the 
charitable organization and the organization 
pays for your travel expenses.
The deduction for travel expenses won't be 
denied simply because you enjoy providing 
services to the charitable organization. Even if 
you enjoy the trip, you can take a charitable 
contribution deduction for your travel expenses 
if you are on duty in a genuine and substantial 
sense throughout the trip. However, if you have 
only nominal duties, or if for significant parts of 
the trip you don't have any duties, you can't de-
duct your travel expenses.
Example 1.  You are a troop leader for a 
tax-exempt youth group and you take the group 
on a camping trip. You are responsible for over-
seeing the setup of the camp and for providing 
adult supervision for other activities during the 
entire trip. You participate in the activities of the 
group and enjoy your time with them. You over-
see the breaking of camp and you transport the 
group home. You can deduct your travel expen-
ses.
Example 2. You sail from one island to an-
other and spend 8 hours a day counting whales 
and other forms of marine life. The project is 
sponsored by a charitable organization. In most 
circumstances, you can't deduct your expen-
ses.
Example 3.  You work for several hours 
each morning on an archaeological dig spon-
sored by a charitable organization. The rest of 
the day is free for recreation and sightseeing. 
You can't take a charitable contribution deduc-
tion even though you work very hard during 
those few hours.
Example 4.  You spend the entire day at-
tending a charitable organization's regional 
meeting as a chosen representative. In the eve-
ning you go to the theater. You can claim your 
travel expenses as charitable contributions, but 
you can't claim the cost of your evening at the 
theater.
Daily allowance (per diem).  If you provide 
services for a charitable organization and re-
ceive a daily allowance to cover reasonable 
travel expenses, including meals and lodging 
while away from home overnight, you must in-
clude in income any part of the allowance that is 
more than your deductible travel expenses. You 
may be able to deduct any necessary travel ex-
penses that are more than the allowance.
Deductible travel expenses.  These in-
clude:
Air, rail, and bus transportation;
Out-of-pocket expenses for your car;
Taxi fares or other costs of transportation 
between the airport or station and your ho-
tel;
Lodging costs; and
The cost of meals.
Because these travel expenses aren't business 
related, they aren't subject to the same limits as 
business-related expenses. For information on 
business travel expenses, see Travel Expenses 
in chapter 26.
Contributions
You Can't Deduct
There are some contributions you can't deduct, 
such as those made to specific individuals and 
those made to nonqualified organizations. (See 
Contributions to Individuals  and Contributions 
to Nonqualified Organizations  next.) There are 
others you can deduct only part of, as dis-
cussed later under Contributions From Which 
You Benefit.
Contributions to 
Individuals
You can't deduct contributions to specific indi-
viduals, including the following.
Contributions to fraternal societies made 
for the purpose of paying medical or burial 
expenses of deceased members. 
Contributions to individuals who are needy 
or worthy. You can't deduct these contribu-
tions even if you make them to a qualified 
organization for the benefit of a specific 
person. But you can deduct a contribution 
to a qualified organization that helps needy 
or worthy individuals if you don't indicate 
that your contribution is for a specific per-
son.
Example. You can deduct contribu-
tions to a qualified organization for flood 
relief, hurricane relief, or other disaster re-
lief. However, you can’t deduct contribu-
tions earmarked for relief of a particular in-
dividual or family. See Temporary 
Suspension of 50% Limit, later.
Payments to a member of the clergy that 
can be spent as he or she wishes, such as 
for personal expenses. 
Expenses you paid for another person who 
provided services to a qualified organiza-
tion.
Example. Your son does missionary 
work. You pay his expenses. You can't 
claim a deduction for your son's unreim-
bursed expenses related to his contribu-
tion of services.
Payments to a hospital that are for a spe-
cific patient's care or for services for a spe-
cific patient. You can't deduct these pay-
ments even if the hospital is operated by a 
city, a state, or other qualified organization. 
Contributions to 
Nonqualified 
Organizations
You can't deduct contributions to organizations 
that aren't qualified to receive tax-deductible 
contributions, including the following.
1. Certain state bar associations if:
a. The bar isn't a political subdivision of 
a state;
b. The bar has private, as well as public, 
purposes, such as promoting the pro-
fessional interests of members; and
c. Your contribution is unrestricted and 
can be used for private purposes.
2. Chambers of commerce and other busi-
ness leagues or organizations (but see 
chapter 28 about miscellaneous deduc-
tions).
3. Civic leagues and associations.
4. Country clubs and other social clubs.
5. Most foreign organizations (other than cer-
tain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican charita-
ble organizations). For details, see Pub. 
526.
6. Homeowners' associations.
7. Labor unions (but see chapter 28 about 
miscellaneous deductions).
8. Political organizations and candidates.
Contributions From
Which You Benefit
If you receive or expect to receive a financial or 
economic benefit as a result of making a contri-
bution to a qualified organization, you can't de-
duct the part of the contribution that represents 
the value of the benefit you receive. See Contri-
butions From Which You Benefit  under Contri-
butions You Can Deduct , earlier. These contri-
butions include the following.
Contributions for lobbying. This includes 
amounts that you earmark for use in, or in 
connection with, influencing specific legis-
lation. 
Contributions to a retirement home for 
room, board, maintenance, or admittance. 
Page 168 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 166 Chapter 24 Contributions

Also, if the amount of your contribution de-
pends on the type or size of apartment you 
will occupy, it isn't a charitable contribu-
tion.
Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc. You 
can't deduct as a charitable contribution 
amounts you pay to buy raffle or lottery 
tickets or to play bingo or other games of 
chance. For information on how to report 
gambling winnings and losses, see Gam-
bling winnings in chapter 12 and Gambling 
Losses up to the Amount of Gambling Win-
nings in chapter 28. 
Dues to fraternal orders and similar 
groups. However, see Membership fees or 
dues, earlier, under Contributions You Can 
Deduct.
Tuition, or amounts you pay instead of tui-
tion. You can't deduct as a charitable con-
tribution amounts you pay as tuition even if 
you pay them for children to attend paro-
chial schools or qualifying nonprofit day-
care centers. You also can't deduct any 
fixed amount you must pay in addition to, 
or instead of, tuition to enroll in a private 
school, even if it is designated as a “dona-
tion.”
Value of Time or Services
You can't deduct the value of your time or serv-
ices, including:
Blood donations to the American Red 
Cross or to blood banks, and
The value of income lost while you work as 
an unpaid volunteer for a qualified organi-
zation. 
Personal Expenses
You can't deduct personal, living, or family ex-
penses, such as the following items.
The cost of meals you eat while you per-
form services for a qualified organization 
unless it is necessary for you to be away 
from home overnight while performing the 
services.
Adoption expenses, including fees paid to 
an adoption agency and the costs of keep-
ing a child in your home before adoption is 
final (but see Adoption Credit in chap-
ter 38, and the Instructions for Form 8839, 
Qualified Adoption Expenses). You also 
may be able to claim an exemption for the 
child. See Adopted child in chapter 3. 
Appraisal Fees
You can't deduct as a charitable contribution 
any fees you pay to find the fair market value of 
donated property (but see chapter 28 for infor-
mation on miscellaneous deductions).
Contributions
of Property
If you contribute property to a qualified organi-
zation, the amount of your charitable contribu-
tion is generally the fair market value of the 
property at the time of the contribution. How-
ever, if the property has increased in value, you 
may have to make some adjustments to the 
amount of your deduction. See Giving Property 
That Has Increased in Value, later.
For information about the records you must 
keep and the information you must furnish with 
your return if you donate property, see Records 
To Keep and How To Report, later.
Clothing and household items.  You can't 
take a deduction for clothing or household items 
you donate unless the clothing or household 
items are in good used condition or better.
Exception. You can take a deduction for a 
contribution of an item of clothing or household 
item that isn't in good used condition or better if 
you deduct more than $500 for it and include a 
qualified appraisal of it with your return.
Household items.  Household items in-
clude:
Furniture and furnishings,
Electronics,
Appliances,
Linens, and
Other similar items.
Household items don't include:
Food;
Paintings, antiques, and other objects of 
art;
Jewelry and gems; and
Collections.
Cars, boats, and airplanes.  The following 
rules apply to any donation of a qualified vehi-
cle.
A qualified vehicle is:
A car or any motor vehicle manufactured 
mainly for use on public streets, roads, and 
highways;
A boat; or
An airplane.
Deduction more than $500.  If you donate 
a qualified vehicle with a claimed fair market 
value of more than $500, you can deduct the 
smaller of:
The gross proceeds from the sale of the 
vehicle by the organization, or
The vehicle's fair market value on the date 
of the contribution. If the vehicle's fair mar-
ket value was more than your cost or other 
basis, you may have to reduce the fair 
market value to figure the deductible 
amount, as described under Giving Prop-
erty That Has Increased in Value, later.
Form 1098-C.  You must attach to your re-
turn Copy B of the Form 1098-C, Contributions 
of Motor Vehicles, Boats, and Airplanes, (or 
other statement containing the same informa-
tion as Form 1098-C) you received from the or-
ganization. The Form 1098-C (or other state-
ment) will show the gross proceeds from the 
sale of the vehicle.
If you e-file your return, you must:
Attach Copy B of Form 1098-C to Form 
8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Trans-
mittal for an IRS e-file Return, and mail the 
forms to the IRS; or
Include Copy B of Form 1098-C as a PDF 
attachment if your software program allows 
it.
If you don't attach Form 1098-C (or other 
statement), you can't deduct your contribution.
You must get Form 1098-C (or other state-
ment) within 30 days of the sale of the vehicle. 
But if exception 1 or 2 (described later) applies, 
you must get Form 1098-C (or other statement) 
within 30 days of your donation.
Filing deadline approaching and still no 
Form 1098-C.  If the filing deadline is ap-
proaching and you still don't have a Form 
1098-C, you have two choices.
Request an automatic 6-month extension 
of time to file your return. You can get this 
extension by filing Form 4868, Application 
for Automatic Extension of Time To File 
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. For 
more information, see Automatic Extension 
in chapter 1.
File the return on time without claiming the 
deduction for the qualified vehicle. After re-
ceiving the Form 1098-C, file an amended 
return, Form 1040X, claiming the deduc-
tion. Attach Copy B of Form 1098-C (or 
other statement) to the amended return. 
For more information about amended re-
turns, see Amended Returns and Claims 
for Refund in chapter 1.
Exceptions. There are two exceptions to the 
rules just described for deductions of more than 
$500.
Exception 1—vehicle used or improved 
by organization.  If the qualified organization 
makes a significant intervening use of or mate-
rial improvement to the vehicle before transfer-
ring it, you generally can deduct the vehicle's 
fair market value at the time of the contribution. 
But if the vehicle's fair market value was more 
than your cost or other basis, you may have to 
reduce the fair market value to get the deducti-
ble amount, as described under Giving Property 
That Has Increased in Value , later. The Form 
1098-C (or other statement) will show whether 
this exception applies.
Exception 2—vehicle given or sold to 
needy individual. If the qualified organization 
will give the vehicle, or sell it for a price well be-
low fair market value, to a needy individual to 
further the organization's charitable purpose, 
you generally can deduct the vehicle's fair mar-
ket value at the time of the contribution. But if 
the vehicle's fair market value was more than 
your cost or other basis, you may have to re-
duce the fair market value to get the deductible 
amount, as described under Giving Property 
That Has Increased in Value , later. The Form 
1098-C (or other statement) will show whether 
this exception applies.
This exception doesn't apply if the organiza-
tion sells the vehicle at auction. In that case, 
you can't deduct the vehicle's fair market value.
Page 169 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 167

Example. Anita donates a used car to a 
qualified organization. She bought it 3 years 
ago for $9,000. A used car guide shows the fair 
market value for this type of car is $6,000. How-
ever, Anita gets a Form 1098-C from the organi-
zation showing the car was sold for $2,900. Nei-
ther exception 1 nor exception 2 applies. If 
Anita itemizes her deductions, she can deduct 
$2,900 for her donation. She must attach Form 
1098-C and Form 8283 to her return.
Deduction $500 or less.  If the qualified or-
ganization sells the vehicle for $500 or less and 
exceptions 1 and 2 don't apply, you can deduct 
the smaller of:
$500, or
The vehicle's fair market value on the date 
of the contribution. But if the vehicle's fair 
market value was more than your cost or 
other basis, you may have to reduce the 
fair market value to get the deductible 
amount, as described under Giving Prop-
erty That Has Increased in Value, later.
If the vehicle's fair market value is at least 
$250 but not more than $500, you must have a 
written statement from the qualified organiza-
tion acknowledging your donation. The state-
ment must contain the information and meet the 
tests for an acknowledgment described under 
Deductions of at Least $250 But Not More Than 
$500 under Records To Keep, later.
Partial interest in property.  Generally, you 
can't deduct a charitable contribution of less 
than your entire interest in property.
Right to use property. A contribution of the 
right to use property is a contribution of less 
than your entire interest in that property and 
isn't deductible. For exceptions and more infor-
mation, see Partial Interest in Property Not in 
Trust in Pub. 561.
Future interests in tangible personal prop-
erty. You can't deduct the value of a charitable 
contribution of a future interest in tangible per-
sonal property until all intervening interests in 
and rights to the actual possession or enjoy-
ment of the property have either expired or 
been turned over to someone other than your-
self, a related person, or a related organization.
Tangible personal property.  This is any 
property, other than land or buildings, that can 
be seen or touched. It includes furniture, books, 
jewelry, paintings, and cars.
Future interest.  This is any interest that is 
to begin at some future time, regardless of 
whether it is designated as a future interest un-
der state law.
Determining
Fair Market Value
This section discusses general guidelines for 
determining the fair market value of various 
types of donated property. Pub. 561 contains a 
more complete discussion.
Fair market value is the price at which prop-
erty would change hands between a willing 
buyer and a willing seller, neither having to buy 
or sell, and both having reasonable knowledge 
of all the relevant facts.
Used clothing and household items.  The 
fair market value of used clothing and house-
hold goods is usually far less than what you 
paid for them when they were new.
For used clothing, you should claim as the 
value the price that buyers of used items ac-
tually pay in used clothing stores, such as con-
signment or thrift shops. See Household Goods 
in Pub. 561 for information on the valuation of 
household goods, such as furniture, appliances, 
and linens.
Example. Dawn Greene donated a coat to 
a thrift store operated by her church. She paid 
$300 for the coat 3 years ago. Similar coats in 
the thrift store sell for $50. The fair market value 
of the coat is $50. Dawn's donation is limited to 
$50.
Cars, boats, and airplanes.  If you contribute 
a car, boat, or airplane to a charitable organiza-
tion, you must determine its fair market value. 
Certain commercial firms and trade organiza-
tions publish used car pricing guides, com-
monly called “blue books,” containing complete 
dealer sale prices or dealer average prices for 
recent model years. The guides may be pub-
lished monthly or seasonally and for different 
regions of the country. These guides also pro-
vide estimates for adjusting for unusual equip-
ment, unusual mileage, and physical condition. 
The prices aren't “official” and these publica-
tions aren't considered an appraisal of any spe-
cific donated property. But they do provide 
clues for making an appraisal and suggest rela-
tive prices for comparison with current sales 
and offerings in your area.
You can also find used car pricing informa-
tion on the Internet.
Example. You donate a used car in poor 
condition to a local high school for use by stu-
dents studying car repair. A used car guide 
shows the dealer retail value for this type of car 
in poor condition is $1,600. However, the guide 
shows the price for a private party sale of the 
car is only $750. The fair market value of the car 
is considered to be $750.
Large quantities.  If you contribute a large 
number of the same item, fair market value is 
the price at which comparable numbers of the 
item are being sold.
Giving Property That
Has Decreased in Value
If you contribute property with a fair market 
value that is less than your basis in it, your de-
duction is limited to its fair market value. You 
can't claim a deduction for the difference be-
tween the property's basis and its fair market 
value.
Giving Property That
Has Increased in Value
If you contribute property with a fair market 
value that is more than your basis in it, you may 
have to reduce the fair market value by the 
amount of appreciation (increase in value) 
when you figure your deduction.
Your basis in property is generally what you 
paid for it. See chapter 13 if you need more in-
formation about basis.
Different rules apply to figuring your deduc-
tion, depending on whether the property is:
Ordinary income property, or
Capital gain property.
Ordinary income property.  Property is ordi-
nary income property if you would have recog-
nized ordinary income or short-term capital gain 
had you sold it at fair market value on the date it 
was contributed. Examples of ordinary income 
property are inventory, works of art created by 
the donor, manuscripts prepared by the donor, 
and capital assets (defined in chapter 14) held 
1 year or less.
Amount of deduction. The amount you can 
deduct for a contribution of ordinary income 
property is its fair market value minus the 
amount that would be ordinary income or 
short-term capital gain if you sold the property 
for its fair market value. Generally, this rule lim-
its the deduction to your basis in the property.
Example. You donate stock you held for 5 
months to your church. The fair market value of 
the stock on the day you donate it is $1,000, but 
you paid only $800 (your basis). Because the 
$200 of appreciation would be short-term capi-
tal gain if you sold the stock, your deduction is 
limited to $800 (fair market value minus the ap-
preciation).
Capital gain property. Property is capital gain 
property if you would have recognized 
long-term capital gain had you sold it at fair 
market value on the date of the contribution. It 
includes capital assets held more than 1 year, 
as well as certain real property and depreciable 
property used in your trade or business and, 
generally, held more than 1 year.
Amount of deduction—general rule.
When figuring your deduction for a contribution 
of capital gain property, you generally can use 
the fair market value of the property.
Exceptions. However, in certain situations, 
you must reduce the fair market value by any 
amount that would have been long-term capital 
gain if you had sold the property for its fair mar-
ket value. Generally, this means reducing the 
fair market value to the property's cost or other 
basis.
Bargain sales. A bargain sale of property is a 
sale or exchange for less than the property's fair 
market value. A bargain sale to a qualified or-
ganization is partly a charitable contribution and 
partly a sale or exchange. A bargain sale may 
result in a taxable gain.
More information.  For more information on 
donating appreciated property, see Giving 
Property That Has Increased in Value  in Pub. 
526.
When To Deduct
You can deduct your contributions only in the 
year you actually make them in cash or other 
property (or in a later carryover year, as ex-
plained later under Carryovers). This applies 
Page 170 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 168 Chapter 24 Contributions

whether you use the cash or an accrual method 
of accounting.
Time of making contribution.  Usually, you 
make a contribution at the time of its uncondi-
tional delivery.
Checks. A check you mail to a charity is 
considered delivered on the date you mail it.
Text message.  Contributions made by text 
message are deductible in the year you send 
the text message if the contribution is charged 
to your telephone or wireless account.
Credit card. Contributions charged on your 
credit card are deductible in the year you make 
the charge.
Pay-by-phone account.  Contributions 
made through a pay-by-phone account are con-
sidered delivered on the date the financial insti-
tution pays the amount.
Stock certificate.  A properly endorsed 
stock certificate is considered delivered on the 
date of mailing or other delivery to the charity or 
to the charity's agent. However, if you give a 
stock certificate to your agent or to the issuing 
corporation for transfer to the name of the char-
ity, your contribution isn't delivered until the 
date the stock is transferred on the books of the 
corporation.
Promissory note. If you issue and deliver a 
promissory note to a charity as a contribution, it 
isn't a contribution until you make the note pay-
ments.
Option. If you grant a charity an option to 
buy real property at a bargain price, it isn't a 
contribution until the organization exercises the 
option.
Borrowed funds.  If you contribute bor-
rowed funds, you can deduct the contribution in 
the year you deliver the funds to the charity, re-
gardless of when you repay the loan.
Limits on Deductions
The amount you can deduct for charitable con-
tributions can't be more than 50% of your AGI. 
Your deduction may be further limited to 30% or 
20% of your AGI, depending on the type of 
property you give and the type of organization 
you give it to. If your total contributions for the 
year are 20% or less of your AGI, these limits 
don't apply to you. The limits are discussed in 
detail under Limits on Deductions in Pub. 526.
A higher limit applies to certain qualified 
conservation contributions. See Pub. 526 for 
details.
Temporary Suspension of 50% Limit.  The 
50% limit does not apply to your “qualified con-
tributions.” A qualified contribution is a charita-
ble contribution paid in cash after August 22, 
2017, and before January 1, 2018, to a 50% 
limit organization (other than a section 509(a)
(3) organization) if you make an election to have 
the 50% limit not apply to these contributions.
Your deduction for qualified contributions is 
limited to your adjusted gross income minus 
your deduction for all other charitable contribu-
tions. You can carry over any contributions you 
aren't able to deduct for 2017 because of this 
limit. In 2018, treat the carryover of your unused 
qualified contributions like a carryover of contri-
butions subject to the 50% limit.
Exceptions. You can't deduct contributions 
earmarked for the relief of a particular individual 
or family. Moreover, you cannot make this elec-
tion for a contribution to establish a new, or 
maintain an existing, segregated fund or ac-
count for which you (or any person you appoint 
or designate) has or expects to have advisory 
privileges with respect to distributions or invest-
ments because of being a donor.
Partners and shareholders.  Each partner 
in a partnership and each shareholder in an S 
corporation makes this election separately. See 
Pub. 976, Disaster Relief, for details.
Carryovers
You can carry over any contributions you can't 
deduct in the current year because they exceed 
your adjusted-gross-income limits. Except for 
qualified conservation contributions, you may 
be able to deduct the excess in each of the next 
5 years until it is used up, but not beyond that 
time. For more information, see Carryovers in 
Pub. 526.
Records To Keep
You must keep records to prove the amount of 
the contributions you make during the year. The 
kind of records you must keep depends on the 
amount of your contributions and whether they 
are:
Cash contributions,
Noncash contributions, or
Out-of-pocket expenses when donating 
your services.
Note. An organization generally must give 
you a written statement if it receives a payment 
from you that is more than $75 and is partly a 
contribution and partly for goods or services. 
(See Contributions From Which You Benefit un-
der Contributions You Can Deduct , earlier.) 
Keep the statement for your records. It may sat-
isfy all or part of the recordkeeping require-
ments explained in the following discussions.
Cash Contributions
Cash contributions include those paid by cash, 
check, electronic funds transfer, debit card, 
credit card, or payroll deduction.
You can't deduct a cash contribution, re-
gardless of the amount, unless you keep one of 
the following.
1. A bank record that shows the name of the 
qualified organization, the date of the con-
tribution, and the amount of the contribu-
tion. Bank records may include:
a. A canceled check,
b. A bank or credit union statement, or
c. A credit card statement.
2. A receipt (or a letter or other written com-
munication) from the qualified organization 
showing the name of the organization, the 
date of the contribution, and the amount of 
the contribution.
3. The payroll deduction records described 
next.
Payroll deductions.  If you make a contribu-
tion by payroll deduction, you must keep:
1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document 
furnished by your employer that shows the 
date and amount of the contribution; and
2. A pledge card or other document prepared 
by or for the qualified organization that 
shows the name of the organization.
If your employer withheld $250 or more from a 
single paycheck, see Contributions of $250 or 
More next.
Contributions of $250 or More
You can claim a deduction for a contribution of 
$250 or more only if you have an acknowledg-
ment of your contribution from the qualified or-
ganization or certain payroll deduction records.
If you made more than one contribution of 
$250 or more, you must have either a separate 
acknowledgment for each or one acknowledg-
ment that lists each contribution and the date of 
each contribution and shows your total contri-
butions.
Amount of contribution.  In figuring whether 
your contribution is $250 or more, don't com-
bine separate contributions. For example, if you 
gave your church $25 each week, your weekly 
payments don't have to be combined. Each 
payment is a separate contribution.
If contributions are made by payroll deduc-
tion, the deduction from each paycheck is trea-
ted as a separate contribution.
If you made a payment that is partly for 
goods and services, as described earlier under 
Contributions From Which You Benefit , your 
contribution is the amount of the payment that is 
more than the value of the goods and services.
Acknowledgment. The acknowledgment must 
meet these tests. 
1. It must be written.
2. It must include:
a. The amount of cash you contributed;
b. Whether the qualified organization 
gave you any goods or services as a 
result of your contribution (other than 
certain token items and membership 
benefits);
c. A description and good faith estimate 
of the value of any goods or services 
described in (b) (other than intangible 
religious benefits); and
d. A statement that the only benefit you 
received was an intangible religious 
benefit, if that was the case. The ac-
knowledgment doesn't need to de-
scribe or estimate the value of an in-
tangible religious benefit. An 
intangible religious benefit is a benefit 
that generally isn't sold in commercial 
transactions outside a donative (gift) 
context. An example is admission to a 
religious ceremony.
Page 171 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 169

3. You must get it on or before the earlier of:
a. The date you file your return for the 
year you make the contribution; or
b. The due date, including extensions, 
for filing the return.
If the acknowledgment doesn't show the 
date of the contribution, you must also have a 
bank record or receipt, as described earlier, that 
does show the date of the contribution. If the 
acknowledgment shows the date of the contri-
bution and meets the other tests just described, 
you don't need any other records.
Payroll deductions.  If you make a contribu-
tion by payroll deduction and your employer 
withholds $250 or more from a single paycheck, 
you must keep:
1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document 
furnished by your employer that shows the 
amount withheld as a contribution; and
2. A pledge card or other document prepared 
by or for the qualified organization that 
shows the name of the organization and 
states the organization doesn't provide 
goods or services in return for any contri-
bution made to it by payroll deduction.
A single pledge card may be kept for all contri-
butions made by payroll deduction regardless 
of amount as long as it contains all the required 
information.
If the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, or 
other document doesn't show the date of the 
contribution, you must have another document 
that does show the date of the contribution. If 
the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, or other 
document shows the date of the contribution, 
you don't need any other records except those 
just described in (1) and (2).
Noncash Contributions
For a contribution not made in cash, the records 
you must keep depend on whether your deduc-
tion for the contribution is:
1. Less than $250,
2. At least $250 but not more than $500,
3. Over $500 but not more than $5,000, or
4. Over $5,000.
Amount of deduction.  In figuring whether 
your deduction is $500 or more, combine your 
claimed deductions for all similar items of prop-
erty donated to any charitable organization dur-
ing the year.
If you received goods or services in return, 
as described earlier in Contributions From 
Which You Benefit , reduce your contribution by 
the value of those goods or services. If you fig-
ure your deduction by reducing the fair market 
value of the donated property by its apprecia-
tion, as described earlier in Giving Property 
That Has Increased in Value , your contribution 
is the reduced amount.
Deductions of Less Than $250
If you make any noncash contribution, you must 
get and keep a receipt from the charitable or-
ganization showing:
1. The name of the charitable organization,
2. The date and location of the charitable 
contribution, and
3. A reasonably detailed description of the 
property.
A letter or other written communication from 
the charitable organization acknowledging re-
ceipt of the contribution and containing the in-
formation in (1), (2), and (3) will serve as a re-
ceipt.
You aren't required to have a receipt where 
it is impractical to get one (for example, if you 
leave property at a charity's unattended drop 
site).
Additional records. You must also keep relia-
ble written records for each item of contributed 
property. Your written records must include the 
following information.
The name and address of the organization 
to which you contributed.
The date and location of the contribution.
A description of the property in detail rea-
sonable under the circumstances. For a 
security, keep the name of the issuer, the 
type of security, and whether it is regularly 
traded on a stock exchange or in an 
over-the-counter market.
The fair market value of the property at the 
time of the contribution and how you fig-
ured the fair market value. If it was deter-
mined by appraisal, keep a signed copy of 
the appraisal. 
The cost or other basis of the property if 
you must reduce its fair market value by 
appreciation. Your records should also in-
clude the amount of the reduction and how 
you figured it.
The amount you claim as a deduction for 
the tax year as a result of the contribution if 
you contribute less than your entire interest 
in the property during the tax year. Your re-
cords must include the amount you 
claimed as a deduction in any earlier years 
for contributions of other interests in this 
property. They must also include the name 
and address of each organization to which 
you contributed the other interests, the 
place where any such tangible property is 
located or kept, and the name of any per-
son in possession of the property, other 
than the organization to which you contrib-
uted it.
The terms of any conditions attached to 
the contribution of property.
Deductions of at Least $250
But Not More Than $500
If you claim a deduction of at least $250 but not 
more than $500 for a noncash charitable contri-
bution, you must get and keep an acknowledg-
ment of your contribution from the qualified or-
ganization. If you made more than one 
contribution of $250 or more, you must have ei-
ther a separate acknowledgment for each or 
one acknowledgment that shows your total con-
tributions.
The acknowledgment must contain the infor-
mation in items 1 through 3 under Deductions of 
Less Than $250 , earlier, and your written re-
cords must include the information listed in that 
discussion under Additional records.
The acknowledgment must also meet these 
tests.
1. It must be written.
2. It must include:
a. A description (but not necessarily the 
value) of any property you contrib-
uted,
b. Whether the qualified organization 
gave you any goods or services as a 
result of your contribution (other than 
certain token items and membership 
benefits), and
c. A description and good faith estimate 
of the value of any goods or services 
described in (b). If the only benefit you 
received was an intangible religious 
benefit (such as admission to a reli-
gious ceremony) that generally isn't 
sold in a commercial transaction out-
side the donative context, the ac-
knowledgment must say so and 
doesn't need to describe or estimate 
the value of the benefit.
3. You must get it on or before the earlier of:
a. The date you file your return for the 
year you make the contribution; or
b. The due date, including extensions, 
for filing the return.
Deductions Over $500
You are required to give additional information if 
you claim a deduction over $500 for noncash 
charitable contributions. See Records To Keep 
in Pub. 526 for more information.
Out-of-Pocket Expenses
If you give services to a qualified organization 
and have unreimbursed out-of-pocket expen-
ses related to those services, the following two 
rules apply.
1. You must have adequate records to prove 
the amount of the expenses.
2. If any of your unreimbursed out-of-pocket 
expenses, considered separately, are 
$250 or more (for example, you pay $250 
or more for an airline ticket to attend a 
convention of a qualified organization as a 
chosen representative), you must get an 
acknowledgment from the qualified organi-
zation that contains:
a. A description of the services you pro-
vided;
b. A statement of whether or not the or-
ganization provided you any goods or 
services to reimburse you for the ex-
penses you incurred;
c. A description and a good faith esti-
mate of the value of any goods or 
services (other than intangible reli-
gious benefits) provided to reimburse 
you; and
Page 172 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 170 Chapter 24 Contributions

d. A statement that the only benefit you 
received was an intangible religious 
benefit, if that was the case. The ac-
knowledgment doesn't need to de-
scribe or estimate the value of an in-
tangible religious benefit (defined 
earlier under Acknowledgment).
You must get the acknowledgment on or before 
the earlier of:
1. The date you file your return for the year 
you make the contribution; or
2. The due date, including extensions, for fil-
ing the return.
Car expenses.  If you claim expenses directly 
related to use of your car in giving services to a 
qualified organization, you must keep reliable 
written records of your expenses. Whether your 
records are considered reliable depends on all 
the facts and circumstances. Generally, they 
may be considered reliable if you made them 
regularly and at or near the time you had the ex-
penses.
For example, your records might show the 
name of the organization you were serving and 
the dates you used your car for a charitable pur-
pose. If you use the standard mileage rate of 14 
cents a mile, your records must show the miles 
you drove your car for the charitable purpose. If 
you deduct your actual expenses, your records 
must show the costs of operating the car that 
are directly related to a charitable purpose.
See Car expenses under Out-of-Pocket Ex-
penses in Giving Services , earlier, for the ex-
penses you can deduct.
How To Report
Report your charitable contributions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040).
If your total deduction for all noncash contri-
butions for the year is over $500, you must also 
file Form 8283. See How To Report in Pub. 526 
for more information.
25.
Nonbusiness 
Casualty and 
Theft Losses
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
CAUTION
!
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can't be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Disaster tax relief.  Disaster tax relief was 
enacted for those impacted by Hurricane Har-
vey, Irma, or Maria, including provisions that 
modified the calculation of casualty and theft 
losses. See Pub. 976, Disaster Relief, for more 
information.
Safe-harbor provisions to determine casu-
alty and theft loss deduction.  Safe-harbor 
provisions allow filers to determine their casu-
alty and theft loss deductions for personal-use 
residential real property and personal belong-
ings resulting from a federally declared disaster 
without an appraisal. See Pub. 976, Disaster 
Relief, for more information about the safe-har-
bor provisions.
Introduction
This chapter explains the tax treatment of per-
sonal (not business or investment-related) 
casualty losses, theft losses, and losses on de-
posits.
The chapter also explains the following
topics.
How to figure the amount of your loss.
How to treat insurance and other reim-
bursements you receive.
The deduction limits.
When and how to report a casualty or theft.
Forms to file.  When you have a casualty or 
theft, you have to file Form 4684. You will also 
have to file one or more of the following forms.
Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deduc-
tions.
Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains 
and Losses.
Condemnations. For information on condem-
nations of property, see Involuntary Conver-
sions in chapter 1 of Pub. 544, Sales and Other 
Dispositions of Assets.
Workbook for casualties and thefts.  Pub. 
584 is available to help you make a list of your 
stolen or damaged personal-use property and 
figure your loss. It includes schedules to help 
you figure the loss on your home, its contents, 
and your motor vehicles.
Business or investment-related losses.  For 
information on a casualty or theft loss of busi-
ness or income-producing property, see Pub. 
547.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Sales and Other Dispositions
of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and
Thefts
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft
Loss Workbook (Personal-Use
Property)
Disaster Relief
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized 
Deductions
Capital Gains 
and Losses
Casualties and Thefts
Casualty
A casualty is the damage, destruction, or loss of 
property resulting from an identifiable event that 
is sudden, unexpected, or unusual.
A sudden event is one that is swift, not 
gradual or progressive.
An unexpected event is one that is ordina-
rily unanticipated and unintended.
An unusual event is one that isn't a 
day-to-day occurrence and that isn't typical 
of the activity in which you were engaged.
Deductible losses.  Deductible casualty los-
ses can result from a number of different cau-
ses, including the following.
Car accidents (but see Nondeductible los-
ses next for exceptions). 
Earthquakes.
Fires (but see Nondeductible losses next 
for exceptions). 
Floods.
Government-ordered demolition or reloca-
tion of a home that is unsafe to use be-
cause of a disaster as discussed under 
Disaster Area Losses in Pub. 547. 
Hurricanes, storms, and tornadoes.
Mine cave-ins.
Shipwrecks. 
Sonic booms. 
Storms, including hurricanes and torna-
does. 
Terrorist attacks.
Vandalism.
Volcanic eruptions.
Nondeductible losses.  A casualty loss isn't 
deductible if the damage or destruction is 
caused by the following.
Accidentally breaking articles, such as 
glassware or china under normal condi-
tions.
A family pet (explained below).
  544
  547
  584
  976
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  Schedule D (Form 1040)
  4684
Page 173 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 171

A fire if you willfully set it or pay someone 
else to set it. 
A car accident if your willful negligence or 
willful act caused it. The same is true if the 
willful act or willful negligence of someone 
acting for you caused the accident. 
Progressive deterioration (explained later).
Family pet. Loss of property due to damage 
by a family pet isn't deductible as a casualty 
loss unless the requirements discussed earlier 
under Casualty are met.
Example. Your antique oriental rug was 
damaged by your new puppy before it was 
housebroken. Because the damage wasn't un-
expected and unusual, the loss isn't deductible 
as a casualty loss.
Progressive deterioration.  Loss of prop-
erty due to progressive deterioration isn't de-
ductible as a casualty loss. This is because the 
damage results from a steadily operating cause 
or a normal process, rather than from a sudden 
event. The following are examples of damage 
due to progressive deterioration.
The steady weakening of a building due to 
normal wind and weather conditions.
The deterioration and damage to a water 
heater that bursts. However, the rust and 
water damage to rugs and drapes caused 
by the bursting of a water heater does 
qualify as a casualty. 
Most losses of property caused by 
droughts. To be deductible, a drought-rela-
ted loss generally must be incurred in a 
trade or business or in a transaction en-
tered into for profit. 
Termite or moth damage. 
The damage or destruction of trees, 
shrubs, or other plants by a fungus, dis-
ease, insects, worms, or similar pests. 
However, a sudden destruction due to an 
unexpected or unusual infestation of bee-
tles or other insects may result in a casu-
alty loss. 
Damage from corrosive drywall.  If you 
suffered property losses due to the effects of 
certain imported drywall installed in homes be-
tween 2001 and 2009, under a special proce-
dure, you may be able to claim a casualty loss 
deduction for amounts you paid to repair dam-
age to your home and household appliances 
that resulted from corrosive drywall. For details, 
see Pub. 547.
Theft
A theft is the taking and removing of money or 
property with the intent to deprive the owner of 
it. The taking of property must be illegal under 
the laws of the state where it occurred and it 
must have been done with criminal intent. You 
don't need to show a conviction for theft.
Theft includes the taking of money or prop-
erty by the following means.
Blackmail.
Burglary.
Embezzlement.
Extortion.
Kidnapping for ransom.
Larceny.
Robbery.
The taking of money or property through 
fraud or misrepresentation is theft if it is illegal 
under state or local law.
Decline in market value of stock.  You can't 
deduct as a theft loss the decline in market 
value of stock acquired on the open market for 
investment if the decline is caused by disclo-
sure of accounting fraud or other illegal miscon-
duct by the officers or directors of the corpora-
tion that issued the stock. However, you can 
deduct as a capital loss the loss you sustain 
when you sell or exchange the stock or the 
stock becomes completely worthless. You re-
port a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). 
For more information about stock sales, worth-
less stock, and capital losses, see chapter 4 of 
Pub. 550.
Mislaid or lost property.  The simple disap-
pearance of money or property isn't a theft. 
However, an accidental loss or disappearance 
of property can qualify as a casualty if it results 
from an identifiable event that is sudden, unex-
pected, or unusual. Sudden, unexpected, and 
unusual events are defined earlier.
Example. A car door is accidentally slam-
med on your hand, breaking the setting of your 
diamond ring. The diamond falls from the ring 
and is never found. The loss of the diamond is a 
casualty.
Losses from Ponzi-type investment 
schemes. If you had a loss from a Ponzi-type 
investment scheme, see the following.
Revenue Ruling 2009-9, 2009-14 I.R.B. 
735 (available at IRS.gov/irb/
2009-14_IRB#RR-2009-9).
Revenue Procedure 2009-20, 2009-14 
I.R.B. 749 (available at IRS.gov/irb/
2009-14_IRB#RP-2009-20).
Revenue Procedure 2011-58, 2011-50 
I.R.B. 849 (available at IRS.gov/irb/
2011-50_IRB#RP-2011-58).
If you qualify to use Revenue Procedure 
2009-20, as modified by Revenue Procedure 
2011-58, and you choose to follow the proce-
dures in the guidance, first fill out Section C of 
Form 4684 to determine the amount to enter on 
Section B, line 28. Skip lines 19 to 27. Sec-
tion C of Form 4684 replaces Appendix A in 
Revenue Procedure 2009-20. You don't need to 
complete Appendix A. For more information, 
see the above revenue ruling and revenue pro-
cedures, and the Instructions for Form 4684.
If you choose not to use the procedures in 
Revenue Procedure 2009-20, you may claim 
your theft loss by filling out Section B, lines 19 
through 39, as appropriate.
Loss on Deposits
A loss on deposits can occur when a bank, 
credit union, or other financial institution be-
comes insolvent or bankrupt. If you incurred this 
type of loss, you can choose one of the follow-
ing ways to deduct the loss.
As a casualty loss.
As an ordinary loss.
As a nonbusiness bad debt.
Casualty loss or ordinary loss.  You can 
choose to deduct a loss on deposits as a casu-
alty loss or as an ordinary loss for any year in 
which you can reasonably estimate how much 
of your deposits you have lost in an insolvent or 
bankrupt financial institution. The choice is gen-
erally made on the return you file for that year 
and applies to all your losses on deposits for 
the year in that particular financial institution. If 
you treat the loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, 
you can't treat the same amount of the loss as a 
nonbusiness bad debt when it actually be-
comes worthless. However, you can take a 
nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any 
amount of loss that is more than the estimated 
amount you deducted as a casualty or ordinary 
loss. Once you make this choice, you can't 
change it without permission from the IRS.
If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as a 
miscellaneous itemized deduction on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum 
amount you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if 
you are married filing separately) reduced by 
any expected state insurance proceeds. Your 
loss is subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-
come limit. You can't choose to claim an ordi-
nary loss if any part of the deposit is federally 
insured.
Nonbusiness bad debt. If you don't choose to 
deduct the loss as a casualty loss or as an ordi-
nary loss, you must wait until the year the actual 
loss is determined and deduct the loss as a 
nonbusiness bad debt in that year.
How to report.  The kind of deduction you 
choose for your loss on deposits determines 
how you report your loss.
Casualty loss — report it on Form 4684 
first and then on Schedule A (Form 1040);
Ordinary loss — report it on Schedule A 
(Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction; or
Nonbusiness bad debt — report it on Form 
8949 first and then on Schedule D (Form 
1040).
More information.  For more information, see 
Special Treatment for Losses on Deposits in In-
solvent or Bankrupt Financial Institutions  in the 
Instructions for Form 4684, or Deposit in Insol-
vent or Bankrupt Financial Institution  in Pub. 
550.
Proof of Loss
To deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must be 
able to prove that you had a casualty or theft. 
You also must be able to support the amount 
you take as a deduction.
Casualty loss proof. For a casualty loss, your 
records should show all the following.
That you were the owner of the property or, 
if you leased the property from someone 
else, that you were contractually liable to 
the owner for the damage.
Page 174 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 172 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

The type of casualty (car accident, fire, 
storm, etc.) and when it occurred.
That the loss was a direct result of the 
casualty.
Whether a claim for reimbursement exists 
for which there is a reasonable expectation 
of recovery.
Theft loss proof. For a theft loss, your records 
should show all the following.
That you were the owner of the property.
That your property was stolen.
When you discovered that your property 
was missing.
Whether a claim for reimbursement exists 
for which there is a reasonable expectation 
of recovery.
It is important that you have records 
that will prove your deduction. If you 
don't have the actual records to sup-
port your deduction, you can use other satisfac-
tory evidence to support it.
Figuring a Loss
Figure the amount of your loss using the follow-
ing steps.
1. Determine your adjusted basis in the prop-
erty before the casualty or theft.
2. Determine the decrease in fair market 
value (FMV) of the property as a result of 
the casualty or theft.
3. From the smaller of the amounts you de-
termined in (1) and (2), subtract any insur-
ance or other reimbursement you received 
or expect to receive.
For personal-use property and property used in 
performing services as an employee, apply the 
deduction limits , discussed later, to determine 
the amount of your deductible loss.
Gain from reimbursement. If your reimburse-
ment is more than your adjusted basis in the 
property, you have a gain. This is true even if 
the decrease in the FMV of the property is 
smaller than your adjusted basis. If you have a 
gain, you may have to pay tax on it, or you may 
be able to postpone reporting the gain. See 
Pub. 547 for more information on how to treat a 
gain from a reimbursement for a casualty or 
theft.
Leased property. If you are liable for casualty 
damage to property you lease, your loss is the 
amount you must pay to repair the property mi-
nus any insurance or other reimbursement you 
receive or expect to receive.
Decrease in
FMV
FMV is the price for which you could sell your 
property to a willing buyer when neither of you 
has to sell or buy and both of you know all the 
relevant facts.
The decrease in FMV used to figure the 
amount of a casualty or theft loss is the differ-
ence between the property's FMV immediately 
RECORDS
before and immediately after the casualty or 
theft.
FMV of stolen property. The FMV of property 
immediately after a theft is considered to be 
zero because you no longer have the property.
Example. Several years ago, you pur-
chased silver dollars at face value for $150. 
This is your adjusted basis in the property. Your 
silver dollars were stolen this year. The FMV of 
the coins was $1,000 just before they were sto-
len, and insurance didn't cover them. Your theft 
loss is $150.
Recovered stolen property.  Recovered sto-
len property is your property that was stolen 
and later returned to you. If you recovered prop-
erty after you had already taken a theft loss de-
duction, you must refigure your loss using the 
smaller of the property's adjusted basis (ex-
plained later) or the decrease in FMV from the 
time just before it was stolen until the time it was 
recovered. Use this amount to refigure your to-
tal loss for the year in which the loss was de-
ducted.
If your refigured loss is less than the loss 
you deducted, you generally have to report the 
difference as income in the recovery year. But 
report the difference only up to the amount of 
the loss that reduced your tax. For more infor-
mation on the amount to report, see Recoveries 
in chapter 12.
Figuring Decrease in FMV—
Items To Consider
To figure the decrease in FMV because of a 
casualty or theft, you generally need a compe-
tent appraisal. However, other measures can 
also be used to establish certain decreases.
Appraisal. An appraisal to determine the dif-
ference between the FMV of the property imme-
diately before a casualty or theft and immedi-
ately afterward should be made by a competent 
appraiser. The appraiser must recognize the ef-
fects of any general market decline that may oc-
cur along with the casualty. This information is 
needed to limit any deduction to the actual loss 
resulting from damage to the property.
Several factors are important in evaluating 
the accuracy of an appraisal, including the fol-
lowing.
The appraiser's familiarity with your prop-
erty before and after the casualty or theft.
The appraiser's knowledge of sales of 
comparable property in the area.
The appraiser's knowledge of conditions in 
the area of the casualty.
The appraiser's method of appraisal.
You may be able to use an appraisal 
that you used to get a federal loan (or a 
federal loan guarantee) as the result of 
a federally declared disaster to establish the 
amount of your disaster loss. For more informa-
tion on disasters, see Disaster Area Losses  in 
Pub. 547.
While generally you must determine your 
deduction for a casualty loss using a competent 
appraisal, you may be able to use a safe-harbor 
method to determine your casualty and theft 
TIP
loss deduction for your personal-use residential 
real property and personal belongings resulting 
from a federally declared disaster without an 
appraisal. See Pub. 976, Disaster Relief, for 
more information.
Cost of cleaning up or making repairs.  The 
cost of repairing damaged property isn't part of 
a casualty loss. Neither is the cost of cleaning 
up after a casualty. But you can use the cost of 
cleaning up or making repairs after a casualty 
as a measure of the decrease in FMV if you 
meet all the following conditions.
The repairs are actually made.
The repairs are necessary to bring the 
property back to its condition before the 
casualty.
The amount spent for repairs isn't exces-
sive.
The repairs take care of the damage only.
The value of the property after the repairs 
isn't, due to the repairs, more than the 
value of the property before the casualty.
Landscaping. The cost of restoring land-
scaping to its original condition after a casualty 
may indicate the decrease in FMV. You may be 
able to measure your loss by what you spend 
on the following.
Removing destroyed or damaged trees 
and shrubs minus any salvage you re-
ceive.
Pruning and other measures taken to pre-
serve damaged trees and shrubs.
Replanting necessary to restore the prop-
erty to its approximate value before the 
casualty.
Car value.  Books issued by various automo-
bile organizations that list the manufacturer and 
the model of your car may be useful in figuring 
the value of your car. You can use the retail 
value for your car listed in the book and modify 
it by such factors as mileage and the condition 
of your car to determine its value. The prices 
aren't official, but they may be useful in deter-
mining value and suggesting relative prices for 
comparison with current sales and offerings in 
your area. If your car isn't listed in the books, 
determine its value from other sources. A deal-
er's offer for your car as a trade-in on a new car 
isn't usually a measure of its true value.
Figuring Decrease in FMV—
Items Not To Consider
You generally shouldn't consider the following 
items when attempting to establish the de-
crease in FMV of your property.
Cost of protection.  The cost of protecting 
your property against a casualty or theft isn't 
part of a casualty or theft loss. The amount you 
spend on insurance or to board up your house 
against a storm isn't part of your loss.
If you make permanent improvements to 
your property to protect it against a casualty or 
theft, add the cost of these improvements to 
your basis in the property. An example would 
be the cost of a dike to prevent flooding.
Exception. You can't increase your basis in 
the property by, or deduct as a business 
Page 175 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 173

expense, any expenditures you made with re-
spect to qualified disaster mitigation payments. 
See Disaster Area Losses in Pub. 547.
Incidental expenses.  Any incidental expen-
ses you have due to a casualty or theft, such as 
expenses for the treatment of personal injuries, 
for temporary housing, or for a rental car, aren't 
part of your casualty or theft loss.
Replacement cost. The cost of replacing sto-
len or destroyed property isn't part of a casualty 
or theft loss.
Sentimental value.  Don't consider sentimen-
tal value when determining your loss. If a family 
portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is damaged, de-
stroyed, or stolen, you must base your loss on 
its FMV, as limited by your adjusted basis in the 
property.
Decline in market value of property in or 
near casualty area. A decrease in the value of 
your property because it is in or near an area 
that suffered a casualty, or that might again suf-
fer a casualty, isn't to be taken into considera-
tion. You have a loss only for actual casualty 
damage to your property. However, if your 
home is in a federally declared disaster area, 
see Disaster Area Losses in Pub. 547.
Costs of photographs and appraisals.  Pho-
tographs taken after a casualty will be helpful in 
establishing the condition and value of the prop-
erty after it was damaged. Photographs show-
ing the condition of the property after it was re-
paired, restored, or replaced may also be 
helpful.
Appraisals are used to figure the decrease 
in FMV because of a casualty or theft. See Ap-
praisal, earlier, under Figuring Decrease in 
FMV—Items To Consider  for information about 
appraisals.
The costs of photographs and appraisals 
used as evidence of the value and condition of 
property damaged as a result of a casualty 
aren't a part of the loss. You can claim these 
costs as a miscellaneous itemized deduction 
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income 
limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). For informa-
tion about miscellaneous deductions, see chap-
ter 28.
Adjusted Basis
Adjusted basis is your basis in the property 
(usually cost) increased or decreased by vari-
ous events, such as improvements and casu-
alty losses. For more information, see chap-
ter 13.
Insurance and Other
Reimbursements
If you receive an insurance payment or other 
type of reimbursement, you must subtract the 
reimbursement when you figure your loss. You 
don't have a casualty or theft loss to the extent 
you are reimbursed.
If you expect to be reimbursed for part or all 
of your loss, you must subtract the expected re-
imbursement when you figure your loss. You 
must reduce your loss even if you don't receive 
payment until a later tax year. See Reimburse-
ment Received After Deducting Loss, later.
Failure to file a claim for reimbursement.  If 
your property is covered by insurance, you 
must file a timely insurance claim for reimburse-
ment of your loss. Otherwise, you can't deduct 
this loss as a casualty or theft loss. However, 
this rule doesn't apply to the portion of the loss 
not covered by insurance (for example, a de-
ductible).
Example. Your car insurance policy in-
cludes collision coverage with a $1,000 deduc-
tible. Because your insurance doesn't cover the 
first $1,000 of an auto collision, the $1,000 is 
deductible (subject to the deduction limits  dis-
cussed later). This is true even if you don't file 
an insurance claim, because your insurance 
policy won't reimburse you for the deductible.
Types of Reimbursements
The most common type of reimbursement is an 
insurance payment for your stolen or damaged 
property. Other types of reimbursements are 
discussed next. Also see the Instructions for 
Form 4684.
Employer's emergency disaster fund.  If you 
receive money from your employer's emer-
gency disaster fund and you must use that 
money to rehabilitate or replace property on 
which you are claiming a casualty loss deduc-
tion, you must take that money into considera-
tion in figuring the casualty loss deduction. 
Take into consideration only the amount you 
used to replace your destroyed or damaged 
property.
Example. Your home was extensively dam-
aged by a tornado. Your loss after reimburse-
ment from your insurance company was 
$10,000. Your employer set up a disaster relief 
fund for its employees. Employees receiving 
money from the fund had to use it to rehabilitate 
or replace their damaged or destroyed property. 
You received $4,000 from the fund and spent 
the entire amount on repairs to your home. In 
figuring your casualty loss, you must reduce 
your unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the 
$4,000 you received from your employer's fund. 
Your casualty loss before applying the deduc-
tion limits discussed later is $6,000.
Cash gifts. If you receive excludable cash gifts 
as a disaster victim and there are no limits on 
how you can use the money, you don't reduce 
your casualty loss by these excludable cash 
gifts. This applies even if you use the money to 
pay for repairs to property damaged in the dis-
aster.
Example. Your home was damaged by a 
hurricane. Relatives and neighbors made cash 
gifts to you that were excludable from your in-
come. You used part of the cash gifts to pay for 
repairs to your home. There were no limits or 
restrictions on how you could use the cash gifts. 
Because it was an excludable gift, the money 
you received and used to pay for repairs to your 
home doesn't reduce your casualty loss on the 
damaged home.
Insurance payments for living expenses.
You don't reduce your casualty loss by insur-
ance payments you receive to cover living ex-
penses in either of the following situations.
You lose the use of your main home be-
cause of a casualty.
Government authorities don't allow you ac-
cess to your main home because of a 
casualty or threat of one.
Inclusion in income.  If these insurance 
payments are more than the temporary in-
crease in your living expenses, you must in-
clude the excess in your income. Report this 
amount on Form 1040, line 21. However, if the 
casualty occurs in a federally declared disaster 
area, none of the insurance payments are taxa-
ble. See Qualified disaster relief payments  un-
der Disaster Area Losses in Pub. 547.
A temporary increase in your living expen-
ses is the difference between the actual living 
expenses you and your family incurred during 
the period you couldn't use your home and your 
normal living expenses for that period. Actual 
living expenses are the reasonable and neces-
sary expenses incurred because of the loss of 
your main home. Generally, these expenses in-
clude the amounts you pay for the following.
Rent for suitable housing.
Transportation.
Food.
Utilities.
Miscellaneous services.
Normal living expenses consist of these same 
expenses that you would have incurred but 
didn't because of the casualty or the threat of 
one.
Example. As a result of a fire, you vacated 
your apartment for a month and moved to a mo-
tel. You normally pay $525 a month for rent. 
None was charged for the month the apartment 
was vacated. Your motel rent for this month was 
$1,200. You normally pay $200 a month for 
food. Your food expenses for the month you 
lived in the motel were $400. You received 
$1,100 from your insurance company to cover 
your living expenses. You determine the pay-
ment you must include in income as follows.
1) Insurance payment for living
expenses ................. $1,100
2) Actual expenses during the month 
you are unable to use your home 
because of fire ........... 1,600
3) Normal living expenses ...... 725
4) Temporary increase in living 
expenses: Subtract line 3
from line 2 ................. 875
5) Amount of payment includible 
in income: Subtract line 4 
from line 1 ................ $225
Tax year of inclusion.  You include the tax-
able part of the insurance payment in income 
for the year you regain the use of your main 
home or, if later, for the year you receive the 
taxable part of the insurance payment.
Example. Your main home was destroyed 
by a tornado in August 2015. You regained use 
of your home in November 2016. The insurance 
payments you received in 2015 and 2016 were 
$1,500 more than the temporary increase in 
Page 176 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 174 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

your living expenses during those years. You in-
clude this amount in income on your 2016 Form 
1040. If, in 2017, you received further payments 
to cover the living expenses you had in 2015 
and 2016, you must include those payments in 
income on your 2017 Form 1040.
Disaster relief.  Food, medical supplies, and 
other forms of assistance you receive don't re-
duce your casualty loss unless they are re-
placements for lost or destroyed property.
Qualified disaster relief payments you 
receive for expenses you incurred as a 
result of a federally declared disaster 
aren't taxable income to you. For more informa-
tion, see Disaster Area Losses in Pub. 547.
Disaster unemployment assistance pay-
ments are unemployment benefits that are taxa-
ble.
Generally, disaster relief grants and quali-
fied disaster mitigation payments made under 
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and 
Emergency Assistance Act or the National 
Flood Insurance Act (as in effect on April 15, 
2005) aren't includible in your income. See Pub. 
976 for more information about disaster tax re-
lief.
Reimbursement Received After 
Deducting Loss
If you figured your casualty or theft loss using 
your expected reimbursement, you may have to 
adjust your tax return for the tax year in which 
you receive your actual reimbursement. This 
section explains the adjustment you may have 
to make.
Actual reimbursement less than expected. 
If you later receive less reimbursement than you 
expected, include that difference as a loss with 
your other losses (if any) on your return for the 
year in which you can reasonably expect no 
more reimbursement.
Example. Your personal car had an FMV of 
$2,000 when it was destroyed in a collision with 
another car in 2016. The accident was due to 
the negligence of the other driver. At the end of 
2016, there was a reasonable prospect that the 
owner of the other car would reimburse you in 
full. You didn't have a deductible loss in 2016.
In January 2017, the court awarded you a 
judgment of $2,000. However, in July it became 
apparent that you will be unable to collect any 
amount from the other driver. You can deduct 
the loss in 2017 subject to the deduction limits 
discussed later.
Actual reimbursement more than expected. 
If you later receive a larger reimbursement 
amount than you expected after you claimed a 
deduction for the loss, you may have to include 
the extra reimbursement amount in your income 
for the year you receive it. However, if any part 
of the original deduction didn't reduce your tax 
for the earlier year, don't include that part of the 
reimbursement in your income. You don't refig-
ure your tax for the year you claimed the deduc-
tion. For more information, see Recoveries in 
chapter 12.
If the total of all the reimbursements 
you receive is more than your adjusted 
basis in the destroyed or stolen 
TIP
CAUTION
!
property, you will have a gain on the casualty or 
theft. If you have already taken a deduction for 
a loss and you receive the reimbursement in a 
later year, you may have to include the gain in 
your income for the later year. Include the gain 
as ordinary income up to the amount of your de-
duction that reduced your tax for the earlier 
year. See Figuring a Gain  in Pub. 547 for more 
information on how to treat a gain from the reim-
bursement of a casualty or theft.
Actual reimbursement same as expected. If 
you receive exactly the reimbursement you ex-
pected to receive, you don't have to include any 
of the reimbursement in your income and you 
can't deduct any additional loss.
Example. In December 2017, you had a 
collision while driving your personal car. Re-
pairs to the car cost $950. You had $100 de-
ductible collision insurance. Your insurance 
company agreed to reimburse you for the rest 
of the damage. Because you expected a reim-
bursement from the insurance company, you 
didn't have a casualty loss deduction in 2017.
Due to the $100 rule (discussed later under 
Deduction Limits ), you can't deduct the $100 
you paid as the deductible. When you receive 
the $850 from the insurance company in 2018, 
don't report it as income.
Single Casualty on 
Multiple Properties
Personal property.  Personal property is any 
property that isn't real property. If your personal 
property is stolen or is damaged or destroyed 
by a casualty, you must figure your loss sepa-
rately for each item of property. Then combine 
these separate losses to figure the total loss 
from that casualty or theft.
Example. A fire in your home destroyed an 
upholstered chair, an oriental rug, and an anti-
que table. You didn't have fire insurance to 
cover your loss. (This was the only casualty or 
theft you had during the year.) You paid $750 
for the chair and you established that it had an 
FMV of $500 just before the fire. The rug cost 
$3,000 and had an FMV of $2,500 just before 
the fire. You bought the table at an auction for 
$100 before discovering it was an antique. It 
had been appraised at $900 before the fire. You 
figure your loss on each of these items as fol-
lows.
Chair Rug Table
1) Basis (cost) ...... $750 $3,000 $100 
2) FMV before fire .... $500 $2,500 $900 
3) FMV after fire ..... –0– –0– –0– 
4) Decrease in FMV .... $500 $2,500 $900 
5) Loss (smaller of (1) or 
(4)) ........... $500 $2,500 $100 
6) Total loss ....... $3,100
Real property.  In figuring a casualty loss on 
personal-use real property, treat the entire 
property (including any improvements, such as 
buildings, trees, and shrubs) as one item. Fig-
ure the loss using the smaller of the adjusted 
basis or the decrease in FMV of the entire prop-
erty.
Example. You bought your home a few 
years ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for the 
land and $140,000 for the house). You also 
spent $2,000 for landscaping. This year a fire 
destroyed your home. The fire also damaged 
the shrubbery and trees in your yard. The fire 
was your only casualty or theft loss this year. 
Competent appraisers valued the property as a 
whole at $200,000 before the fire, but only 
$30,000 after the fire. (The loss to your house-
hold furnishings isn't shown in this example. It 
would be figured separately on each item, as 
explained earlier under Personal property .) 
Shortly after the fire, the insurance company 
paid you $155,000 for the loss. You figure your 
casualty loss as follows.
1) Adjusted basis of the entire property 
(land, building, and landscaping) .. $162,000 
2) FMV of entire property before 
fire ................. $200,000 
3) FMV of entire property after fire ... 30,000 
4) Decrease in FMV of entire 
property ............... $170,000 
5) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)) ...... $162,000 
6) Subtract insurance .......... 155,000 
7) Amount of loss after 
reimbursement ........... $7,000
Deduction Limits
After you have figured your casualty or theft 
loss, you must figure how much of the loss you 
can deduct. If the loss was to property for your 
personal use or your family's use, there are two 
limits on the amount you can deduct for your 
casualty or theft loss.
1. You must reduce each casualty or theft 
loss by $100 ($100 rule). However, if you 
had a net disaster loss which arose from 
Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Maria, then you 
must reduce your casualty or theft loss by 
$500.
2. You must further reduce the total of all 
your casualty or theft losses by 10% of 
your adjusted gross income (AGI) (10% 
rule).
You make these reductions on Form 4684.
These rules are explained next and Ta-
ble 25-1 summarizes how to apply the $100 rule 
and the 10% rule in various situations. For more 
detailed explanations and examples, see Pub. 
547.
Property used partly for business and 
partly for personal purposes. When property 
is used partly for personal purposes and partly 
for business or income-producing purposes, the 
casualty or theft loss deduction must be figured 
separately for the personal-use part and for the 
business or income-producing part. You must 
figure each loss separately because the $100 
rule and the 10% rule apply only to the loss on 
the personal-use part of the property.
Page 177 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 175

$100 Rule
After you have figured your casualty or theft 
loss on personal-use property, you must reduce 
that loss by $100. This reduction applies to 
each total casualty or theft loss. It doesn't mat-
ter how many pieces of property are involved in 
an event. Only a single $100 reduction applies.
Example. A hailstorm damages your home 
and your car. Determine the amount of loss, as 
discussed earlier, for each of these items. Since 
the losses are due to a single event, you com-
bine the losses and reduce the combined 
amount by $100.
Single event.  Generally, events closely rela-
ted in origin cause a single casualty. It is a sin-
gle casualty when the damage is from two or 
more closely related causes, such as wind and 
flood damage caused by the same storm.
Net disaster losses from Hurricane 
Harvey, Irma, or Maria must be re-
duced by $500 instead of $100. See 
Pub. 976 and the Instructions for Form 4684 for 
more information.
10% Rule
You must reduce the total of all your casualty or 
theft losses on personal-use property by 10% of 
your AGI. Apply this rule after you reduce each 
loss by $100. For more information, see the 
Form 4684 instructions. If you have both gains 
and losses from casualties or thefts, see Gains 
and losses, later.
Example 1.  In June, you discovered that 
your house had been burglarized. Your loss af-
ter insurance reimbursement was $2,000. Your 
AGI for the year you discovered the theft is 
$29,500. You first apply the $100 rule and then 
the 10% rule. Figure your theft loss deduction 
as follows.
CAUTION
!
1) Loss after insurance ........... $2,000 
2) Subtract $100 .............. 100 
3) Loss after $100 rule ........... $1,900 
4) Subtract 10% × $29,500 AGI ....... 2,950 
5) Theft loss deduction .......... –0–
You don't have a theft loss deduction be-
cause your loss after you apply the $100 rule 
($1,900) is less than 10% of your AGI ($2,950).
Example 2.  In March, you had a car acci-
dent that totally destroyed your car. You didn't 
have collision insurance on your car, so you 
didn't receive any insurance reimbursement. 
Your loss on the car was $1,800. In November, 
a fire damaged your basement and totally de-
stroyed the furniture, washer, dryer, and other 
items stored there. Your loss on the basement 
items after reimbursement from your insurer 
was $2,100. Your AGI for the year that the acci-
dent and fire occurred is $25,000. You figure 
your casualty loss deduction as follows.
Base-
Car ment 
1) Loss ............. $1,800 $2,100 
2) Subtract $100 per 
incident ........... 100 100 
3) Loss after $100 rule ..... $1,700 $2,000 
4) Total loss ............... $3,700 
5) Subtract 10% × $25,000 AGI ..... 2,500 
6) Casualty loss deduction ....... $1,200
The 10% rule does not apply to net dis-
aster losses from Hurricane Harvey, 
Irma, or Maria. See Pub. 976 and the 
Instructions for Form 4684 for more information.
Gains and losses.  If you had both gains and 
losses from casualties or thefts to your per-
sonal-use property, you must compare your to-
tal gains to your total losses. Do this after you 
have reduced each loss by any reimbursements 
and by $100, but before you have reduced the 
losses by 10% of your AGI.
CAUTION
!
Casualty or theft gains don't include 
gains you choose to postpone. See 
Pub. 547 for information on the post-
ponement of gain.
Losses more than gains. If your losses are 
more than your recognized gains, subtract your 
gains from your losses and reduce the result by 
10% of your AGI. The rest, if any, is your deduc-
tible loss from personal-use property.
Gains more than losses.  If your recog-
nized gains are more than your losses, subtract 
your losses from your gains. The difference is 
treated as capital gain and must be reported on 
Schedule D (Form 1040). The 10% rule doesn't 
apply to your gains. 
When To Report
Gains and Losses
Gains. If you receive an insurance or other re-
imbursement that is more than your adjusted 
basis in the destroyed or stolen property, you 
have a gain from the casualty or theft. You must 
include this gain in your income in the year you 
receive the reimbursement, unless you choose 
to postpone reporting the gain as explained in 
Pub. 547.
Losses. Generally, you can deduct a casualty 
loss that isn't reimbursable only in the tax year 
in which the casualty occurred. This is true even 
if you don't repair or replace the damaged prop-
erty until a later year.
You can deduct theft losses that aren't reim-
bursable only in the year you discover your 
property was stolen.
If you aren't sure whether part of your casu-
alty or theft loss will be reimbursed, don't de-
duct that part until the tax year when you be-
come reasonably certain that it won't be 
reimbursed.
If you have a loss, see Table 25-2.
Loss on deposits. If your loss is a loss on de-
posits in an insolvent or bankrupt financial insti-
tution, see Loss on Deposits, earlier.
CAUTION
!
Table 25-1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits for Personal-Use Property
$100 Rule 10% Rule
General Application You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by 
$100 when figuring your deduction. Apply this 
rule after you have figured the amount of your 
loss.*
You must reduce your total casualty or theft 
loss by 10% of your AGI. Apply this rule after 
you reduce each loss by $100 ($100 rule).**
Single Event Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces 
of property are affected.
Apply this rule only once, even if many 
pieces of property are affected.
More Than One Event Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all 
events.
More Than One Person—
With Loss From the Same Event
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.
Married Couple—
With Loss From the 
Same Event
Filing Jointly Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.
Filing Separately Apply separately to each spouse. Apply separately to each spouse.
More Than One Owner
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Apply separately to each owner of jointly 
owned property.
Apply separately to each owner of jointly 
owned property.
* Disaster losses from Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Maria must be reduced by $500 when figuring your deduction. See Pub. 976 for more information.
** The 10% rule does not apply to net disaster losses from Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Maria. See Pub. 976 for more information.
Page 178 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 176 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Disaster Area Loss
You generally must deduct a casualty loss in 
the year it occurred. However, if you have a 
casualty loss from a federally declared disaster 
that occurred in an area warranting public or in-
dividual assistance (or both), you can choose to 
deduct the loss on your tax return or amended 
return for either of the following years.
The year the loss was sustained (the dis-
aster year).
The year immediately preceding the disas-
ter year.
You must make the choice to take your 
casualty loss for the disaster in the preceding 
year on or before the date that is six months af-
ter the regular due date for filing your original re-
turn (without extensions) for the disaster year.
If you claimed a deduction for a disaster loss 
in the disaster year and you wish to deduct the 
loss in the preceding year, you must file an 
amended return to remove the previously de-
ducted loss on or before you file the return or 
amended return for the preceding year that in-
cludes the disaster loss deduction.
Gains. Special rules apply if you choose to 
postpone reporting gain on property damaged 
or destroyed in a federally declared disaster 
area. For those special rules, see Pub. 547.
Postponed tax deadlines. The IRS may post-
pone for up to 1 year certain tax deadlines of 
taxpayers who are affected by a federally de-
clared disaster. The tax deadlines the IRS may 
postpone include those for filing income and 
employment tax returns, paying income and 
employment taxes, and making contributions to 
a traditional IRA or Roth IRA.
If any tax deadline is postponed, the IRS will 
publicize the postponement in your area by 
publishing a news release, revenue ruling, reve-
nue procedure, notice, announcement, or other 
guidance in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB). 
Go to IRS.gov/Newsroom/Tax-Relief-in-
Disaster-Situations to find out if a tax deadline 
has been postponed for your area.
Who is eligible.  If the IRS postpones a tax 
deadline, the following taxpayers are eligible for 
the postponement.
Any individual whose main home is located 
in a covered disaster area (defined next).
Any business entity or sole proprietor 
whose principal place of business is loca-
ted in a covered disaster area.
Any individual who is a relief worker affili-
ated with a recognized government or phil-
anthropic organization who is assisting in a 
covered disaster area.
Any individual, business entity, or sole pro-
prietorship whose records are needed to 
meet a postponed tax deadline, provided 
those records are maintained in a covered 
disaster area. The main home or principal 
place of business doesn't have to be loca-
ted in the covered disaster area.
Any estate or trust that has tax records 
necessary to meet a postponed tax dead-
line, provided those records are main-
tained in a covered disaster area.
The spouse on a joint return with a tax-
payer who is eligible for postponements.
Any individual, business entity, or sole pro-
prietorship not located in a covered disas-
ter area, but whose records necessary to 
meet a postponed tax deadline are located 
in the covered disaster area.
Any individual visiting the covered disaster 
area who was killed or injured as a result of 
the disaster.
Any other person determined by the IRS to 
be affected by a federally declared disas-
ter.
Covered disaster area. This is an area of a 
federally declared disaster in which the IRS has 
decided to postpone tax deadlines for up to 1 
year.
Abatement of interest and penalties.  The 
IRS may abate the interest and penalties on un-
derpaid income tax for the length of any post-
ponement of tax deadlines.
More information.  For more information, see 
Disaster Area Losses in Pub. 547.
How To Report
Gains and Losses
Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a deductible 
loss from a casualty or theft. If you have more 
than one casualty or theft, use a separate Form 
4684 to determine your gain or loss for each 
event. Combine the gains and losses on one 
Form 4684. Follow the form instructions as to 
which lines to fill out. In addition, you must use 
the appropriate schedule to report a gain or 
loss. The schedule you use depends on 
whether you have a gain or loss.
If you have a: Report it on:
Gain ......... Schedule D (Form 1040)
Loss ......... Schedule A (Form 1040)
Adjustments to basis.  If you have a casualty 
or theft loss, you must decrease your basis in 
the property by any insurance or other reim-
bursement you receive, and by any deductible 
loss. If you make either of the basis adjustments 
described above, amounts you spend on re-
pairs to restore your property to its pre-casualty 
condition increase your adjusted basis. See Ad-
justed Basis in chapter 13 for more information.
Net operating loss (NOL).  If your casualty or 
theft loss deduction causes your deductions for 
the year to be more than your income for the 
year, you may have an NOL. You can use an 
NOL to lower your tax in an earlier year, allow-
ing you to get a refund for tax you have already 
paid. Or, you can use it to lower your tax in a 
later year. You don't have to be in business to 
have an NOL from a casualty or theft loss. For 
more information, see Pub. 536.
26.
Car Expenses 
and Other 
Employee 
Business 
Expenses
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as California 
wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted, 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Standard mileage rate.  For 2017, the stand-
ard mileage rate for the cost of operating your 
car for business use is 53.5 cents (0.535) per 
mile.
Car expenses and use of the standard mile-
age rate are explained under Transportation Ex-
penses, later.
Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, and 
vans. For 2017, the first-year limit on the total 
depreciation deduction for cars remains at 
CAUTION
!
Table 25-2.  When To Deduct a Loss
IF you have a loss... THEN deduct it in the year...
from a casualty the loss occurred.
in a federally declared disaster area the loss was sustained or the year immediately before 
the loss was sustained.
from a theft  the theft was discovered.
on a deposit treated as a:
• casualty or any ordinary loss a reasonable estimate can be made.
• bad debt deposits are totally worthless.
Page 179 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 177

$11,160 ($3,160 if you elect not to claim the 
special depreciation allowance). For trucks and 
vans, the first-year limit is $11,560 ($3,560 if 
you elect not to claim the special depreciation 
allowance).
Special depreciation allowance.  For 2017, 
the special (“bonus”) depreciation allowance on 
qualified property (including cars, trucks, and 
vans) remains at 50%. The special depreciation 
allowance is explained in chapter 4 of Pub. 463.
Introduction
You may be able to deduct the ordinary and 
necessary business-related expenses you have 
for:
Travel,
Entertainment,
Gifts, or
Transportation.
An ordinary expense is one that is common and 
accepted in your trade or business. A neces-
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropri-
ate for your business. An expense doesn’t have 
to be required to be considered necessary.
This chapter explains the following.
What expenses are deductible.
How to report your expenses on your re-
turn.
What records you need to prove your ex-
penses.
How to treat any expense reimbursements 
you may receive.
Who doesn’t need to use this chapter.  If 
you are an employee, you won’t need to read 
this chapter if all of the following are true.
You fully accounted to your employer for 
your work-related expenses.
You received full reimbursement for your 
expenses.
Your employer required you to return any 
excess reimbursement and you did so.
There is no amount shown with a code L in 
box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and Tax 
Statement.
If you meet all of these conditions, there is no 
need to show the expenses or the reimburse-
ments on your return. See Reimbursements, 
later, if you would like more information on reim-
bursements and accounting to your employer.
If you meet these conditions and your 
employer included reimbursements on 
your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-
ployer for a corrected Form W-2.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car 
Expenses
Business Expenses
TIP
  463 
  535 
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized 
Deductions
Profit or Loss 
From Business
Net Profit 
From Business
Profit or Loss 
From Farming
Employee Business 
Expenses
Unreimbursed Employee 
Business Expenses
Travel Expenses
If you temporarily travel away from your tax 
home, you can use this section to determine if 
you have deductible travel expenses. This sec-
tion discusses:
Traveling away from home,
Tax home,
Temporary assignment or job, and
What travel expenses are deductible.
It also discusses the standard meal allowance, 
rules for travel inside and outside the United 
States, and deductible convention expenses.
Travel expenses defined.  For tax purposes, 
travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary 
expenses (defined earlier) of traveling away 
from home for your business, profession, or job.
You will find examples of deductible travel 
expenses in Table 26-1.
Traveling Away From 
Home
You are traveling away from home if:
Your duties require you to be away from 
the general area of your tax home (defined 
later) substantially longer than an ordinary 
day's work, and
You need to sleep or rest to meet the de-
mands of your work while away from 
home.
This rest requirement isn’t satisfied by merely 
napping in your car. You don’t have to be away 
from your tax home for a whole day or from 
dusk to dawn as long as your relief from duty is 
long enough to get necessary sleep or rest.
Example 1.  You are a railroad conductor. 
You leave your home terminal on a regularly 
scheduled round-trip run between two cities 
and return home 16 hours later. During the run, 
you have 6 hours off at your turnaround point 
where you eat two meals and rent a hotel room 
to get necessary sleep before starting the return 
trip. You are considered to be away from home.
Example 2.  You are a truck driver. You 
leave your terminal and return to it later the 
same day. You get an hour off at your turn-
around point to eat. Because you aren’t off to 
get necessary sleep and the brief time off isn’t 
an adequate rest period, you aren’t traveling 
away from home.
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  Schedule C (Form 1040)
  Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040)
  Schedule F (Form 1040)
  Form 2106
  Form 2106-EZ
Members of the Armed Forces.  If you are a 
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-
nent duty assignment overseas, you aren’t trav-
eling away from home. You can’t deduct your 
expenses for meals and lodging. You can’t de-
duct these expenses even if you have to main-
tain a home in the United States for your family 
members who aren’t allowed to accompany you 
overseas. If you are transferred from one per-
manent duty station to another, you may have 
deductible moving expenses, which are ex-
plained in Pub. 521, Moving Expenses.
A naval officer assigned to permanent duty 
aboard a ship that has regular eating and living 
facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel 
expense purposes.
Tax Home
To determine whether you are traveling away 
from home, you must first determine the loca-
tion of your tax home.
Generally, your tax home is your regular 
place of business or post of duty, regardless of 
where you maintain your family home. It in-
cludes the entire city or general area in which 
your business or work is located.
If you have more than one regular place of 
business, your tax home is your main place of 
business. See Main place of business or work , 
later.
If you don’t have a regular or a main place of 
business because of the nature of your work, 
then your tax home may be the place where you 
regularly live. See No main place of business or 
work, later.
If you don’t have a regular or a main place of 
business or post of duty and there is no place 
where you regularly live, you are considered an 
itinerant (a transient) and your tax home is 
wherever you work. As an itinerant, you can’t 
claim a travel expense deduction because you 
are never considered to be traveling away from 
home.
Main place of business or work.  If you have 
more than one place of business or work, con-
sider the following when determining which one 
is your main place of business or work.
The total time you ordinarily spend in each 
place.
The level of your business activity in each 
place.
Whether your income from each place is 
significant or insignificant.
Example. You live in Cincinnati where you 
have a seasonal job for 8 months each year and 
earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in 
Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn 
$15,000. Cincinnati is your main place of work 
because you spend most of your time there and 
earn most of your income there.
No main place of business or work.  You 
may have a tax home even if you don’t have a 
regular or main place of business or work. Your 
tax home may be the home where you regularly 
live.
Page 180 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 178 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Factors used to determine tax home.  If 
you don’t have a regular or main place of busi-
ness or work, use the following three factors to 
determine where your tax home is.
1. You perform part of your business in the 
area of your main home and use that 
home for lodging while doing business in 
the area.
2. You have living expenses at your main 
home that you duplicate because your 
business requires you to be away from 
that home.
3. You haven’t abandoned the area in which 
both your historical place of lodging and 
your claimed main home are located; you 
have a member or members of your family 
living at your main home; or you often use 
that home for lodging.
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home 
is the home where you regularly live. If you sat-
isfy only two factors, you may have a tax home 
depending on all the facts and circumstances. If 
you satisfy only one factor, you are an itinerant; 
your tax home is wherever you work and you 
can’t deduct travel expenses.
Example. You are single and live in Boston 
in an apartment you rent. You have worked for 
your employer in Boston for a number of years. 
Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month execu-
tive training program. You don’t expect to return 
to work in Boston after you complete your train-
ing.
During your training, you don’t do any work 
in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and 
on-the-job training throughout the United 
States. You keep your apartment in Boston and 
return to it frequently. You use your apartment 
to conduct your personal business. You also 
keep up your community contacts in Boston. 
When you complete your training, you are 
transferred to Los Angeles.
You don’t satisfy factor (1) because you 
didn’t work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-
cause you had duplicate living expenses. You 
also satisfy factor (3) because you didn’t aban-
don your apartment in Boston as your main 
home, you kept your community contacts, and 
you frequently returned to live in your apart-
ment. Therefore, you have a tax home in Bos-
ton.
Tax home different from family home.  If you 
(and your family) don’t live at your tax home 
(defined earlier), you can’t deduct the cost of 
traveling between your tax home and your fam-
ily home. You also can’t deduct the cost of 
meals and lodging while at your tax home. See 
Example 1 below.
If you are working temporarily in the same 
city where you and your family live, you may be 
considered as traveling away from home. See 
Example 2 below.
Example 1. You are a truck driver and you 
and your family live in Tucson. You are em-
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in 
Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you re-
turn to your home terminal in Phoenix and 
spend one night there before returning home. 
You can’t deduct any expenses you have for 
meals and lodging in Phoenix or the cost of 
traveling from Phoenix to Tucson. This is be-
cause Phoenix is your tax home.
Example 2.  Your family home is in Pitts-
burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The 
rest of the year you work for the same employer 
in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants 
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is 
the same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-
more.
Because you spend most of your working 
time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore, 
that city is your tax home. You can’t deduct any 
expenses you have for meals and lodging 
there. However, when you return to work in 
Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax home 
even though you stay at your family home. You 
can deduct the cost of your round trip between 
Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct 
your part of your family's living expenses for 
meals and lodging while you are living and 
working in Pittsburgh.
Temporary Assignment
or Job
You may regularly work at your tax home and 
also work at another location. It may not be 
practical to return to your tax home from this 
other location at the end of each work day.
Temporary assignment vs. indefinite as-
signment. If your assignment or job away from 
your main place of work is temporary, your tax 
home doesn’t change. You are considered to 
be away from home for the whole period you 
are away from your main place of work. You 
can deduct your travel expenses if they other-
wise qualify for deduction. Generally, a tempo-
rary assignment in a single location is one that 
is realistically expected to last (and does in fact 
last) for 1 year or less.
However, if your assignment or job is indefi-
nite, the location of the assignment or job be-
comes your new tax home and you can’t deduct 
your travel expenses while there. An assign-
ment or job in a single location is considered in-
definite if it is realistically expected to last for 
more than 1 year, whether or not it actually lasts 
for more than 1 year.
If your assignment is indefinite, you must in-
clude in your income any amounts you receive 
from your employer for living expenses, even if 
they are called travel allowances and you ac-
count to your employer for them. You may be 
able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new 
tax home as a moving expense. See Pub. 521 
for more information.
Exception for federal crime investigations 
or prosecutions.  If you are a federal em-
ployee participating in a federal crime investiga-
tion or prosecution, you aren’t subject to the 
1-year rule. This means you may be able to de-
duct travel expenses even if you are away from 
your tax home for more than 1 year, provided 
you meet the other requirements for deductibil-
ity.
For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or 
his or her designee) must certify that you are 
traveling:
For the federal government;
In a temporary duty status; and
To investigate or prosecute, or provide 
support services for the investigation or 
prosecution of a federal crime.
Determining temporary or indefinite.  You 
must determine whether your assignment is 
temporary or indefinite when you start work. If 
you expect an assignment or job to last for 1 
year or less, it is temporary unless there are 
facts and circumstances that indicate other-
wise. An assignment or job that is initially tem-
porary may become indefinite due to changed 
circumstances. A series of assignments to the 
same location, all for short periods but that to-
gether cover a long period, may be considered 
an indefinite assignment.
Going home on days off.  If you go back to 
your tax home from a temporary assignment on 
your days off, you aren’t considered away from 
home while you are in your hometown. You 
can’t deduct the cost of your meals and lodging 
there. However, you can deduct your travel ex-
penses, including meals and lodging, while 
traveling between your temporary place of work 
and your tax home. You can claim these expen-
ses up to the amount it would have cost you to 
stay at your temporary place of work.
If you keep your hotel room during your visit 
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel 
room. In addition, you can deduct your expen-
ses of returning home up to the amount you 
would have spent for meals had you stayed at 
your temporary place of work.
Probationary work period.  If you take a job 
that requires you to move, with the understand-
ing that you will keep the job if your work is sat-
isfactory during a probationary period, the job is 
indefinite. You can’t deduct any of your expen-
ses for meals and lodging during the probation-
ary period.
What Travel Expenses Are 
Deductible?
Once you have determined that you are travel-
ing away from your tax home, you can deter-
mine what travel expenses are deductible.
You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-
penses you have when you travel away from 
home on business. The type of expense you 
can deduct depends on the facts and your cir-
cumstances.
Table 26-1 summarizes travel expenses you 
may be able to deduct. You may have other de-
ductible travel expenses that aren’t covered 
there, depending on the facts and your circum-
stances.
When you travel away from home on 
business, you should keep records of 
all the expenses you have and any ad-
vances you receive from your employer. You 
can use a log, diary, notebook, or any other 
written record to keep track of your expenses. 
The types of expenses you need to record, 
along with supporting documentation, are de-
scribed in Table 26-2.
Separating costs.  If you have one expense 
that includes the costs of meals, entertainment, 
and other services (such as lodging or transpor-
tation), you must allocate that expense between 
the cost of meals and entertainment and the 
RECORDS
Page 181 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

cost of other services. You must have a reason-
able basis for making this allocation. For exam-
ple, you must allocate your expenses if a hotel 
includes one or more meals in its room charge.
Travel expenses for another individual.  If a 
spouse, dependent, or other individual goes 
with you (or your employee) on a business trip 
or to a business convention, you generally can’t 
deduct his or her travel expenses.
Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-
penses of someone who goes with you if that 
person:
1. Is your employee,
2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the 
travel, and
3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the 
travel expenses.
Business associate.  If a business asso-
ciate travels with you and meets the conditions 
in (2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel 
expenses you have for that person. A business 
associate is someone with whom you could rea-
sonably expect to engage or deal in the active 
conduct of your business. A business associate 
can be a current or prospective (likely to be-
come) customer, client, supplier, employee, 
agent, partner, or professional advisor.
Bona fide business purpose.  A bona fide 
business purpose exists if you can prove a real 
business purpose for the individual's presence. 
Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-
sisting in entertaining customers, aren’t enough 
to make the expenses deductible.
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda 
isn’t Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally types 
notes, performs similar services, and accompa-
nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-
formance of these services doesn’t establish 
that her presence on the trip is necessary to the 
conduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses 
aren’t deductible.
Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A 
single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct 
the total cost of driving his car to and from Chi-
cago, but only $149 a day for his hotel room. If 
both Jerry and Linda use public transportation, 
Jerry can deduct only his fare.
Meals and Incidental Expenses
You can deduct the cost of meals in either of 
the following situations.
It is necessary for you to stop for substan-
tial sleep or rest to properly perform your 
duties while traveling away from home on 
business.
The meal is business-related entertain-
ment.
Business-related entertainment is discussed 
under Entertainment Expenses , later. The fol-
lowing discussion deals only with meals (and in-
cidental expenses) that aren’t business-related 
entertainment.
Lavish or extravagant.  You can’t deduct ex-
penses for meals that are lavish or extravagant. 
An expense isn’t considered lavish or extrava-
gant if it is reasonable based on the facts and 
circumstances. Expenses won’t be disallowed 
merely because they are more than a fixed dol-
lar amount or take place at deluxe restaurants, 
hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.
50% limit on meals. You can figure your meal 
expenses using either of the following methods.
Actual cost.
The standard meal allowance.
Both of these methods are explained below. 
But, regardless of the method you use, you 
generally can deduct only 50% of the unreim-
bursed cost of your meals.
If you are reimbursed for the cost of your 
meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on 
whether your employer's reimbursement plan 
was accountable or nonaccountable. If you 
aren’t reimbursed, the 50% limit applies 
whether the unreimbursed meal expense is for 
business travel or business entertainment. The 
50% limit is explained later under Entertainment 
Expenses. Accountable and nonaccountable 
plans are discussed later under Reimburse-
ments.
Actual cost.  You can use the actual cost of 
your meals to figure the amount of your ex-
pense before reimbursement and application of 
the 50% deduction limit. If you use this method, 
you must keep records of your actual cost.
Standard meal allowance.  Generally, you 
can use the “standard meal allowance” method 
as an alternative to the actual cost method. It al-
lows you to use a set amount for your daily 
meals and incidental expenses (M&IE), instead 
of keeping records of your actual costs. The set 
amount varies depending on where and when 
you travel. In this chapter, “standard meal allow-
ance” refers to the federal rate for M&IE, dis-
cussed later under Amount of standard meal al-
lowance. If you use the standard meal 
allowance, you still must keep records to prove 
Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you
travel away from home for business purposes.
IF you have 
expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of...
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and 
your business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or 
you are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar 
program, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury 
Water Travel and Cruise Ships (under Conventions) in Pub. 
463 for additional rules and limits.
taxi, commuter 
bus, and airport 
limousine
fares for these and other types of transportation that take you 
between:
The airport or station and your hotel; and
The hotel and the work location of your customers or 
clients, your business meeting place, or your temporary 
work location.
baggage and 
shipping
sending baggage and sample or display material between your 
regular and temporary work locations.
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from 
home on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the 
standard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls and 
parking. If you rent a car while away from home on business, 
you can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long 
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly 
perform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, 
beverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals and Incidental 
Expenses, later, for additional rules and limits.
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes 
business communication by fax machine or other 
communication devices.
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your 
business travel. These expenses might include transportation 
to or from a business meal, public stenographer's fees, 
computer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a house 
trailer.
Table 26-1.
Page 182 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 180 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

the time, place, and business purpose of your 
travel. See Recordkeeping, later.
Incidental expenses.  The term “incidental 
expenses” means fees and tips given to por-
ters, baggage carriers, hotel staff, and staff on 
ships. Incidental expenses don’t include expen-
ses for laundry, cleaning and pressing of cloth-
ing, lodging taxes, costs of telegrams or tele-
phone calls, transportation between places of 
lodging or business and places where meals 
are taken, or the mailing cost of filing travel 
vouchers and paying employer-sponsored 
charge card billings.
Incidental expenses only method.  You 
can use an optional method (instead of actual 
cost) for deducting incidental expenses only. 
The amount of the deduction is $5 a day. You 
can use this method only if you didn’t pay or in-
cur any meal expenses. You can’t use this 
method on any day that you use the standard 
meal allowance.
Federal employees should refer to the 
Federal Travel Regulations at 
GSA.gov. Find “What GSA Offers” and 
click on “Regulations: FMR, FTR, & FAR” for 
Federal Travel Regulation (FTR) for changes 
affecting claims for reimbursement.
50% limit may apply.  If you use the stand-
ard meal allowance method for meal expenses 
and you aren’t reimbursed or you are reim-
bursed under a nonaccountable plan, you can 
generally deduct only 50% of the standard meal 
allowance. If you are reimbursed under an ac-
countable plan and you are deducting amounts 
that are more than your reimbursements, you 
can deduct only 50% of the excess amount. 
The 50% limit is explained later under Entertain-
ment Expenses. Accountable and nonaccount-
able plans are discussed later under Reim-
bursements.
There is no optional standard lodging 
amount similar to the standard meal al-
lowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
pense deduction is your actual cost.
Who can use the standard meal allow-
ance. You can use the standard meal allow-
ance whether you are an employee or self-em-
ployed, and whether or not you are reimbursed 
for your traveling expenses.
Use of the standard meal allowance for 
other travel.  You can use the standard meal 
allowance to figure your meal expenses when 
you travel in connection with investment and 
other income-producing property. You can also 
use it to figure your meal expenses when you 
travel for qualifying educational purposes. You 
can’t use the standard meal allowance to figure 
the cost of your meals when you travel for medi-
cal or charitable purposes.
Amount of standard meal allowance.  The 
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE 
rate. For travel in 2017, the rate for most small 
localities in the United States is $51 a day.
Most major cities and many other localities 
in the United States are designated as 
high-cost areas, qualifying for higher standard 
meal allowances. You can find this information 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
(organized by year and location) on the Internet 
at GSA.gov/perdiem.
If you travel to more than one location in one 
day, use the rate in effect for the area where 
you stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the 
transportation industry, however, see Special 
rate for transportation workers, later.
Standard meal allowance for areas out-
side the continental United States.  The 
standard meal allowance rates above don’t ap-
ply to travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other loca-
tion outside the continental United States. The 
Department of Defense establishes per diem 
rates for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American 
Samoa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana 
Islands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island, 
and other non-foreign areas outside the conti-
nental United States. The Department of State 
establishes per diem rates for all other foreign 
areas.
You can access per diem rates for 
non-foreign areas outside the continen-
tal United States at 
www.Defensetravel.dod.mil/site/
perdiemCalc.cfm. You can access all other for-
eign per diem rates at State.gov/travel/. Click on 
“Travel Per Diem Allowances for Foreign Areas” 
under “Foreign Per Diem Rates” to obtain the 
latest foreign per diem rates.
Special rate for transportation workers.
You can use a special standard meal allowance 
if you work in the transportation industry. You 
are in the transportation industry if your work:
Directly involves moving people or goods 
by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or 
truck; and
Regularly requires you to travel away from 
home and, during any single trip, usually 
involves travel to areas eligible for different 
standard meal allowance rates.
If this applies to you, the standard daily meal al-
lowance for 2017 is $63 a day ($68 for travel 
outside the continental United States). To deter-
mine which rate you should use, see Transition 
Rules in Pub. 463.
Using the special rate for transportation 
workers eliminates the need for you to deter-
mine the standard meal allowance for every 
area where you stop for sleep or rest. If you 
choose to use the special rate for any trip, you 
must use the special rate (and not use the regu-
lar standard meal allowance rates) for all trips 
you take that year.
Travel for days you depart and return.  For 
both the day you depart for and the day you re-
turn from a business trip, you must prorate the 
standard meal allowance (figure a reduced 
amount for each day). You can do so by one of 
two methods.
Method 1: You can claim 34 of the standard 
meal allowance.
Method 2: You can prorate using any 
method that you consistently apply and 
that is in accordance with reasonable busi-
ness practice.
Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans 
as a convention planner. In March, her em-
ployer sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, 
DC, to attend a planning seminar. She left her 
home in New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday 
and arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. Af-
ter spending two nights there, she flew back to 
New Orleans on Friday and arrived back home 
at 8 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount 
to cover her expenses and included it with her 
wages.
Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2 12 days of 
the standard meal allowance for Washington, 
DC: 34 of the daily rate for Wednesday and Fri-
day (the days she departed and returned), and 
the full daily rate for Thursday.
Under Method 2, Jen could also use any 
method that she applies consistently and that is 
in accordance with reasonable business prac-
tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of the 
standard meal allowance even though a federal 
employee would have to use Method 1 and be 
limited to only 212 days.
Travel in the
United States
The following discussion applies to travel in the 
United States. For this purpose, the United 
States includes only the 50 states and the Dis-
trict of Columbia. The treatment of your travel 
expenses depends on how much of your trip 
was business related and on how much of your 
trip occurred within the United States. See Part 
of Trip Outside the United States, later.
Trip Primarily for Business
You can deduct all your travel expenses if your 
trip was entirely business related. If your trip 
was primarily for business and, while at your 
business destination, you extended your stay 
for a vacation, made a personal side trip, or had 
other personal activities, you can deduct your 
business-related travel expenses. These ex-
penses include the travel costs of getting to and 
from your business destination and any busi-
ness-related expenses at your business desti-
nation.
Example. You work in Atlanta and take a 
business trip to New Orleans in May. Your busi-
ness travel totals 900 miles round trip. On your 
way home, you stop in Mobile to visit your pa-
rents. You spend $2,165 for the 9 days you are 
away from home for travel, meals, lodging, and 
other travel expenses. If you hadn’t stopped in 
Mobile, you would’ve been gone only 6 days, 
and your total cost would have been $1,633.50. 
You can deduct $1,633.50 for your trip, includ-
ing the cost of round-trip transportation to and 
from New Orleans. The deduction for your 
meals is subject to the 50% limit on meals men-
tioned earlier.
Trip Primarily for
Personal Reasons
If your trip was primarily for personal reasons, 
such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a 
nondeductible personal expense. However, you 
can deduct any expenses you have while at 
your destination that are directly related to your 
business.
Page 183 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be a 
vacation even if the promoter advertises that it 
is primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-
dental business activities during a trip, such as 
viewing videotapes or attending lectures deal-
ing with general subjects, won’t change what is 
really a vacation into a business trip.
Part of Trip Outside
the United States
If part of your trip is outside the United States, 
use the rules described later under Travel Out-
side the United States  for that part of the trip. 
For the part of your trip that is inside the United 
States, use the rules for travel in the United 
States. Travel outside the United States doesn’t 
include travel from one point in the United 
States to another point in the United States. 
The following discussion can help you deter-
mine whether your trip was entirely within the 
United States.
Public transportation.  If you travel by public 
transportation, any place in the United States 
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a 
point in the United States. Once the vehicle 
leaves the last scheduled stop in the United 
States on its way to a point outside the United 
States, you apply the rules under Travel Out-
side the United States, later.
Example. You fly from New York to Puerto 
Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return 
to New York nonstop. The flight from New York 
to Miami is in the United States, so only the 
flight from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the 
United States. Because there are no scheduled 
stops between Puerto Rico and New York, all of 
the return trip is outside the United States.
Private car. Travel by private car in the United 
States is travel between points in the United 
States, even when you are on your way to a 
destination outside the United States.
Example. You travel by car from Denver to 
Mexico City and return. Your travel from Denver 
to the border and from the border back to Den-
ver is travel in the United States, and the rules 
in this section apply. The rules below under 
Travel Outside the United States  apply to your 
trip from the border to Mexico City and back to 
the border.
Travel Outside
the United States
If any part of your business travel is outside the 
United States, some of your deductions for the 
cost of getting to and from your destination may 
be limited. For this purpose, the United States 
includes only the 50 states and the District of 
Columbia.
How much of your travel expenses you can 
deduct depends in part upon how much of your 
trip outside the United States was business re-
lated.
See chapter 1 of Pub. 463 for information on 
luxury water travel.
Travel Entirely for Business
or Considered Entirely
for Business
You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-
ting to and from your business destination if 
your trip is entirely for business or considered 
entirely for business.
Travel entirely for business. If you travel out-
side the United States and you spend the entire 
time on business activities, you can deduct all 
of your travel expenses.
Travel considered entirely for business. 
Even if you didn’t spend your entire time on 
business activities, your trip is considered en-
tirely for business if you meet at least one of the 
following four exceptions.
Exception 1—No substantial control. 
Your trip is considered entirely for business if 
you didn’t have substantial control over arrang-
ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing 
of your trip doesn’t, by itself, mean that you 
have substantial control over arranging your 
trip.
You don’t have substantial control over your 
trip if you:
Are an employee who was reimbursed or 
paid a travel expense allowance,
Aren’t related to your employer, or
Aren’t a managing executive.
“Related to your employer” is defined later in 
this chapter under Per Diem and Car Allowan-
ces.
A “managing executive” is an employee who 
has the authority and responsibility, without be-
ing subject to the veto of another, to decide on 
the need for the business travel.
A self-employed person generally has sub-
stantial control over arranging business trips.
Exception 2—Outside United States no 
more than a week. Your trip is considered en-
tirely for business if you were outside the United 
States for a week or less, combining business 
and nonbusiness activities. One week means 7 
consecutive days. In counting the days, don’t 
count the day you leave the United States, but 
do count the day you return to the United 
States.
Exception 3—Less than 25% of time on 
personal activities.  Your trip is considered 
entirely for business if:
You were outside the United States for 
more than a week, and
You spent less than 25% of the total time 
you were outside the United States on 
nonbusiness activities.
For this purpose, count both the day your trip 
began and the day it ended.
Exception 4—Vacation not a major con-
sideration. Your trip is considered entirely for 
business if you can establish that a personal va-
cation wasn’t a major consideration, even if you 
have substantial control over arranging the trip.
Travel Primarily for Business
If you travel outside the United States primarily 
for business but spend some of your time on 
nonbusiness activities, you generally can’t de-
duct all of your travel expenses. You only can 
deduct the business portion of your cost of get-
ting to and from your destination. You must allo-
cate the costs between your business and non-
business activities to determine your deductible 
amount. These travel allocation rules are dis-
cussed in chapter 1 of Pub. 463.
You don’t have to allocate your travel 
expense deduction if you meet one of 
the four exceptions listed earlier under 
Travel considered entirely for business. In those 
cases, you can deduct the total cost of getting 
to and from your destination.
Travel Primarily for Personal 
Reasons
If you travel outside the United States primarily 
for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-
tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal 
expense. If you spend some time attending 
brief professional seminars or a continuing edu-
cation program, you can deduct your registra-
tion fees and other expenses you have that are 
directly related to your business.
Conventions
You can deduct your travel expenses when you 
attend a convention if you can show that your 
attendance benefits your trade or business. You 
can’t deduct the travel expenses for your family.
If the convention is for investment, political, 
social, or other purposes unrelated to your 
trade or business, you can’t deduct the expen-
ses.
Your appointment or election as a dele-
gate doesn’t, in itself, determine 
whether you can deduct travel expen-
ses. You can deduct your travel expenses only 
if your attendance is connected to your own 
trade or business.
Convention agenda.  The convention agenda 
or program generally shows the purpose of the 
convention. You can show your attendance at 
the convention benefits your trade or business 
by comparing the agenda with the official duties 
and responsibilities of your position. The 
agenda doesn’t have to deal specifically with 
your official duties and responsibilities; it will be 
enough if the agenda is so related to your posi-
tion that it shows your attendance was for busi-
ness purposes.
Conventions held outside the North Ameri-
can area. See chapter 1 of Pub. 463 for infor-
mation on conventions held outside the North 
American area.
Entertainment 
Expenses
You may be able to deduct business-related en-
tertainment expenses you have for entertaining 
a client, customer, or employee.
You can deduct entertainment expenses 
only if they are both ordinary and necessary 
TIP
CAUTION
!
Page 184 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 182 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

(defined earlier in the Introduction) and meet 
one of the following tests.
Directly related test.
Associated test.
Both of these tests are explained in chapter 2 of 
Pub. 463.
The amount you can deduct for enter-
tainment expenses may be limited. 
Generally, you can deduct only 50% of 
your unreimbursed entertainment expenses. 
This limit is discussed next.
50% Limit
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your 
business-related meal and entertainment ex-
penses. (If you are subject to the Department of 
Transportation's “hours of service” limits, you 
can deduct 80% of your business-related meal 
and entertainment expenses. See Individuals 
subject to “hours of service” limits, later.)
The 50% limit applies to employees or their 
employers, and to self-employed persons (in-
cluding independent contractors) or their cli-
ents, depending on whether the expenses are 
reimbursed.
Figure 26-A  summarizes the general rules 
explained in this section.
The 50% limit applies to business meals or 
entertainment expenses you have while:
Traveling away from home (whether eating 
alone or with others) on business;
Entertaining customers at your place of 
business, a restaurant, or other location; or
Attending a business convention or recep-
tion, business meeting, or business lun-
cheon at a club.
Included expenses.  Expenses subject to the 
50% limit include:
Taxes and tips relating to a business meal 
or entertainment activity,
Cover charges for admission to a night-
club,
Rent paid for a room in which you hold a 
dinner or cocktail party, and
Amounts paid for parking at a sports 
arena.
However, the cost of transportation to and from 
a business meal or a business-related enter-
tainment activity isn’t subject to the 50% limit.
Application of 50% limit.  The 50% limit on 
meal and entertainment expenses applies if the 
expense is otherwise deductible and isn’t cov-
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later in 
this section.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal 
and entertainment expenses that aren’t busi-
ness related. It applies to meal and entertain-
ment expenses incurred for the production of in-
come, including rental or royalty income. It also 
applies to the cost of meals included in deducti-
ble educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit.  You apply the 
50% limit after determining the amount that 
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You 
first have to determine the amount of meal and 
CAUTION
!
entertainment expenses that would be deducti-
ble under the other rules discussed in this chap-
ter.
Example 1.  You spend $200 for a busi-
ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount isn’t 
allowable because it is lavish and extravagant, 
the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit. 
Your deduction can’t be more than $45 (0.50 × 
$90).
Example 2.  You purchase two tickets to a 
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You 
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face 
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction 
can’t be more than $80 (0.50 × $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit. 
Figure 26-A can help you determine if the 50% 
limit applies to you.
Your meal or entertainment expense isn’t 
subject to the 50% limit if the expense meets 
one of the following exceptions.
Employee's reimbursed expenses.  If you 
are an employee, you aren’t subject to the 50% 
limit on expenses for which your employer reim-
burses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed later under Re-
imbursements.
Individuals subject to “hours of service” 
limits. You can deduct a higher percentage of 
your meal expenses while traveling away from 
your tax home if the meals take place during or 
incident to any period subject to the Department 
of Transportation's “hours of service” limits. The 
percentage is 80%.
Individuals subject to the Department of 
Transportation's “hours of service” limits include 
the following persons.
Certain air transportation workers (such as 
pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and 
control tower operators) who are under 
Federal Aviation Administration regula-
tions.
Interstate truck operators and bus drivers 
who are under Department of Transporta-
tion regulations.
Certain railroad employees (such as engi-
neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-
ers, and control operations personnel) who 
are under Federal Railroad Administration 
regulations.
Certain merchant mariners who are under 
Coast Guard regulations.
Other exceptions.  There are also exceptions 
for the self-employed, advertising expenses, 
selling meals or entertainment, and charitable 
sports events. These are discussed in Pub. 
463.
What Entertainment 
Expenses Are Deductible?
This section explains different types of enter-
tainment expenses you may be able to deduct.
Entertainment. Entertainment includes any 
activity generally considered to provide enter-
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples 
include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-
cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at 
sporting events; or on hunting, fishing, vacation, 
and similar trips.
A meal as a form of entertainment.  Enter-
tainment includes the cost of a meal you pro-
vide to a customer or client, whether the meal is 
a part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal 
expense includes the cost of food, beverages, 
taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-
tainment-related meal, you or your employee 
must be present when the food or beverages 
are provided.
You can’t claim the cost of your meal 
both as an entertainment expense and 
as a travel expense.
Separating costs.  If you have one expense 
that includes the costs of entertainment and 
other services (such as lodging or transporta-
tion), you must allocate that expense between 
the cost of entertainment and the cost of other 
services. You must have a reasonable basis for 
making this allocation. For example, you must 
allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-
tainment in its lounge on the same bill with your 
room charge.
Taking turns paying for meals or entertain-
ment. If a group of business acquaintances 
take turns picking up each others' meal or en-
tertainment checks without regard to whether 
any business purposes are served, no member 
of the group can deduct any part of the ex-
pense.
Lavish or extravagant expenses.  You can’t 
deduct expenses for entertainment that is lavish 
or extravagant. An expense isn’t considered 
lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable consid-
ering the facts and circumstances. Expenses 
won’t be disallowed just because they are more 
than a fixed dollar amount or take place at de-
luxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.
Trade association meetings. You can deduct 
entertainment expenses that are directly related 
to, and necessary for, attending business meet-
ings or conventions of certain exempt organiza-
tions if the expenses of your attendance are re-
lated to your active trade or business. These 
organizations include business leagues, cham-
bers of commerce, real estate boards, trade as-
sociations, and professional associations.
Entertainment tickets.  Generally, you can’t 
deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For 
example, you can’t deduct service fees you pay 
to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount 
over the face value of the tickets you pay to 
scalpers.
What Entertainment 
Expenses Aren’t 
Deductible?
This section explains different types of enter-
tainment expenses you generally may not be 
able to deduct.
CAUTION
!
Page 185 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 183

Club dues and membership fees.  You can’t 
deduct dues (including initiation fees) for mem-
bership in any club organized for:
Business,
Pleasure,
Recreation, or
Other social purpose.
This rule applies to any membership organiza-
tion if one of its principal purposes is either:
To conduct entertainment activities for 
members or their guests, or
To provide members or their guests with 
access to entertainment facilities.
The purposes and activities of a club, not its 
name, will determine whether or not you can 
deduct the dues. You can’t deduct dues paid to:
Country clubs,
Golf and athletic clubs,
Airline clubs,
Hotel clubs, and
Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
cumstances generally considered to be 
conducive to business discussions.
Entertainment facilities.  Generally, you can’t 
deduct any expense for the use of an entertain-
ment facility. This includes expenses for depre-
ciation and operating costs such as rent, utilit-
ies, maintenance, and protection.
An entertainment facility is any property you 
own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples 
include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, 
swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, 
airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a 
vacation resort.
Out-of-pocket expenses.  You can deduct 
out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and 
beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that 
you provided during entertainment at a facility. 
These aren’t expenses for the use of an enter-
tainment facility. However, these expenses are 
subject to the directly related and associated 
tests and to the 50% limit discussed earlier.
Additional information. For more information 
on entertainment expenses, including discus-
sions of the directly related and associated 
tests, see chapter 2 of Pub. 463.
Gift Expenses
If you give gifts in the course of your trade or 
business, you can deduct all or part of the cost. 
This section explains the limits and rules for de-
ducting the costs of gifts.
$25 limit.  You can deduct no more than $25 
for business gifts you give directly or indirectly 
to each person during your tax year. A gift to a 
company that is intended for the eventual per-
sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a 
limited class of people will be considered an in-
direct gift to that particular person or to the indi-
viduals within that class of people who receive 
the gift.
If you give a gift to a member of a custom-
er's family, the gift is generally considered to be 
an indirect gift to the customer. This rule doesn’t 
apply if you have a bona fide  independent 
business connection with that family member 
and the gift isn’t intended for the customer's 
eventual use or benefit.
If you and your spouse both give gifts, both 
of you are treated as one taxpayer. It doesn’t 
matter whether you have separate businesses, 
are separately employed, or whether each of 
you has an independent connection with the re-
cipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
payer.
Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as en-
graving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring, and 
mailing, are generally not included in determin-
ing the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25 
limit.
A cost is incidental only if it doesn’t add sub-
stantial value to the gift. For example, the cost 
of customary gift wrapping is an incidental cost. 
However, the purchase of an ornamental bas-
ket for packaging fruit isn’t an incidental cost if 
the value of the basket is substantial compared 
to the value of the fruit.
Exceptions. The following items aren’t consid-
ered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit.
1. An item that costs $4 or less and:
a. Has your name clearly and perma-
nently imprinted on the gift, and
b. Is one of a number of identical items 
you widely distribute. Examples in-
clude pens, desk sets, and plastic 
bags and cases.
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional 
material to be used on the business prem-
ises of the recipient.
Gift or entertainment.  Any item that might be 
considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
ally will be considered entertainment. However, 
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
ages you intend the customer to use at a later 
date, treat it as a gift.
If you give a customer tickets to a theater 
performance or sporting event and you don’t go 
with the customer to the performance or event, 
you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the 
tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-
ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.
Figure 26-A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report. )
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
Start Here
/H17074/H17074
Page 186 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 184 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

If you go with the customer to the event, you 
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
ment expense. You can’t choose, in this case, 
to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.
Transportation 
Expenses
This section discusses expenses you can de-
duct for business transportation when you 
aren’t traveling away from home as defined ear-
lier under Travel Expenses. These expenses in-
clude the cost of transportation by air, rail, bus, 
taxi, etc., and the cost of driving and maintain-
ing your car.
Transportation expenses include the ordi-
nary and necessary costs of all of the following.
Getting from one workplace to another in 
the course of your business or profession 
when you are traveling within the area of 
your tax home. (Tax home is defined ear-
lier under Travel Expenses.)
Visiting clients or customers.
Going to a business meeting away from 
your regular workplace.
Getting from your home to a temporary 
workplace when you have one or more 
regular places of work. These temporary 
workplaces can be either within the area of 
your tax home or outside that area.
Transportation expenses don’t include expen-
ses you have while traveling away from home 
overnight. Those expenses are travel expen-
ses, discussed earlier. However, if you use your 
car while traveling away from home overnight, 
use the rules in this section to figure your car 
expense deduction. See Car Expenses, later.
Illustration of transportation expenses.  Fig-
ure 26-B  illustrates the rules for when you can 
deduct transportation expenses when you have 
a regular or main job away from your home. You 
may want to refer to it when deciding whether 
you can deduct your transportation expenses. 
Daily transportation expenses you incur while 
traveling from home to one or more regular pla-
ces of business are generally nondeductible 
commuting expenses. However, there are 
many exceptions for deducting transportation 
expenses, like whether your work location is 
temporary (inside or outside the metropolitan 
area), traveling for the same trade or business, 
or if you have a home office.
Temporary work location.  If you have one or 
more regular work locations away from your 
home and you commute to a temporary work lo-
cation in the same trade or business, you can 
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip 
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is real-
istically expected to last (and does in fact last) 
for 1 year or less, the employment is temporary 
unless there are facts and circumstances that 
would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is real-
istically expected to last for more than 1 year or 
if there is no realistic expectation that the em-
ployment will last for 1 year or less, the employ-
ment isn’t temporary, regardless of whether it 
actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is 
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less, 
but at some later date the employment is realis-
tically expected to last more than 1 year, that 
employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that 
would indicate otherwise) until your expectation 
changes. It won’t be treated as temporary after 
the date you determine it will last more than 1 
year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the 
general area of your regular place of work and 
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from 
home. You may have deductible travel expen-
ses as discussed earlier in this chapter.
No regular place of work.  If you have no reg-
ular place of work but ordinarily work in the met-
ropolitan area where you live, you can deduct 
daily transportation costs between home and a 
temporary work site outside that metropolitan 
area.
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the 
area within the city limits and the suburbs that 
are considered part of that metropolitan area.
You can’t deduct daily transportation costs 
between your home and temporary work sites 
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
ductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work. If you work at two places 
in one day, whether or not for the same em-
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting 
from one workplace to the other. However, if for 
some personal reason you don’t go directly 
from one location to the other, you can’t deduct 
more than the amount it would have cost you to 
go directly from the first location to the second.
Transportation expenses you have in going 
between home and a part-time job on a day off 
from your main job are commuting expenses. 
You can’t deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists.  A meeting of an 
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of 
business if the meeting is held on a day on 
which you work at your regular job. You can de-
duct the expense of getting from one workplace 
to the other as just discussed under Two places 
of work, earlier.
You usually can’t deduct the expense if the 
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you 
don’t work at your regular job. In this case, your 
transportation generally is a nondeductible 
commuting expense. However, you can deduct 
your transportation expenses if the location of 
the meeting is temporary and you have one or 
more regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metro-
politan area but not at any specific location and 
the reserve meeting is held at a temporary loca-
tion outside that metropolitan area, you can de-
duct your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to at-
tend a guard or reserve meeting, you can de-
duct your travel expenses. These expenses are 
discussed earlier under Travel Expenses.
If you travel more than 100 miles away from 
home in connection with your performance of 
services as a member of the reserves, you may 
be able to deduct some of your reserve-related 
travel costs as an adjustment to income rather 
than as an itemized deduction. See Armed 
Forces reservists traveling more than 100 miles 
from home under Special Rules, later.
Commuting expenses.  You can’t deduct the 
costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, or 
of driving a car between your home and your 
main or regular place of work. These costs are 
personal commuting expenses. You can’t de-
duct commuting expenses no matter how far 
your home is from your regular place of work. 
You can’t deduct commuting expenses even if 
you work during the commuting trip.
Example. You sometimes use your cell 
phone to make business calls while commuting 
to and from work. Sometimes business asso-
ciates ride with you to and from work, and you 
have a business discussion in the car. These 
activities don’t change the trip from personal to 
business. You can’t deduct your commuting ex-
penses.
Parking fees. Fees you pay to park your car 
at your place of business are nondeductible 
commuting expenses. You can, however, de-
duct business-related parking fees when visit-
ing a customer or client.
Advertising display on car. Putting display 
material that advertises your business on your 
car doesn’t change the use of your car from 
personal use to business use. If you use this car 
for commuting or other personal uses, you still 
can’t deduct your expenses for those uses.
Car pools. You can’t deduct the cost of us-
ing your car in a nonprofit car pool. Don’t in-
clude payments you receive from the passen-
gers in your income. These payments are 
considered reimbursements of your expenses. 
However, if you operate a car pool for a profit, 
you must include payments from passengers in 
your income. You can then deduct your car ex-
penses (using the rules in this chapter).
Hauling tools or instruments.  Hauling 
tools or instruments in your car while commut-
ing to and from work doesn’t make your car ex-
penses deductible. However, you can deduct 
any additional costs you have for hauling tools 
or instruments (such as for renting a trailer you 
tow with your car).
Union members' trips from a union hall.
If you get your work assignments at a union hall 
and then go to your place of work, the costs of 
getting from the union hall to your place of work 
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-
though you need the union to get your work as-
signments, you are employed where you work, 
not where the union hall is located.
Office in the home.  If you have an office in 
your home that qualifies as a principal place of 
business, you can deduct your daily transporta-
tion costs between your home and another 
work location in the same trade or business. 
(See chapter 28 for information on determining 
if your home office qualifies as a principal place 
of business.)
Examples of deductible transportation.  The 
following examples show when you can deduct 
transportation expenses based on the location 
of your work and your home.
Page 187 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 185

Example 1. You regularly work in an office 
in the city where you live. Your employer sends 
you to a 1-week training session at a different 
office in the same city. You travel directly from 
your home to the training location and return 
each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily 
round-trip transportation between your home 
and the training location.
Example 2.  Your principal place of busi-
ness is in your home. You can deduct the cost 
of round-trip transportation between your quali-
fying home office and your client's or custom-
er's place of business.
Example 3. You have no regular office, and 
you don’t have an office in your home. In this 
case, the location of your first business contact 
inside the metropolitan area is considered your 
office. Transportation expenses between your 
home and this first contact are nondeductible 
commuting expenses. Transportation expenses 
between your last business contact and your 
home are also nondeductible commuting 
expenses. While you can’t deduct the costs of 
these first and last trips, you can deduct the 
costs of going from one client or customer to 
another. With no regular or home office, the 
costs of travel between two or more business 
contacts in a metropolitan area are deductible 
while the costs of travel between the home to 
(and from) business contacts aren’t deductible.
Car Expenses
If you use your car for business purposes, you 
may be able to deduct car expenses. You gen-
erally can use one of the following two methods 
to figure your deductible expenses.
Standard Mileage Rate.
Actual Car Expenses. 
If you use actual car expenses to figure your 
deduction for a car you lease, there are rules 
that affect the amount of your lease payments 
you can deduct. See Leasing a car under Actual 
Car Expenses, later.
In this chapter, the term “car” includes a van, 
pickup, or panel truck.
Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mail car-
rier, you may be able to treat the amount of 
qualified reimbursement you received as the 
amount of your allowable expense. Because 
the qualified reimbursement is treated as paid 
under an accountable plan, your employer 
shouldn’t include the amount of reimbursement 
in your income.
If your vehicle expenses are more than the 
amount of your reimbursement, you can deduct 
the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-
duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You must 
complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form 
1040.
A “qualified reimbursement” is the reim-
bursement you receive that meets both of the 
following conditions.
It is given as an equipment maintenance 
allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S. 
Postal Service.
It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-
lective bargaining agreement. Any later 
agreement can’t increase the qualified re-
imbursement amount by more than the 
rate of inflation.
See your employer for information on your reim-
bursement.
If you are a rural mail carrier and re-
ceived a qualified reimbursement, you 
can’t use the standard mileage rate.
Standard Mileage Rate
You may be able to use the standard mileage 
rate to figure the deductible costs of operating 
your car for business purposes. For 2017, the 
standard mileage rate for business use is 53.5 
cents (0.535) per mile.
If you use the standard mileage rate for 
a year, you can’t deduct your actual car 
expenses for that year, but see Parking 
fees and tolls, later.
You generally can use the standard mileage 
rate whether or not you are reimbursed and 
whether or not any reimbursement is more or 
less than the amount figured using the standard 
mileage rate. See Reimbursements under How 
To Report, later.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.  If you 
want to use the standard mileage rate for a car 
you own, you must choose to use it in the first 
year the car is available for use in your busi-
ness. Then, in later years, you can choose to 
use either the standard mileage rate or actual 
expenses.
If you want to use the standard mileage rate 
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire 
lease period.
You must make the choice to use the stand-
ard mileage rate by the due date (including ex-
tensions) of your return. You can’t revoke the 
choice. However, in a later year, you can switch 
from the standard mileage rate to the actual ex-
penses method. If you change to the actual ex-
penses method in a later year, but before your 
car is fully depreciated, you have to estimate 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Figure 26-B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. (Don’t use this chart if your home is 
your principal place of business. See Office in the home.)
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. If you do not go directly from your first job to your second
job, you can only deduct the transportation expenses of going directly from your first
job to your second job. You cannot deduct your transportation expenses between
your home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
Page 188 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 186 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

the remaining useful life of the car and use 
straight line depreciation.
Example. Larry is an employee who occa-
sionally uses his own car for business purpo-
ses. He purchased the car in 2015, but he didn’t 
claim any unreimbursed employee expenses on 
his 2015 tax return. Because Larry didn’t use 
the standard mileage rate the first year the car 
was available for business use, he can’t use the 
standard mileage rate in 2017 to claim unreim-
bursed employee business expenses.
For more information about depreciation in-
cluded in the standard mileage rate, see the ex-
ception in Methods of depreciation under De-
preciation Deduction in chapter 4 of Pub. 463.
Standard mileage rate not allowed.  You 
can’t use the standard mileage rate if you:
Use five or more cars at the same time (as 
in fleet operations),
Claimed a depreciation deduction for the 
car using any method other than straight 
line depreciation,
Claimed a section 179 deduction on the 
car,
Claimed the special depreciation allow-
ance on the car,
Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 for 
a car you leased, or
Are a rural mail carrier who received a 
qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail 
carriers, earlier.)
Five or more cars.  If you own or lease five 
or more cars that are used for business at the 
same time, you can’t use the standard mileage 
rate for the business use of any car. However, 
you may be able to deduct your actual expen-
ses for operating each of the cars in your busi-
ness. See Actual Car Expenses  in chapter 4 of 
Pub. 463 for information on how to figure your 
deduction.
You aren’t using five or more cars for busi-
ness at the same time if you alternate using 
(use at different times) the cars for business.
Note. You can elect to use the standard 
mileage rate if you used a car for hire (such as a 
taxi).
Parking fees and tolls.  In addition to using 
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any 
business-related parking fees and tolls. (Park-
ing fees you pay to park your car at your place 
of work are nondeductible commuting expen-
ses.)
Actual Car Expenses
If you don’t use the standard mileage rate, you 
may be able to deduct your actual car expen-
ses.
If you qualify to use both methods, you 
may want to figure your deduction both 
ways to see which gives you a larger 
deduction.
Actual car expenses include:
TIP
Depreciation
Licenses
Lease 
payments
Registration 
fees
Gas Insurance Repairs
Oil Garage rent Tires
Tolls Parking fees
Business and personal use.  If you use your 
car for both business and personal purposes, 
you must divide your expenses between busi-
ness and personal use. You can divide your ex-
penses based on the miles driven for each pur-
pose.
Example. You are a contractor and drive 
your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000 
miles for business use and 8,000 miles for per-
sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷ 
20,000) of the cost of operating your car as a 
business expense.
Interest on car loans. If you are an employee, 
you can’t deduct any interest paid on a car loan. 
This interest is treated as personal interest and 
isn’t deductible. However, if you are self-em-
ployed and use your car in that business, see 
chapter 4 of Pub. 535.
If you use a home equity loan to pur-
chase your car, you may be able to de-
duct the interest. See chapter 23  for 
more information.
Taxes paid on your car.  If you are an em-
ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes 
paid on your car if you itemize deductions. En-
ter the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A 
(Form 1040). (See chapter 22 for more informa-
tion on taxes.) If you aren’t an employee, see 
your form instructions for information on how to 
deduct personal property taxes paid on your 
car.
Sales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on your 
car are part of your car's basis and are recov-
ered through depreciation, discussed later.
Fines and collateral.  You can’t deduct fines 
you pay and collateral you forfeited for traffic vi-
olations.
Depreciation and section 179 deductions.
Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and 
improvements, is a capital expense. Because 
the benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener-
ally can’t deduct a capital expense. However, 
you can recover this cost through the section 
179 deduction and depreciation deductions. 
Depreciation allows you to recover the cost 
over more than 1 year by deducting part of it 
each year. The section 179 deduction and the 
depreciation deductions are discussed in more 
detail in chapter 4 of Pub. 463.
Generally, there are limits on these deduc-
tions. Special rules apply if you use your car 
50% or less in your work or business.
Leasing a car. If you lease a car, truck, or van 
that you use in your business, you can use the 
standard mileage rate or actual expenses to fig-
ure your deductible car expense.
Deductible payments. If you choose to use 
actual expenses, you can deduct the part of 
each lease payment that is for the use of the ve-
hicle in your business. You can’t deduct any 
TIP
part of a lease payment that is for personal use 
of the vehicle, such as commuting.
You must spread any advance payments 
over the entire lease period. You can’t deduct 
any payments you make to buy a vehicle, even 
if the payments are called lease payments.
If you lease a car, truck, or van for 30 days 
or more, you may have to reduce your lease 
payment deduction by an “inclusion amount.” 
For information on reporting lease inclusion 
amounts, see Leasing a Car in chapter 4 of 
Pub. 463.
Sale, Trade-in, or Other 
Disposition
If you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your 
car, you may have a taxable gain or a deducti-
ble loss. This is true whether you used the 
standard mileage rate or actual car expenses to 
deduct the business use of your car. Pub. 544 
has information on sales of property used in a 
trade or business, and details on how to report 
the disposition.
Recordkeeping
If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
portation expenses, you must be able to prove 
(substantiate) certain elements of the expense. 
This section discusses the records you need to 
keep to prove these expenses.
If you keep timely and accurate re-
cords, you will have support to show 
the IRS if your tax return is ever exam-
ined. You will also have proof of expenses that 
your employer may require if you are reim-
bursed under an accountable plan. These plans 
are discussed later under Reimbursements.
How To Prove Expenses
Table 26-2 is a summary of records you need to 
prove each expense discussed in this chapter. 
You must be able to prove the elements listed 
across the top portion of the table. You prove 
them by having the information and receipts 
(where needed) for the expenses listed in the 
first column.
You can’t deduct amounts that you ap-
proximate or estimate.
You should keep adequate records to prove 
your expenses or have sufficient evidence that 
will support your own statement. You must gen-
erally prepare a written record for it to be con-
sidered adequate. This is because written evi-
dence is more reliable than oral evidence alone.
However, if you contemporaneously 
prepare a record on a computer, it is 
considered an adequate record.
What Are Adequate Records?
You should keep the proof you need in an ac-
count book, diary, statement of expense, or 
similar record. You should also keep documen-
tary evidence that, together with your records, 
will support each element of an expense.
RECORDS
CAUTION
!
TIP
Page 189 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 187

Documentary evidence.  You generally must 
have documentary evidence, such as receipts, 
canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-
penses.
Exception. Documentary evidence is not 
needed if any of the following conditions apply.
You have meals or lodging expenses while 
traveling away from home for which you 
account to your employer under an ac-
countable plan and you use a per diem al-
lowance method that includes meals 
and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and 
per diem allowances are discussed later 
under Reimbursements.)
Your expense, other than lodging, is less 
than $75.
You have a transportation expense for 
which a receipt is not readily available.
Adequate evidence.  Documentary evi-
dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if 
it shows the amount, date, place, and essential 
character of the expense.
For example, a hotel receipt is enough to 
support expenses for business travel if it has all 
of the following information.
The name and location of the hotel.
The dates you stayed there.
Separate amounts for charges such as 
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an 
expense for a business meal if it has all of the 
following information.
The name and location of the restaurant.
The number of people served.
The date and amount of the expense.
If a charge is made for items other than food 
and beverages, the receipt must show that this 
is the case.
Canceled check.  A canceled check, to-
gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-
tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check 
by itself doesn’t prove a business expense with-
out other evidence to show that it was for a 
business purpose.
Duplicate information.  You don’t have to re-
cord information in your account book or other 
record that duplicates information shown on a 
receipt as long as your records and receipts 
complement each other in an orderly manner.
You don’t have to record amounts your em-
ployer pays directly for any ticket or other travel 
item. However, if you charge these items to 
your employer, through a credit card or other-
wise, you must keep a record of the amounts 
you spend.
Timely kept records.  You should record the 
elements of an expense or of a business use at 
or near the time of the expense or use and sup-
port it with sufficient documentary evidence. A 
timely kept record has more value than a state-
ment prepared later when generally there is a 
lack of accurate recall.
You don’t need to write down the elements 
of every expense on the day of the expense. If 
you maintain a log on a weekly basis which ac-
counts for use during the week, the log is 
considered a timely kept record.
If you give your employer, client, or cus-
tomer an expense account statement, it can 
also be considered a timely kept record. This is 
true if you copy it from your account book, diary, 
statement of expense, or similar record.
Proving business purpose.  You must gener-
ally provide a written statement of the business 
purpose of an expense. However, the degree of 
proof varies according to the circumstances in 
each case. If the business purpose of an ex-
pense is clear from the surrounding circumstan-
ces, then you don’t need to give a written ex-
planation.
Confidential information.  You don’t need to 
put confidential information relating to an ele-
ment of a deductible expense (such as the 
place, business purpose, or business relation-
ship) in your account book, diary, or other re-
cord. However, you do have to record the infor-
mation elsewhere at or near the time of the 
expense and have it available to fully prove that 
element of the expense. 
What if I Have Incomplete 
Records?
If you don’t have complete records to prove an 
element of an expense, then you must prove 
the element with:
Your own written or oral statement, con-
taining specific information about the ele-
ment; and
Other supporting evidence that is sufficient 
to establish the element.
Destroyed records. If you can’t produce a re-
ceipt because of reasons beyond your control, 
you can prove a deduction by reconstructing 
your records or expenses. Reasons beyond 
your control include fire, flood, and other casu-
alty.
Separating and Combining 
Expenses
This section explains when expenses must be 
kept separate and when expenses can be com-
bined.
Separating expenses.  Each separate pay-
ment is generally considered a separate ex-
pense. For example, if you entertain a customer 
or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the 
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-
ets are two separate expenses. You must re-
cord them separately in your records.
Combining items.  You can make one daily 
entry in your record for reasonable categories of 
expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone 
calls, or other incidental travel costs. Meals 
should be in a separate category. You can in-
clude tips for meal-related services with the 
costs of the meals.
Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-
ing the course of a single event are considered 
a single expense. For example, if during enter-
tainment at a cocktail lounge, you pay sepa-
rately for each serving of refreshments, the total 
expense for the refreshments is treated as a 
single expense.
Allocating total cost.  If you can prove the to-
tal cost of travel or entertainment but you can’t 
prove how much it cost for each person who 
participated in the event, you may have to allo-
cate the total cost among you and your guests 
on a pro rata basis. An allocation would be nee-
ded, for example, if you didn’t have a business 
relationship with all of your guests.
If your return is examined.  If your return is 
examined, you may have to provide additional 
information to the IRS. This information could 
be needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy 
or reliability of information contained in your re-
cords, statements, testimony, or documentary 
evidence before a deduction is allowed.
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts
You must keep records as long as they may be 
needed for the administration of any provision 
of the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this 
means you must keep your records that support 
your deduction (or an item of income) for 3 
years from the date you file the income tax re-
turn on which the deduction is claimed. A return 
filed early is considered filed on the due date. 
For a more complete explanation, see Pub. 
583, Starting a Business and Keeping Records.
Reimbursed for expenses.  Employees who 
give their records and documentation to their 
employers and are reimbursed for their expen-
ses generally don’t have to keep copies of this 
information. However, you may have to prove 
your expenses if any of the following conditions 
apply.
You claim deductions for expenses that 
are more than reimbursements.
Your expenses are reimbursed under a 
nonaccountable plan.
Your employer doesn’t use adequate ac-
counting procedures to verify expense ac-
counts.
You are related to your employer, as de-
fined later under Related to employer.
See the next section, How To Report , for a 
discussion of reimbursements, adequate ac-
counting, and nonaccountable plans.
Additional information.  Chapter 5 of Pub. 
463 has more information on recordkeeping, in-
cluding examples.
How To Report
This section explains where and how to report 
the expenses discussed in this chapter. It dis-
cusses reimbursements and how to treat them 
under accountable and nonaccountable plans. 
It also explains rules for independent contrac-
tors and clients, fee-basis officials, certain per-
forming artists, Armed Forces reservists, and 
certain disabled employees. This section ends 
with an illustration of how to report travel, enter-
tainment, gift, and car expenses on Form 
2106-EZ.
Self-employed. You must report your income 
and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 
1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on 
Schedule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. 
Page 190 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 188 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

You don’t use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. See your 
form instructions for information on how to com-
plete your tax return. You can also find informa-
tion in Pub. 535 if you are a sole proprietor, or in 
Pub. 225, Farmer's Tax Guide, if you are a 
farmer.
Both self-employed and an employee. If you 
are both self-employed and an employee, you 
must keep separate records for each business 
activity. Report your business expenses for 
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F 
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your 
business expenses for your work as an em-
ployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed 
next.
Employees. If you are an employee, you gen-
erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your 
travel, transportation, and entertainment expen-
ses. However, you can use the shorter Form 
2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of 
the following conditions.
You are an employee deducting expenses 
attributable to your job.
You weren’t reimbursed by your employer 
for your expenses (amounts included in 
box 1 of your Form W-2 aren’t considered 
reimbursements).
If you claim car expenses, you use the 
standard mileage rate.
For more information on how to report your 
expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see 
Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later.
Gifts. If you didn’t receive any reimburse-
ments (or the reimbursements were all included 
in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only business 
expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the 
rules for certain individuals (such as performing 
artists) discussed later under Special Rules 
don’t apply to you, don’t complete Form 2106 or 
2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your de-
ductible gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
Statutory employees.  If you received a 
Form W-2 and the “Statutory employee” box in 
box 13 was checked, report your income and 
expenses related to that income on Schedule C 
or C-EZ (Form 1040). Don’t complete Form 
2106 or 2106-EZ.
Statutory employees include full-time life in-
surance salespersons, certain agent or com-
mission drivers, traveling salespersons, and 
certain homeworkers.
If you are entitled to a reimbursement 
from your employer but you don’t claim 
it, you can’t claim a deduction for the 
expenses to which that unclaimed reimburse-
ment applies.
Reimbursement for personal expenses.  If 
your employer reimburses you for nondeducti-
ble personal expenses, such as for vacation 
trips, your employer must report the reimburse-
ment as wage income in box 1 of your Form 
W-2. You can’t deduct personal expenses.
Reimbursements
This section explains what to do when you re-
ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any of 
CAUTION
!
Table 26-2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have 
expenses for...
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Amount Time
Place or 
Description
Business Purpose and 
Business Relationship
Travel Cost of each separate 
expense for travel, lodging, 
and meals. Incidental 
expenses may be totaled in 
reasonable categories such 
as taxis, fees and tips, etc.
Dates you left 
and returned 
for each trip 
and number of 
days spent on 
business.
Destination or area 
of your travel 
(name of city, town, 
or other 
designation).
Purpose: Business purpose for the 
expense or the business benefit gained or 
expected to be gained.
 
Relationship: N/A
Entertainment Cost of each separate 
expense. Incidental 
expenses such as taxis, 
telephones, etc., may be 
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of 
entertainment. 
(Also see 
Business 
Purpose in this 
table.)
Name and address 
or location of place 
of entertainment. 
Type of 
entertainment if not 
otherwise 
apparent. (Also see 
Business Purpose 
in this table.)
Purpose: Business purpose for the 
expense or the business benefit gained or 
expected to be gained. For entertainment, 
the nature of the business discussion or 
activity. If the entertainment was directly 
before or after a business discussion: the 
date, place, nature, and duration of the 
business discussion, and the identities of 
the persons who took part in both the 
business discussion and the 
entertainment activity.
 
Relationship: Occupations or other 
information (such as names, titles, or 
other designations) about the recipients 
that shows their business relationship to 
you. For entertainment, you must also 
prove that you or your employee was 
present if the entertainment was a 
business meal.
Gifts Cost of the gift. Date of the gift. Description of the 
gift.
Transportation Cost of each separate 
expense. For car expenses, 
the cost of the car and any 
improvements, the date you 
started using it for business, 
the mileage for each 
business use, and the total 
miles for the year.
Date of the 
expense. For 
car expenses, 
the date of the 
use of the car.
Your business 
destination.
Purpose: Business purpose for the 
expense.
 
Relationship: N/A
Page 191 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 189

the employee business expenses discussed in 
this chapter.
If you received an advance, allowance, or 
reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-
port this amount and your expenses depends 
on whether your employer reimbursed you un-
der an accountable plan or a nonaccountable 
plan.
This section explains the two types of plans, 
how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-
ing the amount of your expenses, and the tax 
treatment of your reimbursements and expen-
ses.
No reimbursement. You aren’t reimbursed or 
given an allowance for your expenses if you are 
paid a salary or commission with the under-
standing that you will pay your own expenses. 
In this situation, you have no reimbursement or 
allowance arrangement, and you don’t have to 
read this section on reimbursements. Instead, 
see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ , 
later, for information on completing your tax re-
turn.
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance.  A 
reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-
rangement is a system or plan that an employer 
uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-
penses, advances, reimbursements, and 
amounts charged to the employer for employee 
business expenses. Arrangements include per 
diem and car allowances.
A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of 
daily reimbursement your employer gives you 
for your lodging, meal, and incidental expenses 
when you are away from home on business. 
(The term “incidental expenses” is defined ear-
lier under Meals and Incidental Expenses .) A 
car allowance is an amount your employer 
gives you for the business use of your car.
Your employer should tell you what method 
of reimbursement is used and what records you 
must provide.
Accountable Plans
To be an accountable plan, your employer's re-
imbursement or allowance arrangement must 
include all of the following rules.
1. Your expenses must have a business con-
nection—that is, you must have paid or in-
curred deductible expenses while per-
forming services as an employee of your 
employer.
2. You must adequately account to your em-
ployer for these expenses within a reason-
able period of time.
3. You must return any excess reimburse-
ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-
riod of time.
See Adequate Accounting  and Returning 
Excess Reimbursements, later.
An excess reimbursement or allowance is 
any amount you are paid that is more than the 
business-related expenses that you adequately 
accounted for to your employer.
Reasonable period of time.  The definition 
of a reasonable period of time depends on the 
facts and circumstances of your situation. How-
ever, regardless of the facts and circumstances 
of your situation, actions that take place within 
the times specified in the following list will be 
treated as taking place within a reasonable pe-
riod of time.
You receive an advance within 30 days of 
the time you have an expense.
You adequately account for your expenses 
within 60 days after they were paid or in-
curred.
You return any excess reimbursement 
within 120 days after the expense was paid 
or incurred.
You are given a periodic statement (at 
least quarterly) that asks you to either re-
turn or adequately account for outstanding 
advances and you comply within 120 days 
of the statement.
Employee meets accountable plan rules.  If 
you meet the three rules for accountable plans, 
your employer shouldn’t include any reimburse-
ments in your income in box 1 of your Form 
W-2. If your expenses equal your reimburse-
ment, you don’t complete Form 2106. You have 
no deduction since your expenses and reim-
bursement are equal.
If your employer included reimburse-
ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and 
you meet all the rules for accountable 
plans, ask your employer for a corrected Form 
W-2.
Accountable plan rules not met.  Even 
though you are reimbursed under an accounta-
ble plan, some of your expenses may not meet 
all the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet 
all three rules for accountable plans are treated 
as having been reimbursed under a nonac-
countable plan (discussed later).
Reimbursement of nondeductible expen-
ses. You may be reimbursed under your em-
ployer's accountable plan for expenses related 
to that employer's business, some of which are 
deductible as employee business expenses 
and some of which aren’t deductible. The reim-
bursements you receive for the nondeductible 
expenses don’t meet rule (1) for accountable 
plans, and they are treated as paid under a non-
accountable plan.
Example. Your employer's plan reimburses 
you for travel expenses while away from home 
on business and also for meals when you work 
late at the office, even though you aren’t away 
from home. The part of the arrangement that re-
imburses you for the nondeductible meals when 
you work late at the office is treated as paid un-
der a nonaccountable plan.
The employer makes the decision 
whether to reimburse employees under 
an accountable plan or a nonaccounta-
ble plan. If you are an employee who receives 
payments under a nonaccountable plan, you 
can’t convert these amounts to payments under 
an accountable plan by voluntarily accounting 
to your employer for the expenses and voluntar-
ily returning excess reimbursements to the em-
ployer.
TIP
TIP
Adequate Accounting
One of the rules for an accountable plan is that 
you must adequately account to your employer 
for your expenses. You adequately account by 
giving your employer a statement of expense, 
an account book, a diary, or a similar record in 
which you entered each expense at or near the 
time you had it, along with documentary evi-
dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mile-
age, and other employee business expenses. 
(See Table 26-2 for details you need to enter in 
your record and documents you need to prove 
certain expenses.) A per diem or car allowance 
satisfies the adequate accounting requirement 
under certain conditions. See Per Diem and Car 
Allowances, later.
You must account for all amounts you re-
ceived from your employer during the year as 
advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This 
includes amounts you charged to your em-
ployer by credit card or other method. You must 
give your employer the same type of records 
and supporting information that you would have 
to give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a de-
duction on your return. You must pay back the 
amount of any reimbursement or other expense 
allowance for which you don’t adequately ac-
count or that is more than the amount for which 
you accounted.
Per Diem and Car Allowances
If your employer reimburses you for your expen-
ses using a per diem or car allowance, you can 
generally use the allowance as proof of the 
amount of your expenses. A per diem or car al-
lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-
quirements for the amount of your expenses 
only if all the following conditions apply.
Your employer reasonably limits payments 
of your expenses to those that are ordinary 
and necessary in the conduct of the trade 
or business.
The allowance is similar in form to and not 
more than the federal rate (discussed 
later).
You prove the time (dates), place, and 
business purpose of your expenses to your 
employer (as explained in Table 26-2) 
within a reasonable period of time.
You aren’t related to your employer (as de-
fined next). If you are related to your em-
ployer, you must be able to prove your ex-
penses to the IRS even if you have already 
adequately accounted to your employer 
and returned any excess reimbursement.
If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-
ance practices aren’t based on reasonably ac-
curate estimates of travel costs (including rec-
ognition of cost differences in different areas for 
per diem amounts), you won’t be considered to 
have accounted to your employer. In this case, 
you must be able to prove your expenses to the 
IRS.
Related to employer.  You are related to your 
employer if:
1. Your employer is your brother or sister, 
half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-
tor, or lineal descendant;
Page 192 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 190 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

2. Your employer is a corporation in which 
you own, directly or indirectly, more than 
10% in value of the outstanding stock; or
3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-
duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, 
a trust, and your employer.
You may be considered to indirectly own stock, 
for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a 
corporation, partnership, estate, or trust that 
owns the stock or if a member of your family or 
your partner owns the stock.
The federal rate.  The federal rate can be fig-
ured using any one of the following methods.
1. For per diem amounts:
a. The regular federal per diem rate.
b. The standard meal allowance.
c. The high-low rate.
2. For car expenses:
a. The standard mileage rate.
b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
For per diem amounts, use the rate in 
effect for the area where you stop for 
sleep or rest.
Regular federal per diem rate. The regular 
federal per diem rate is the highest amount that 
the federal government will pay to its employ-
ees for lodging, meal, and incidental expenses 
(or meal and incidental expenses only) while 
they are traveling away from home in a particu-
lar area. The rates are different for different lo-
cations. Your employer should have these rates 
available. (They are also available at GSA.gov.)
The standard meal allowance.  The stand-
ard meal allowance (discussed earlier) is the 
federal rate for meals and incidental expenses 
(M&IE). For travel in 2017, the rate for most 
small localities in the United States is $51 a 
day. Most major cities and many other localities 
qualify for higher rates. You can find the rates or 
all localities within the continental United States 
on the Internet at GSA.gov.
You receive an allowance only for meals 
and incidental expenses when your employer 
does one of the following.
Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in 
kind).
Reimburses you, based on your receipts, 
for the actual cost of your lodging.
Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your 
lodging.
Doesn’t have a reasonable belief that you 
had (or will have) lodging expenses, such 
as when you stay with friends or relatives 
or sleep in the cab of your truck.
Figures the allowance on a basis similar to 
that used in figuring your compensation, 
such as number of hours worked or miles 
traveled.
High-low rate.  This is a simplified method 
of figuring the federal per diem rate for travel 
within the continental United States. It elimi-
nates the need to keep a current list of the per 
diem rate for each city.
TIP
Under the high-low method, the per diem 
amount for travel during January through Sep-
tember 2017 is $282 (including $68 for M&IE) 
for certain high-cost locations. All other areas 
have a per diem amount of $189 (including $57 
for M&IE). (You can find the areas eligible for 
the $282 per diem amount under the high-low 
method for all or part of this period at GSA.gov.)
Effective October 1, 2017 (FY2018), 
the per diem amount for travel under 
the high-low method for high-cost loca-
tions increased to $284 (including $68 for 
M&IE). The rate for all other locations increased 
to $191 (including $57 for M&IE). Employers 
who didn’t use the high-low method during the 
first 9 months of 2017 can’t begin to use it be-
fore 2018. For more information, see Notice 
2017-54, which can be found at IRS.gov/pub/
irs-drop/n-17-54.pdf, and Revenue Procedure 
2011-47 at IRS.gov/irb/2011-42_IRB/ar12.html.
Prorating the standard meal allowance 
on partial days of travel.  The standard meal 
allowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If 
you travel for part of a day, such as on the days 
you depart and return, you must prorate the 
full-day M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your 
employer uses the regular federal per diem rate 
or the high-low rate.
You can use either of the following methods 
to figure the federal M&IE for that day.
1. Method 1:
a. For the day you depart, add 34 of the 
standard meal allowance amount for 
that day.
b. For the day you return, add 34 of the 
standard meal allowance amount for 
the preceding day.
2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-
lowance using any method you consis-
tently apply in accordance with reasonable 
business practice.
The standard mileage rate.  This is a set 
rate per mile that you can use to figure your de-
ductible car expenses. For 2017, the standard 
mileage rate for the cost of operating your car is 
53.5 cents (0.535) per mile.
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR).  This is an 
allowance your employer may use to reimburse 
your car expenses. Under this method, your 
employer pays an allowance that includes a 
combination of payments covering fixed and 
variable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to 
cover your variable operating costs (such as 
gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your 
fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-
ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer choo-
ses to use this method, your employer will re-
quest the necessary records from you.
Reporting your expenses with a per diem or 
car allowance. If your reimbursement is in the 
form of an allowance received under an ac-
countable plan, the following facts affect your 
reporting.
The federal rate.
Whether the allowance or your actual ex-
penses were more than the federal rate.
The following discussions explain where to re-
port your expenses depending upon how the 
CAUTION
!
amount of your allowance compares to the fed-
eral rate.
Allowance less than or equal to the fed-
eral rate.  If your allowance is less than or 
equal to the federal rate, the allowance won’t be 
included in box 1 of your Form W-2. You don’t 
need to report the related expenses or the al-
lowance on your return if your expenses are 
equal to or less than the allowance.
However, if your actual expenses are more 
than your allowance, you can complete Form 
2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-
penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS 
the total amount of your expenses and reim-
bursements for the entire year. If you are using 
the standard meal allowance or the standard 
mileage rate, you don’t have to prove that 
amount.
Example. Nicole drives 10,000 miles in 
2017 for business. Under her employer's ac-
countable plan, she accounts for the time 
(dates), place, and business purpose of each 
trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allow-
ance of 40 cents (0.40) a mile.
Since Nicole's $5,350 expense figured un-
der the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles x 
53.5 cents (0.535)) is more than her $4,000 re-
imbursement (10,000 miles × 40 cents (0.40)), 
she itemizes her deductions to claim the excess 
expense. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show-
ing all her expenses and reimbursements) and 
enters $1,350 ($5,350 − $4,000) as an itemized 
deduction.
Allowance more than the federal rate.  If 
your allowance is more than the federal rate, 
your employer must include the allowance 
amount up to the federal rate under code L in 
box 12 of your Form W-2. This amount isn’t tax-
able. However, the excess allowance will be in-
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You must re-
port this part of your allowance as if it were 
wage income.
If your actual expenses are less than or 
equal to the federal rate, you don’t complete 
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on 
your return.
However, if your actual expenses are more 
than the federal rate, you can complete Form 
2106 and deduct those excess expenses. You 
must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements 
up to the federal rate (as shown under code L in 
box 12 of your Form W-2) and all your expen-
ses. You should be able to prove these 
amounts to the IRS.
Example. Joe lives and works in Austin. In 
May, his employer sent him to San Diego for 4 
days and paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotel 
bill. The employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for 
his meals and incidental expenses. The federal 
rate for San Diego is $64 a day.
Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses 
totaled $380. His employer's accountable plan 
won’t pay more than $75 a day for travel to San 
Diego, so Joe doesn’t give his employer the re-
cords that prove that he actually spent $380. 
However, he does account for the time, place, 
and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe's 
only business trip this year.
Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 × 4 days), 
which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256 
Page 193 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 191

($64 × 4 days). His employer includes the $44 
as income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. His em-
ployer also enters $256 under code L in box 12 
of Joe's Form W-2.
Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-
ductible expenses. He enters the total of his ac-
tual expenses for the year ($380) on Form 
2106. He also enters the reimbursements that 
weren’t included in his income ($256). His total 
deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is 
$124. After he figures the 50% limit on his unre-
imbursed meals and entertainment, he will in-
clude the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc-
tion on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Returning Excess 
Reimbursements
Under an accountable plan, you are required to 
return any excess reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowances for your business expenses 
to the person paying the reimbursement or al-
lowance. Excess reimbursement means any 
amount for which you didn’t adequately account 
within a reasonable period of time. For exam-
ple, if you received a travel advance and you 
didn’t spend all the money on business-related 
expenses or you don’t have proof of all your ex-
penses, you have an excess reimbursement.
For more information, see Adequate Ac-
counting, earlier.
Travel advance. You receive a travel advance 
if your employer provides you with an expense 
allowance before you actually have the ex-
pense, and the allowance is reasonably expec-
ted to be no more than your expense. Under an 
accountable plan, you are required to ade-
quately account to your employer for this ad-
vance and to return any excess within a reason-
able period of time.
If you don’t adequately account for or don’t 
return any excess advance within a reasonable 
period of time, the amount you don’t account for 
or return will be treated as having been paid un-
der a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
Unproven amounts. If you don’t prove that 
you actually traveled on each day for which you 
received a per diem or car allowance (proving 
the elements described in Table 26-2 ), you 
must return this unproven amount of the travel 
advance within a reasonable period of time. If 
you don’t do this, the unproven amount will be 
considered paid under a nonaccountable plan 
(discussed later).
Per diem allowance more than federal 
rate. If your employer's accountable plan pays 
you an allowance that is higher than the federal 
rate, you don’t have to return the difference be-
tween the two rates for the period you can 
prove business-related travel expenses. How-
ever, the difference will be reported as wages 
on your Form W-2. This excess amount is con-
sidered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis-
cussed later).
Example. Your employer sends you on a 
5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2017 
and gives you a $400 ($80 × 5 days) advance 
to cover your meals and incidental expenses. 
The federal per diem for meals and incidental 
expenses for Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 
3 days. Under your employer's accountable 
plan, you must return the $160 ($80 × 2 days) 
advance for the 2 days you didn’t travel. For the 
3 days you did travel, you don’t have to return 
the $63 difference between the allowance you 
received and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 
− $59) × 3 days). However, the $63 will be re-
ported on your Form W-2 as wages.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or 
expense allowance arrangement that doesn’t 
meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier 
under Accountable Plans.
In addition, even if your employer has an ac-
countable plan, the following payments will be 
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable 
plan.
Excess reimbursements you fail to return 
to your employer.
Reimbursement of nondeductible expen-
ses related to your employer's business. 
See Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses under Accountable Plans, earlier.
If you aren’t sure if the reimbursement or ex-
pense allowance arrangement is an accounta-
ble or nonaccountable plan, ask your employer.
Reporting your expenses under a nonac-
countable plan.  Your employer will combine 
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-
countable plan with your wages, salary, or other 
pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 
of your Form W-2.
You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ 
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-
tertainment. Your meal and entertainment ex-
penses will be subject to the 50% limit 
discussed earlier under Entertainment Expen-
ses. Also, your total expenses will be subject to 
the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap-
plies to most miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Example. Kim's employer gives her $1,000 
a month ($12,000 for the year) for her business 
expenses. Kim doesn’t have to provide any 
proof of her expenses to her employer, and Kim 
can keep any funds that she doesn’t spend.
Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-
countable plan. Her employer will include the 
$12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages. 
If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, 
she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and 
itemize her deductions.
Completing Forms
2106 and 2106-EZ
This section briefly describes how employees 
complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 26-3 
explains what the employer reports on Form 
W-2 and what the employee reports on Form 
2106. The instructions for the forms have more 
information on completing them.
If you are self-employed, don’t file 
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report your 
expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F 
(Form 1040). See the instructions for the form 
that you must file.
Form 2106-EZ.  You may be able to use the 
shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee 
business expenses. You can use this form if 
you meet all the following conditions.
You are an employee deducting expenses 
attributable to your job.
You weren’t reimbursed by your employer 
for your expenses (amounts included in 
box 1 of your Form W-2 aren’t considered 
reimbursements).
If you are claiming car expenses, you use 
the standard mileage rate.
Car expenses.  If you used a car to perform 
your job as an employee, you may be able to 
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-
ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then 
claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, column A. 
Car expenses using the standard mileage rate 
can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-
pleting Part II and Part I, line 1.
Transportation expenses.  Show your trans-
portation expenses that didn’t involve overnight 
travel on Form 2106, line 2, column A, or on 
Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on 
this line business expenses you have for park-
ing fees and tolls. Don’t include expenses of op-
erating your car or expenses of commuting be-
tween your home and work.
Employee business expenses other than 
meals and entertainment.  Show your other 
employee business expenses on Form 2106, 
lines 3 and 4, column A, or Form 2106-EZ, lines 
3 and 4. Don’t include expenses for meals and 
entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex-
penses such as gifts, educational expenses 
(tuition and books), office-in-the-home expen-
ses, and trade and professional publications.
If line 4 expenses are the only ones 
you are claiming, you received no reim-
bursements (or the reimbursements 
were all included in box 1 of your Form W-2), 
and the Special Rules discussed later don’t ap-
ply to you, don’t complete Form 2106 or 
2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the type 
and amount of each expense on the dotted 
lines and include the total on line 21.
Meal and entertainment expenses.  Show 
the full amount of your expenses for busi-
ness-related meals and entertainment on Form 
2106, line 5, column B. Include meals while 
away from your tax home overnight and other 
business meals and entertainment. Enter 50% 
of the line 8, column B, meal and entertainment 
expenses on line 9, column B.
If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full 
amount of your meals and entertainment on the 
line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by 
50% (0.50). Enter the result on line 5.
“Hours of service” limits.  If you are sub-
ject to the Department of Transportation's 
“hours of service” limits, use 80% instead of 
50% for meals while away from your tax home.
CAUTION
!
TIP
Page 194 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 192 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7, 
the amounts your employer (or third party) reim-
bursed you that weren’t included in box 1 of 
your Form W-2. (You can’t use Form 2106-EZ.) 
This includes any reimbursement reported un-
der code L in box 12 of Form W-2.
Allocating your reimbursement.  If you 
were reimbursed under an accountable plan 
and want to deduct excess expenses that 
weren’t reimbursed, you may have to allocate 
your reimbursement. This is necessary if your 
employer pays your reimbursement in the fol-
lowing manner.
Pays you a single amount that covers 
meals and/or entertainment, as well as 
other business expenses.
Doesn’t clearly identify how much is for de-
ductible meals and/or entertainment.
You must allocate that single payment so that 
you know how much to enter on Form 2106, 
line 7, column A and column B.
Example. Rob's employer paid him an ex-
pense allowance of $12,000 this year under an 
accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con-
sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for enter-
tainment and car expenses. Rob's employer 
didn’t clearly show how much of the $7,000 was 
for the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob 
actually spent $14,000 during the year ($5,500 
for airfare, $4,500 for entertainment, and 
$4,000 for car expenses).
Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-
tified, Rob knows that $5,000 of the payment 
goes in column A, line 7 of Form 2106. To allo-
cate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses the work-
sheet from the instructions for Form 2106. His 
completed worksheet follows.
Reimbursement Allocation 
Worksheet
(keep for your records)
1. Enter the total amount of 
reimbursements your employer gave 
you that weren’t reported to you in box 1 
of Form W-2 .............. $7,000
2. Enter the total amount of your expenses 
for the periods covered by this 
reimbursement ............. 8,500
3. Of the amount on line 2, enter your total 
expense for meals and 
entertainment ............. 4,500
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the result as 
a decimal (rounded to at least three 
places) ................. 0.529
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter the result 
here and in column B, line 7 ...... 3,703
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter the 
result here and in column A, line 7 ... $3,297
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297 
($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) in col-
umn A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in column B.
After you complete the form.  After you have 
completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, follow 
the directions on that form to deduct your ex-
penses on the appropriate line of your tax re-
turn. For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of 
Schedule A (Form 1040). However, if you are a 
government official paid on a fee basis, a per-
forming artist, an Armed Forces reservist, or a 
disabled employee with impairment-related 
work expenses, see Special Rules, later.
Limits on employee business expenses. 
Your employee business expenses may be 
subject to either of the limits described next. 
These limits are figured in the following order on 
the specified form.
1. Limit on meals and entertainment.  
Certain meal and entertainment expenses are 
subject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, 
you figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or 
line 5 of Form 2106-EZ. See 50% Limit  under 
Entertainment Expenses, earlier.
2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions. If you are an employee, deduct em-
ployee business expenses (as figured on Form 
2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule A 
(Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions, including employee business expen-
ses, are subject to a 2% limit. This limit is fig-
ured on line 26 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
3. Limit on total itemized deductions.  To-
tal itemized deductions may be limited if your 
adjusted gross income is over $313,800 if filing 
as married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); 
$287,650 if head of household; $261,500 if sin-
gle; or $156,900 if married filing separately. 
This limit is figured on the Itemized Deductions 
Worksheet found in the Instructions for Sched-
ule A (Form 1040).
Special Rules
This section discusses special rules that apply 
to Armed Forces reservists, government offi-
cials who are paid on a fee basis, performing 
artists, and disabled employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses and 
Reimbursements
IF the type of reimbursement (or 
other expense allowance) 
arrangement is under...
THEN the 
employer reports 
on Form W-2...
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106... *
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting made and excess 
returned.
No amount. No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of 
excess both required but excess not 
returned.
The excess amount 
as wages in box 1.
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to 
the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and excess 
returned.
No amount. All expenses and 
reimbursements only 
if excess expenses 
are claimed. 
Otherwise, form isn’t 
filed.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to 
the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of 
excess both required but excess not 
returned.
The excess amount 
as wages in box 1. 
The amount up to 
the federal rate is 
reported only in 
box 12—it is not 
reported in box 1.
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds 
the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the federal 
rate only and excess not returned.
The excess amount 
as wages in box 1. 
The amount up to 
the federal rate is 
reported only in 
box 12—it isn’t 
reported in box 1.
All expenses (and 
reimbursement 
reported on Form 
W-2, box 12) only if 
expenses in excess 
of the federal rate are 
claimed. Otherwise, 
form isn’t required.
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of 
excess, or both, not required by plan.
The entire amount 
as wages in box 1.
All expenses.
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount 
as wages in box 1.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, earlier.
Table 26-3. 
Page 195 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 193

Armed Forces reservists traveling more 
than 100 miles from home. If you are a mem-
ber of a reserve component of the Armed 
Forces of the United States and you travel more 
than 100 miles away from home in connection 
with your performance of services as a member 
of the reserves, you can deduct your travel ex-
penses as an adjustment to gross income 
rather than as a miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tion. The amount of expenses you can deduct 
as an adjustment to gross income is limited to 
the regular federal per diem rate (for lodging, 
meals, and incidental expenses) and the stand-
ard mileage rate (for car expenses) plus any 
parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. The federal 
rate is explained earlier under Per Diem and 
Car Allowances . Any expenses in excess of 
these amounts can be claimed only as a miscel-
laneous itemized deduction subject to the 2% 
limit.
Member of a reserve component. You are 
a member of a reserve component of the Armed 
Forces of the United States if you are in the 
Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast 
Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the 
United States, the Air National Guard of the Uni-
ted States, or the Reserve Corps of the Public 
Health Service.
How to report.  If you have reserve-related 
travel that takes you more than 100 miles from 
home, you should first complete Form 2106 or 
Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for 
reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to 
the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or 
Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040, 
line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on 
Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, 
and deduct the balance as an itemized deduc-
tion on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21.
You can’t deduct expenses of travel that 
doesn’t take you more than 100 miles from 
home as an adjustment to gross income. In-
stead, you must complete Form 2106 or 
2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an 
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 21.
Officials paid on a fee basis.  Certain fee-ba-
sis officials can claim their employee business 
expenses whether or not they itemize their 
other deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-
ployed by a state or local government and who 
are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They 
can deduct their business expenses in perform-
ing services in that job as an adjustment to 
gross income rather than as a miscellaneous 
itemized deduction.
If you are a fee-basis official, include your 
employee business expenses from Form 2106, 
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Form 1040, 
line 24.
Expenses of certain performing artists.  If 
you are a performing artist, you may qualify to 
deduct your employee business expenses as 
an adjustment to gross income rather than as a 
miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify, 
you must meet all of the following requirements.
1. During the tax year, you perform services 
in the performing arts as an employee for 
at least two employers.
2. You receive at least $200 each from any 
two of these employers.
3. Your related performing-arts business ex-
penses are more than 10% of your gross 
income from the performance of those 
services.
4. Your adjusted gross income isn’t more 
than $16,000 before deducting these busi-
ness expenses.
Special rules for married persons.  If you 
are married, you must file a joint return unless 
you lived apart from your spouse at all times 
during the tax year.
If you file a joint return, you must figure re-
quirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for both 
you and your spouse. However, requirement (4) 
applies to your and your spouse's combined ad-
justed gross income.
Where to report.  If you meet all of the 
above requirements, you should first complete 
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your 
performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 
of Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106-EZ in the 
total on line 24 of Form 1040.
If you don’t meet all of the above require-
ments, you don’t qualify to deduct your expen-
ses as an adjustment to gross income. Instead, 
you must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and 
deduct your employee business expenses as 
an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 21.
Impairment-related work expenses of disa-
bled employees. If you are an employee with 
a physical or mental disability, your impair-
ment-related work expenses aren’t subject to 
the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap-
plies to most other employee business expen-
ses. After you complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, 
enter your impairment-related work expenses 
from Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, 
line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, and 
identify the type and amount of this expense on 
the line next to line 28. Enter your employee 
business expenses that are unrelated to your 
disability from Form 2106, line 10, or Form 
2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 21.
Impairment-related work expenses are your 
allowable expenses for attendant care at your 
workplace and other expenses you have in con-
nection with your workplace that are necessary 
for you to be able to work. For more information, 
see chapter 21.
27.
Tax Benefits for 
Work-Related 
Education
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Standard mileage rate.  Generally, if you 
claim a business deduction for work-related ed-
ucation and you drive your car to and from 
school, the amount you can deduct for miles 
driven from January 1, 2017, through Decem-
ber 31, 2017, is 53.5 cents a mile. For more in-
formation, see Transportation Expenses  under 
What Expenses Can Be Deducted, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses work-related education 
expenses you may be able to deduct as busi-
ness expenses.
To claim such a deduction, you must:
Itemize your deductions on Schedule A 
(Form 1040) if you are an employee;
File Schedule C (Form 1040), Sched-
ule C-EZ (Form 1040), or Schedule F 
(Form 1040) if you are self-employed; and
Have expenses for education that meet the 
requirements discussed under Qualifying 
Work-Related Education, later.
If you are an employee and can itemize your 
deductions, you may be able to claim a deduc-
tion for the expenses you pay for your work-re-
lated education. Your deduction will be the 
amount by which your qualifying work-related 
education expenses plus other job and certain 
miscellaneous expenses (except for impair-
ment-related work expenses of disabled individ-
uals) is greater than 2% of your adjusted gross 
income. See chapter 28.
CAUTION
!
Page 196 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 194 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

If you are self-employed, you deduct your 
expenses for qualifying work-related education 
directly from your self-employment income.
Your work-related education expenses may 
also qualify you for other tax benefits, such as 
the American opportunity and lifetime learning 
credits (see chapter 35 ). You may qualify for 
these other benefits even if you do not meet the 
requirements listed earlier.
Also, your work-related education expenses 
may qualify you to claim more than one tax ben-
efit. Generally, you may claim any number of 
benefits as long as you use different expenses 
to figure each one.
When you figure your taxes, you may 
want to compare these tax benefits so 
you can choose the method(s) that 
give you the lowest tax liability.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car 
Expenses
Tax Benefits for Education
Form (and Instructions)
Employee Business Expenses
Unreimbursed Employee 
Business Expenses
Itemized 
Deductions
Qualifying 
Work-Related 
Education
You can deduct the costs of qualifying work-re-
lated education as business expenses. This is 
education that meets at least one of the follow-
ing two tests.
The education is required by your em-
ployer or the law to keep your present sal-
ary, status, or job. The required education 
must serve a bona fide business purpose 
of your employer.
The education maintains or improves skills 
needed in your present work.
However, even if the education meets one 
or both of the above tests, it is not qualifying 
work-related education if it:
Is needed to meet the minimum educa-
tional requirements of your present trade 
or business, or
Is part of a program of study that will qual-
ify you for a new trade or business.
You can deduct the costs of qualifying 
work-related education as a business expense 
even if the education could lead to a degree.
Use Figure 27-A  as a quick check to see if 
your education qualifies.
TIP
  463
  970
  2106
  2106-EZ
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
Education Required by
Employer or by Law
Once you have met the minimum educational 
requirements for your job, your employer or the 
law may require you to get more education. 
This additional education is qualifying work-re-
lated education if all three of the following re-
quirements are met.
It is required for you to keep your present 
salary, status, or job.
The requirement serves a bona fide busi-
ness purpose of your employer.
The education is not part of a program that 
will qualify you for a new trade or business.
When you get more education than your em-
ployer or the law requires, the additional educa-
tion can be qualifying work-related education 
only if it maintains or improves skills required in 
your present work. See Education To Maintain 
or Improve Skills, later.
Example. You are a teacher who has satis-
fied the minimum requirements for teaching. 
Your employer requires you to take an addi-
tional college course each year to keep your 
teaching job. If the courses will not qualify you 
for a new trade or business, they are qualifying 
work-related education even if you eventually 
receive a master's degree and an increase in 
salary because of this extra education.
Education To Maintain
or Improve Skills
If your education is not required by your em-
ployer or the law, it can be qualifying work-rela-
ted education only if it maintains or improves 
skills needed in your present work. This could 
include refresher courses, courses on current 
developments, and academic or vocational 
courses.
Example. You repair televisions, radios, 
and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep up 
with the latest changes, you take special cour-
ses in radio and stereo service. These courses 
maintain and improve skills required in your 
work.
Maintaining skills vs. qualifying for new job. 
Education to maintain or improve skills needed 
in your present work is not qualifying education 
if it will also qualify you for a new trade or busi-
ness.
Education during temporary absence.  If 
you stop working for a year or less in order to 
get education to maintain or improve skills nee-
ded in your present work and then return to the 
same general type of work, your absence is 
considered temporary. Education that you get 
during a temporary absence is qualifying 
work-related education if it maintains or im-
proves skills needed in your present work.
Example. You quit your biology research 
job to become a full-time biology graduate stu-
dent for 1 year. If you return to work in biology 
research after completing the courses, the edu-
cation is related to your present work even if 
you do not go back to work with the same em-
ployer.
Education during indefinite absence.  If 
you stop work for more than a year, your ab-
sence from your job is considered indefinite. 
Education during an indefinite absence, even if 
it maintains or improves skills needed in the 
work from which you are absent, is considered 
to qualify you for a new trade or business. 
Therefore, it is not qualifying work-related edu-
cation.
Education To Meet
Minimum Requirements
Education you need to meet the minimum edu-
cational requirements for your present trade or 
business is not qualifying work-related educa-
tion. The minimum educational requirements 
are determined by:
Laws and regulations;
Standards of your profession, trade, or 
business; and
Your employer.
Once you have met the minimum educa-
tional requirements that were in effect when you 
were hired, you do not have to meet any new 
minimum educational requirements. This 
means that if the minimum requirements 
change after you were hired, any education you 
need to meet the new requirements can be 
qualifying education.
You have not necessarily met the mini-
mum educational requirements of your 
trade or business simply because you 
are already doing the work.
Example 1. You are a full-time engineering 
student. Although you have not received your 
degree or certification, you work part-time as an 
engineer for a firm that will employ you as a 
full-time engineer after you finish college. Al-
though your college engineering courses im-
prove your skills in your present job, they are 
also needed to meet the minimum job require-
ments for a full-time engineer. The education is 
not qualifying work-related education.
Example 2. You are an accountant and you 
have met the minimum educational require-
ments of your employer. Your employer later 
changes the minimum educational require-
ments and requires you to take college courses 
to keep your job. These additional courses can 
be qualifying work-related education because 
you have already satisfied the minimum require-
ments that were in effect when you were hired.
Requirements for Teachers
States or school districts usually set the mini-
mum educational requirements for teachers. 
The requirement is the college degree or the 
minimum number of college hours usually re-
quired of a person hired for that position.
If there are no requirements, you will have 
met the minimum educational requirements 
when you become a faculty member. The deter-
mination of whether you are a faculty member 
of an educational institution must be made on 
CAUTION
!
Page 197 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 195

the basis of the particular practices of the insti-
tution. You generally will be considered a fac-
ulty member when one or more of the following 
occurs.
You have tenure.
Your years of service count toward obtain-
ing tenure.
You have a vote in faculty decisions.
Your school makes contributions for you to 
a retirement plan other than social security 
or a similar program.
Example 1.  The law in your state requires 
beginning secondary school teachers to have a 
bachelor's degree, including 10 professional 
education courses. In addition, to keep the job a 
teacher must complete a fifth year of training 
within 10 years from the date of hire. If the em-
ploying school certifies to the state Department 
of Education that qualified teachers cannot be 
found, the school can hire persons with only 3 
years of college. However, to keep their jobs, 
these teachers must get a bachelor's degree 
and the required professional education cour-
ses within 3 years.
Under these facts, the bachelor's degree, 
whether or not it includes the 10 professional 
education courses, is considered the minimum 
educational requirement for qualification as a 
teacher in your state.
If you have all the required education except 
the fifth year, you have met the minimum edu-
cational requirements. The fifth year of training 
is qualifying work-related education unless it is 
part of a program of study that will qualify you 
for a new trade or business.
Example 2.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1  except that you have a bachelor's 
degree and only six professional education 
courses. The additional four education courses 
can be qualifying work-related education. Al-
though you do not have all the required cour-
ses, you have already met the minimum educa-
tional requirements.
Example 3.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1 except that you are hired with only 3 
years of college. The courses you take that lead 
to a bachelor's degree (including those in edu-
cation) are not qualifying work-related educa-
tion. They are needed to meet the minimum ed-
ucational requirements for employment as a 
teacher.
Example 4. You have a bachelor's degree 
and you work as a temporary instructor at a uni-
versity. At the same time, you take graduate 
courses toward an advanced degree. The rules 
of the university state that you can become a 
faculty member only if you get a graduate de-
gree. Also, you can keep your job as an instruc-
tor only as long as you show satisfactory pro-
gress toward getting this degree. You have not 
met the minimum educational requirements to 
qualify you as a faculty member. The graduate 
courses are not qualifying work-related educa-
tion.
Certification in a new state.  Once you have 
met the minimum educational requirements for 
teachers for your state, you are considered to 
have met the minimum educational require-
ments in all states. This is true even if you must 
get additional education to be certified in an-
other state. Any additional education you need 
is qualifying work-related education. You have 
already met the minimum requirements for 
teaching. Teaching in another state is not a new 
trade or business.
Example. You hold a permanent teaching 
certificate in State A and are employed as a 
teacher in that state for several years. You 
move to State B and are promptly hired as a 
teacher. You are required, however, to com-
plete certain prescribed courses to get a perma-
nent teaching certificate in State B. These addi-
tional courses are qualifying work-related 
education because the teaching position in 
State B involves the same general kind of work 
for which you were qualified in State A.
Education That
Qualifies You for a
New Trade or Business
Education that is part of a program of study that 
will qualify you for a new trade or business is 
not qualifying work-related education. This is 
true even if you do not plan to enter that trade or 
business.
If you are an employee, a change of duties 
that involves the same general kind of work is 
not a new trade or business.
Example 1.  You are an accountant. Your 
employer requires you to get a law degree at 
your own expense. You register at a law school 
for the regular curriculum that leads to a law de-
gree. Even if you do not intend to become a 
lawyer, the education is not qualifying because 
the law degree will qualify you for a new trade or 
business.
Example 2.  You are a general practitioner 
of medicine. You take a 2-week course to re-
view developments in several specialized fields 
of medicine. The course does not qualify you 
for a new profession. It is qualifying work-rela-
ted education because it maintains or improves 
skills required in your present profession.
Example 3.  While working in the private 
practice of psychiatry, you enter a program to 
study and train at an accredited psychoanalytic 
institute. The program will lead to qualifying you 
to practice psychoanalysis. The psychoanalytic 
training does not qualify you for a new profes-
sion. It is qualifying work-related education be-
cause it maintains or improves skills required in 
your present profession.
Bar or CPA Review Course
Review courses to prepare for the bar examina-
tion or the certified public accountant (CPA) ex-
amination are not qualifying work-related edu-
cation. They are part of a program of study that 
can qualify you for a new profession.
Figure 27-A. Does Your Work-Related Education Qualify?
Start Here
Yes
Is the education required
by your employer or the
law to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the requirement
serve a bona fide
business requirement of
your employer?
Is the education needed to meet
the minimum educational
requirements of your present
trade or business?
Is the education part of a
program of study that will
qualify you for a new
trade or business?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
needed in your present
work?
Your education is not
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Your education is
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
Page 198 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 196 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Teaching and Related Duties
All teaching and related duties are considered 
the same general kind of work. A change in du-
ties in any of the following ways is not consid-
ered a change to a new business.
Elementary school teacher to secondary 
school teacher.
Teacher of one subject, such as biology, to 
teacher of another subject, such as art.
Classroom teacher to guidance counselor.
Classroom teacher to school administrator.
What Expenses Can Be 
Deducted?
If your education meets the requirements de-
scribed earlier under Qualifying Work-Related 
Education, you can generally deduct your edu-
cation expenses as business expenses. If you 
are not self-employed, you can deduct business 
expenses only if you itemize your deductions.
You cannot deduct expenses related to 
tax-exempt and excluded income.
Deductible expenses.  The following educa-
tion expenses can be deducted.
Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and sim-
ilar items.
Certain transportation and travel costs.
Other education expenses, such as costs 
of research and typing when writing a pa-
per as part of an educational program.
Nondeductible expenses. You cannot deduct 
personal or capital expenses. For example, you 
cannot deduct the dollar value of vacation time 
or annual leave you take to attend classes. This 
amount is a personal expense.
Unclaimed reimbursement.  If you do not 
claim reimbursement that you are entitled to re-
ceive from your employer, you cannot deduct 
the expenses that apply to that unclaimed reim-
bursement.
Example. Your employer agrees to pay 
your education expenses if you file a voucher 
showing your expenses. You do not file a 
voucher, and you do not get reimbursed. Be-
cause you did not file a voucher, you cannot de-
duct the expenses on your tax return.
Transportation Expenses
If your education qualifies, you can deduct local 
transportation costs of going directly from work 
to school. If you are regularly employed and go 
to school on a temporary basis, you can also 
deduct the costs of returning from school to 
home.
Temporary basis.  You go to school on a 
temporary basis if either of the following situa-
tions applies to you.
1. Your attendance at school is realistically 
expected to last 1 year or less and does 
indeed last for 1 year or less.
2. Initially, your attendance at school is real-
istically expected to last 1 year or less, but 
at a later date your attendance is reasona-
bly expected to last more than 1 year. 
Your attendance is temporary up to the 
date you determine it will last more than 1 
year.
Note. If you are in either situation (1) or (2), 
your attendance is not temporary if facts and 
circumstances indicate otherwise.
Attendance not on a temporary basis. 
You do not go to school on a temporary basis if 
either of the following situations applies to you.
1. Your attendance at school is realistically 
expected to last more than 1 year. It does 
not matter how long you actually attend.
2. Initially, your attendance at school is real-
istically expected to last 1 year or less, but 
at a later date your attendance is reasona-
bly expected to last more than 1 year. 
Your attendance is not temporary after the 
date you determine it will last more than 1 
year.
Deductible Transportation 
Expenses
If you are regularly employed and go directly 
from home to school on a temporary basis, you 
can deduct the round-trip costs of transporta-
tion between your home and school. This is true 
regardless of the location of the school, the dis-
tance traveled, or whether you attend school on 
nonwork days.
Transportation expenses include the actual 
costs of bus, subway, cab, or other fares, as 
well as the costs of using your car. Transporta-
tion expenses do not include amounts spent for 
travel, meals, or lodging while you are away 
from home overnight.
Example 1. You regularly work in a nearby 
town, and go directly from work to home. You 
also attend school every work night for 3 
months to take a course that improves your job 
skills. Since you are attending school on a tem-
porary basis, you can deduct your daily 
round-trip transportation expenses in going be-
tween home and school. This is true regardless 
of the distance traveled.
Example 2.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1 except that on certain nights you go 
directly from work to school and then home. 
You can deduct your transportation expenses 
from your regular work site to school and then 
home.
Example 3.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1 except that you attend the school for 
9 months on Saturdays, nonwork days. Since 
you are attending school on a temporary basis, 
you can deduct your round-trip transportation 
expenses in going between home and school.
Example 4.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1 except that you attend classes twice 
a week for 15 months. Since your attendance in 
school is not considered temporary, you cannot 
deduct your transportation expenses in going 
between home and school. If you go directly 
from work to school, you can deduct the 
one-way transportation expenses of going from 
work to school. If you go from work to home to 
school and return home, your transportation ex-
penses cannot be more than if you had gone di-
rectly from work to school.
Using your car.  If you use your car (whether 
you own or lease it) for transportation to school, 
you can deduct your actual expenses or use the 
standard mileage rate to figure the amount you 
can deduct. The standard mileage rate for miles 
driven from January 1, 2017, through Decem-
ber 31, 2017, is 53.5 cents a mile. Whichever 
method you use, you can also deduct parking 
fees and tolls. See chapter 26 for information on 
deducting your actual expenses of using a car.
Travel Expenses
You can deduct expenses for travel, meals (see 
50% limit on meals , later), and lodging if you 
travel overnight mainly to obtain qualifying 
work-related education.
Travel expenses for qualifying work-related 
education are treated the same as travel expen-
ses for other employee business purposes. For 
more information, see chapter 26.
You cannot deduct expenses for per-
sonal activities, such as sightseeing, 
visiting, or entertaining.
Mainly personal travel.  If your travel away 
from home is mainly personal, you cannot de-
duct all of your expenses for travel, meals, and 
lodging. You can deduct only your expenses for 
lodging and 50% of your expenses for meals 
during the time you attend the qualified educa-
tional activities.
Whether a trip's purpose is mainly personal 
or educational depends upon the facts and cir-
cumstances. An important factor is the compari-
son of time spent on personal activities with 
time spent on educational activities. If you 
spend more time on personal activities, the trip 
is considered mainly educational only if you can 
show a substantial nonpersonal reason for trav-
eling to a particular location.
Example 1.  John works in Newark, New 
Jersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a deduc-
tible 1-week course at the request of his em-
ployer. His main reason for going to Chicago 
was to take the course.
While there, he took a sightseeing trip, en-
tertained some friends, and took a side trip to 
Pleasantville for a day.
Since the trip was mainly for business, John 
can deduct his round-trip airfare to Chicago. He 
cannot deduct his transportation expenses of 
going to Pleasantville. He can deduct only the 
meals (subject to the 50% limit) and lodging 
connected with his educational activities.
Example 2. Sue works in Boston. She went 
to a university in Michigan to take a course for 
work. The course is qualifying work-related edu-
cation.
She took one course, which is one-fourth of 
a full course load of study. She spent the rest of 
the time on personal activities. Her reasons for 
taking the course in Michigan were all personal.
Sue's trip is mainly personal because 
three-fourths of her time is considered personal 
time. She cannot deduct the cost of her 
CAUTION
!
Page 199 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 197

round-trip train ticket to Michigan. She can de-
duct one-fourth of the meals (subject to the 50% 
limit) and lodging costs for the time she atten-
ded the university.
Example 3.  Dave works in Nashville and 
recently traveled to California to take a 2-week 
seminar. The seminar is qualifying work-related 
education.
While there, he spent an extra 8 weeks on 
personal activities. The facts, including the ex-
tra 8-week stay, show that his main purpose 
was to take a vacation.
Dave cannot deduct his round-trip airfare or 
his meals and lodging for the 8 weeks. He can 
deduct only his expenses for meals (subject to 
the 50% limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks he 
attended the seminar.
Cruises and conventions.  Certain cruises 
and conventions offer seminars or courses as 
part of their itinerary. Even if the seminars or 
courses are work related, your deduction for 
travel may be limited. This applies to:
Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other 
form of luxury water transportation; and
Conventions outside the North American 
area.
For a discussion of the limits on travel ex-
pense deductions that apply to cruises and con-
ventions, see Luxury Water Travel and Conven-
tions in chapter 1 of Pub. 463.
50% limit on meals.  You can deduct only 
50% of the cost of your meals while traveling 
away from home to obtain qualifying work-rela-
ted education. You cannot have been reim-
bursed for the meals.
Employees must use Form 2106 or Form 
2106-EZ to apply the 50% limit.
Travel as Education
You cannot deduct the cost of travel as a form 
of education even if it is directly related to your 
duties in your work or business.
Example. You are a French language 
teacher. While on sabbatical leave granted for 
travel, you traveled through France to improve 
your knowledge of the French language. You 
chose your itinerary and most of your activities 
to improve your French language skills. You 
cannot deduct your travel expenses as educa-
tion expenses. This is true even if you spent 
most of your time learning French by visiting 
French schools and families, attending movies 
or plays, and engaging in similar activities.
No Double Benefit Allowed
You cannot do either of the following.
Deduct work-related education expenses 
as business expenses if you benefit from 
these expenses under any other provision 
of the law (see chapter 35).
Deduct work-related education expenses 
paid with tax-free scholarship, grant, or 
employer-provided educational assis-
tance.
Adjustments to Qualifying 
Work-Related Education Expenses
If you pay qualifying work-related education ex-
penses with certain tax-free funds, you cannot 
claim a deduction for those amounts. You must 
reduce the qualifying expenses by the amount 
of such expenses allocable to the tax-free edu-
cational assistance.
Tax-free educational assistance in-
cludes: 
The tax-free part of scholarships and fel-
lowship grants (see chapter 1 of Pub. 970),
The tax-free part of Pell grants (see chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 970),
The tax-free part of employer-provided ed-
ucational assistance (see chapter 11 of 
Pub. 970),
Veterans' educational assistance (see 
chapter 1 of Pub. 970), and
Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments 
(other than gifts or inheritances) received 
for education assistance.
Amounts that do not reduce qualifying 
work-related education expenses.  Do not 
reduce the qualifying work-related education 
expenses by amounts paid with funds the stu-
dent receives as:
Payment for services, such as wages;
A loan;
A gift;
An inheritance; or
A withdrawal from the student's personal 
savings.
Also, do not reduce the qualifying work-rela-
ted education expenses by any scholarship or 
fellowship grant reported as income on the stu-
dent's return or any scholarship which, by its 
terms, cannot be applied to qualifying work-re-
lated education expenses.
Reimbursements
How you treat reimbursements depends on the 
arrangement you have with your employer.
There are two basic types of reimbursement 
arrangements—accountable plans and nonac-
countable plans. You can tell the type of plan 
you are reimbursed under by the way the reim-
bursement is reported on your Form W-2.
For information on how to treat reimburse-
ments under both accountable and nonac-
countable plans, see Reimbursements in chap-
ter 26.
Deducting Business 
Expenses
Self-employed persons and employees report 
business expenses differently.
The following information explains what 
forms you must use to deduct the cost of your 
qualifying work-related education as a business 
expense.
Self-Employed Persons
If you are self-employed, report the cost of your 
qualifying work-related education on the appro-
priate form used to report your business income 
and expenses (generally, Schedule C, C-EZ, or 
F). If your educational expenses include expen-
ses for a car or truck, travel, or meals, report 
those expenses the same way you report other 
business expenses for those items. See the in-
structions for the form you file for information on 
how to complete it.
Employees
If you are an employee, you can deduct the cost 
of qualifying work-related education only if you:
1. Did not receive (and were not entitled to 
receive) any reimbursement from your em-
ployer;
2. Were reimbursed under a nonaccountable 
plan (amount is included in box 1 of Form 
W-2); or
3. Received reimbursement under an ac-
countable plan, but the amount received 
was less than your expenses for which 
you claimed reimbursement.
If either (1) or (2) applies, you can deduct the 
total qualifying cost. If (3) applies, you can de-
duct only the qualifying costs that were more 
than your reimbursement. 
In order to deduct the cost of your qualifying 
work-related education as a business expense, 
include the amount with your deduction for any 
other employee business expenses on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), line 21. (Special rules for ex-
penses of certain performing artists and fee-ba-
sis officials and for impairment-related work 
expenses are explained later.)
This deduction (except for impairment-rela-
ted work expenses of disabled individuals) is 
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income 
limit that applies to most miscellaneous item-
ized deductions. See chapter 28 for more infor-
mation.
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.  To figure your deduc-
tion for employee business expenses, including 
qualifying work-related education, you generally 
must complete Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ.
Form not required.  Do not complete either 
Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ if:
Amounts included in box 1 of your Form 
W-2 are not considered reimbursements; 
and
You are not claiming travel, transportation, 
meal, or entertainment expenses.
If you meet both of these requirements, en-
ter the expenses directly on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 21. (Special rules for expenses of 
certain performing artists and fee-basis officials 
and for impairment-related work expenses are 
explained later.)
Using Form 2106-EZ.  This form is shorter 
and easier to use than Form 2106. Generally, 
you can use this form if:
All reimbursements, if any, are included in 
box 1 of your Form W-2; and
Page 200 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 198 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

You are using the standard mileage rate if 
you are claiming vehicle expenses.
If you do not meet both of these require-
ments, use Form 2106.
Performing Artists and 
Fee-Basis Officials
If you are a qualified performing artist, or a state 
(or local) government official who is paid in 
whole or in part on a fee basis, you can deduct 
the cost of your qualifying work-related educa-
tion as an adjustment to gross income rather 
than as an itemized deduction.
Include the cost of your qualifying work-rela-
ted education with any other employee busi-
ness expenses on Form 1040, line 24. You do 
not have to itemize your deductions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), and, therefore, the deduc-
tion is not subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit. You must complete 
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ to figure your deduction, 
even if you meet the requirements described 
earlier under Form not required.
For more information on qualified performing 
artists, see chapter 6 of Pub. 463.
Impairment-Related Work 
Expenses
If you are disabled and have impairment-related 
work expenses that are necessary for you to be 
able to get qualifying work-related education, 
you can deduct these expenses on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 28. They are not subject to 
the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. To de-
duct these expenses, you must complete Form 
2106 or 2106-EZ even if you meet the require-
ments described earlier under Form not re-
quired.
For more information on impairment-related 
work expenses, see chapter 6 of Pub. 463.
Recordkeeping
You must keep records as proof of any 
deduction claimed on your tax return. 
Generally, you should keep your re-
cords for 3 years from the date of filing the tax 
return and claiming the deduction.
For specific information about keeping re-
cords of business expenses, see Recordkeep-
ing in chapter 26.
RECORDS
28.
Miscellaneous 
Deductions
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Standard mileage rate.  The 2017 rate for 
business use of a vehicle is 53.5 cents a mile.
Introduction
This chapter explains which expenses you can 
claim as miscellaneous itemized deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). You must reduce the 
total of most miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tions by 2% of your adjusted gross income. This 
chapter covers the following topics.
Deductions subject to the 2% limit.
Deductions not subject to the 2% limit.
Expenses you can't deduct.
You must keep records to verify your 
deductions. You should keep receipts, 
canceled checks, substitute checks, fi-
nancial account statements, and other docu-
mentary evidence. For more information on re-
cordkeeping, see What Records Should I 
Keep? in chapter 1.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car 
Expenses
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Miscellaneous Deductions
Business Expenses
Business Use of Your Home 
(Including Use by Daycare Providers)
CAUTION
!
RECORDS
  463
  525
  529
  535
  587
How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized 
Deductions
Employee Business Expenses
Unreimbursed Employee 
Business Expenses
Deductions Subject
to the 2% Limit
You can deduct certain expenses as miscella-
neous itemized deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040). You can claim the amount of ex-
penses that is more than 2% of your adjusted 
gross income (AGI). You figure your deduction 
on Schedule A by subtracting 2% of your AGI 
from the total amount of these expenses. Your 
AGI is the amount on Form 1040, line 38.
Generally, you apply the 2% limit after you 
apply any other deduction limit. For example, 
you apply the 50% (or 80%) limit on busi-
ness-related meals and entertainment (dis-
cussed in chapter 26) before you apply the 2% 
limit.
Deductions subject to the 2% limit are dis-
cussed in the three categories in which you re-
port them on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Unreimbursed employee expenses 
(line 21).
Tax preparation fees (line 22).
Other expenses (line 23).
Unreimbursed Employee 
Expenses (Line 21)
Generally, you can deduct on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 21, unreimbursed employee 
expenses that are:
Paid or incurred during your tax year,
For carrying on your trade or business of 
being an employee, and
Ordinary and necessary.
An expense is ordinary if it's common and 
accepted in your trade, business, or profession. 
An expense is necessary if it's appropriate and 
helpful to your business. An expense doesn't 
have to be required to be considered neces-
sary.
Examples of unreimbursed employee ex-
penses are listed next. The list is followed by 
discussions of additional unreimbursed em-
ployee expenses.
Business bad debt of an employee.
Education that is work related. See chap-
ter 27.
Legal fees related to your job.
Licenses and regulatory fees.
Malpractice insurance premiums.
Medical examinations required by an em-
ployer.
Occupational taxes.
  946
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  2106
  2106-EZ
Page 201 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 199

Passport for a business trip.
Subscriptions to professional journals and 
trade magazines related to your work.
Travel, transportation, entertainment, and 
gifts related to your work. See chapter 26.
Business Liability Insurance
You can deduct insurance premiums you paid 
for protection against personal liability for 
wrongful acts on the job.
Damages for Breach of 
Employment Contract
If you break an employment contract, you can 
deduct damages you pay your former employer 
that are attributable to the pay you received 
from that employer.
Depreciation on Computers
You can claim a depreciation deduction for a 
computer that you use in your work as an em-
ployee if its use is:
For the convenience of your employer, and
Required as a condition of your employ-
ment.
For more information about the rules and ex-
ceptions to the rules affecting the allowable de-
ductions for a home computer, see Pub. 529.
Dues to Chambers of Commerce 
and Professional Societies
You may be able to deduct dues paid to profes-
sional organizations (such as bar associations 
and medical associations) and to chambers of 
commerce and similar organizations, if mem-
bership helps you carry out the duties of your 
job. Similar organizations include:
Boards of trade,
Business leagues,
Civic or public service organizations,
Real estate boards, and
Trade associations.
Lobbying and political activities.  You may 
not be able to deduct that part of your dues that 
is for certain lobbying and political activities. 
See Dues used for lobbying  under Nondeducti-
ble Expenses, later.
Educator Expenses
If you were an eligible educator in 2017, you 
can deduct up to $250 of qualified expenses 
you paid in 2017 as an adjustment to gross in-
come on Form 1040, line 23, rather than as a 
miscellaneous itemized deduction. If you file 
Form 1040A, you can deduct these expenses 
on line 16. If you and your spouse are filing 
jointly and both of you were eligible educators, 
the maximum deduction is $500. However, nei-
ther spouse can deduct more than $250 of his 
or her qualified expenses.
Home Office
If you use a part of your home regularly and ex-
clusively for business purposes, you may be 
able to deduct a part of the operating expenses 
and depreciation of your home.
You can claim this deduction for the busi-
ness use of a part of your home only if you use 
that part of your home regularly and exclusively:
As your principal place of business for any 
trade or business;
As a place to meet or deal with your pa-
tients, clients, or customers in the normal 
course of your trade or business; or
In the case of a separate structure not at-
tached to your home, in connection with 
your trade or business.
The regular and exclusive business use 
must be for the convenience of your employer 
and not just appropriate and helpful in your job. 
See Pub. 587 for more detailed information and 
a worksheet.
Job Search Expenses
You can deduct certain expenses you have in 
looking for a new job in your present occupa-
tion, even if you don't get a new job. You can't 
deduct these expenses if:
You're looking for a job in a new occupa-
tion,
There was a substantial break between the 
ending of your last job and your looking for 
a new one, or
You're looking for a job for the first time.
Employment and outplacement agency 
fees. You can deduct employment and out-
placement agency fees you pay in looking for a 
new job in your present occupation.
Employer pays you back. If, in a later year, 
your employer pays you back for employment 
agency fees, you must include the amount you 
receive in your gross income up to the amount 
of your tax benefit in the earlier year. See Re-
coveries in chapter 12.
Employer pays the employment agency. 
If your employer pays the fees directly to the 
employment agency and you aren't responsible 
for them, you don't include them in your gross 
income.
Résumé. You can deduct amounts you spend 
for preparing and mailing copies of a résumé to 
prospective employers if you're looking for a 
new job in your present occupation.
Travel and transportation expenses.  If you 
travel to an area and, while there, you look for a 
new job in your present occupation, you may be 
able to deduct travel expenses to and from the 
area. You can deduct the travel expenses if the 
trip is primarily to look for a new job. The 
amount of time you spend on personal activity 
compared to the amount of time you spend in 
looking for work is important in determining 
whether the trip is primarily personal or is pri-
marily to look for a new job.
Even if you can't deduct the travel expenses 
to and from an area, you can deduct the 
expenses of looking for a new job in your 
present occupation while in the area.
You can choose to use the standard mile-
age rate to figure your car expenses. The 2017 
rate for business use of a vehicle is 53.5 cents a 
mile. See chapter 26 for more information.
Licenses and Regulatory Fees
You can deduct the amount you pay each year 
to state or local governments for licenses and 
regulatory fees for your trade, business, or pro-
fession.
Occupational Taxes
You can deduct an occupational tax charged at 
a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of work-
ing or conducting a business in the locality. If 
you're an employee, you can claim occupa-
tional taxes only as a miscellaneous deduction 
subject to the 2% limit; you can't claim them as 
a deduction for taxes elsewhere on your return.
Repayment of Income Aid 
Payment
An “income aid payment” is one that is received 
under an employer's plan to aid employees who 
lose their jobs because of lack of work. If you 
repay a lump-sum income aid payment that you 
received and included in income in an earlier 
year, you can deduct the repayment.
Research Expenses of a College 
Professor
If you're a college professor, you can deduct re-
search expenses, including travel expenses, for 
teaching, lecturing, or writing and publishing on 
subjects that relate directly to your teaching du-
ties. You must have undertaken the research as 
a means of carrying out the duties expected of 
a professor and without expectation of profit 
apart from salary. However, you can't deduct 
the cost of travel as a form of education.
Tools Used in Your Work
Generally, you can deduct amounts you spend 
for tools used in your work if the tools wear out 
and are thrown away within 1 year from the date 
of purchase. You can depreciate the cost of 
tools that have a useful life substantially beyond 
the tax year. For more information about depre-
ciation, see Pub. 946.
Union Dues and Expenses
You can deduct dues and initiation fees you pay 
for union membership.
You can also deduct assessments for bene-
fit payments to unemployed union members. 
However, you can't deduct the part of the as-
sessments or contributions that provides funds 
for the payment of sick, accident, or death ben-
efits. Also, you can't deduct contributions to a 
pension fund, even if the union requires you to 
make the contributions.
You may not be able to deduct amounts you 
pay to the union that are related to certain lob-
bying and political activities. See Lobbying Ex-
penses under Nondeductible Expenses, later.
Page 202 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 200 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Work Clothes and Uniforms
You can deduct the cost and upkeep of work 
clothes if the following two requirements are 
met.
You must wear them as a condition of your 
employment.
The clothes aren't suitable for everyday 
wear.
It isn't enough that you wear distinctive 
clothing. The clothing must be specifi-
cally required by your employer. Nor is 
it enough that you don't, in fact, wear your work 
clothes away from work. The clothing must not 
be suitable for taking the place of your regular 
clothing.
Examples of workers who may be able to 
deduct the cost and upkeep of work clothes are: 
delivery workers, firefighters, health care work-
ers, law enforcement officers, letter carriers, 
professional athletes, and transportation work-
ers (air, rail, bus, etc.). 
Musicians and entertainers can deduct the 
cost of theatrical clothing and accessories that 
aren't suitable for everyday wear.
However, work clothing consisting of white 
cap, white shirt or white jacket, white bib over-
alls, and standard work shoes, which a painter 
is required by his union to wear on the job, isn't 
distinctive in character or in the nature of a uni-
form. Similarly, the costs of buying and main-
taining blue work clothes worn by a welder at 
the request of a foreman aren't deductible.
Protective clothing. You can deduct the cost 
of protective clothing required in your work, 
such as safety shoes or boots, safety glasses, 
hard hats, and work gloves.
Examples of workers who may be required 
to wear safety items are: carpenters, cement 
workers, chemical workers, electricians, fishing 
boat crew members, machinists, oil field work-
ers, pipe fitters, steamfitters, and truck drivers.
Military uniforms. You generally can't deduct 
the cost of your uniforms if you're on full-time 
active duty in the armed forces. However, if 
you're an armed forces reservist, you can de-
duct the unreimbursed cost of your uniform if 
military regulations restrict you from wearing it 
except while on duty as a reservist. In figuring 
the deduction, you must reduce the cost by any 
nontaxable allowance you receive for these ex-
penses.
If local military rules don't allow you to wear 
fatigue uniforms when you're off duty, you can 
deduct the amount by which the cost of buying 
and keeping up these uniforms is more than the 
uniform allowance you receive.
You can deduct the cost of your uniforms if 
you're a civilian faculty or staff member of a mili-
tary school.
Tax Preparation Fees
(Line 22)
You can usually deduct tax preparation fees in 
the year you pay them. Thus, on your 2017 re-
turn, you can deduct fees paid in 2017 for pre-
paring your 2016 return. These fees include the 
cost of tax preparation software programs and 
CAUTION
!
tax publications. They also include any fee you 
paid for electronic filing of your return.
Other Expenses (Line 23)
You can deduct certain other expenses as mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 
2% limit. On Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, 
you can deduct expenses that you pay:
1. To produce or collect income that must be 
included in your gross income;
2. To manage, conserve, or maintain prop-
erty held for producing such income; or
3. To determine, contest, pay, or claim a re-
fund of any tax.
You can deduct expenses you pay for the pur-
poses in (1) and (2) above only if they are rea-
sonably and closely related to these purposes. 
Some of these other expenses are explained in 
the following discussions.
If the expenses you pay produce income 
that is only partially taxable, see Tax-Exempt In-
come Expenses, later, under Nondeductible Ex-
penses.
Appraisal Fees
You can deduct appraisal fees if you pay them 
to figure a casualty loss or the fair market value 
of donated property.
Casualty and Theft Losses
You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a 
miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to 
the 2% limit if you used the damaged or stolen 
property in performing services as an em-
ployee. First report the loss in Section B of 
Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. You may 
also have to include the loss on Form 4797, 
Sales of Business Property, if you're otherwise 
required to file that form. To figure your deduc-
tion, add all casualty or theft losses from this 
type of property included on Form 4684, lines 
32 and 38b, or Form 4797, line 18a. For other 
casualty and theft losses, see chapter 25.
Clerical Help and Office Rent
You can deduct office expenses, such as rent 
and clerical help, that you have in connection 
with your investments and collecting the taxable 
income on them.
Credit or Debit Card Convenience 
Fees
You can deduct the convenience fee charged 
by the card processor for paying your income 
tax (including estimated tax payments) by credit 
or debit card. The fees are deductible in the 
year paid.
Depreciation on Home Computer
You can deduct depreciation on your home 
computer if you use it to produce income (for 
example, to manage your investments that pro-
duce taxable income). You generally must de-
preciate the computer using the straight line 
method over the Alternative Depreciation 
System (ADS) recovery period. But if you work 
as an employee and also use the computer in 
that work, see Pub. 946.
Excess Deductions of an Estate
If an estate's total deductions in its last tax year 
are more than its gross income for that year, the 
beneficiaries succeeding to the estate's prop-
erty can deduct the excess. Don't include de-
ductions for the estate's personal exemption 
and charitable contributions when figuring the 
estate's total deductions. The beneficiaries can 
claim the deduction only for the tax year in 
which, or with which, the estate terminates, 
whether the year of termination is a normal year 
or a short tax year. For more information, see 
Termination of Estate in Pub. 559.
Fees To Collect Interest and 
Dividends
You can deduct fees you pay to a broker, bank, 
trustee, or similar agent to collect your taxable 
bond interest or dividends on shares of stock. 
But you can't deduct a fee you pay to a broker 
to buy investment property, such as stocks or 
bonds. You must add the fee to the cost of the 
property.
You can't deduct the fee you pay to a broker 
to sell securities. You can use the fee only to 
figure gain or loss from the sale. See the In-
structions for Form 8949 for information on how 
to report the fee.
Hobby Expenses
You can generally deduct hobby expenses, but 
only up to the amount of hobby income. A 
hobby isn't a business because it isn't carried 
on to make a profit. See Activity not for profit  in 
chapter 12 under Other Income.
Indirect Deductions of
Pass-Through Entities
Pass-through entities include partnerships, S 
corporations, and mutual funds that aren't pub-
licly offered. Deductions of pass-through enti-
ties are passed through to the partners or 
shareholders. The partners or shareholders can 
deduct their share of passed-through deduc-
tions for investment expenses as miscellaneous 
itemized deductions subject to the 2% limit.
Example. You're a member of an invest-
ment club that is formed solely to invest in se-
curities. The club is treated as a partnership. 
The partnership's income is solely from taxable 
dividends, interest, and gains from sales of se-
curities. In this case, you can deduct your share 
of the partnership's operating expenses as mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 
2% limit. However, if the investment club part-
nership has investments that also produce non-
taxable income, you can't deduct your share of 
the partnership's expenses that produce the 
nontaxable income.
Page 203 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 201

Publicly offered mutual funds.  Publicly of-
fered mutual funds don't pass deductions for in-
vestment expenses through to shareholders. A 
mutual fund is “publicly offered” if it's:
Continuously offered pursuant to a public 
offering,
Regularly traded on an established securi-
ties market, or
Held by or for at least 500 persons at all 
times during the tax year.
A publicly offered mutual fund will send you 
a Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, 
or a substitute form, showing the net amount of 
dividend income (gross dividends minus invest-
ment expenses). This net figure is the amount 
you report on your return as income. You can't 
further deduct investment expenses related to 
publicly offered mutual funds because they are 
already included as part of the net income 
amount.
Information returns. You should receive infor-
mation returns from pass-through entities.
Partnerships and S corporations.  These 
entities issue Schedule K-1, which lists the 
items and amounts you must report and identi-
fies the tax return schedules and lines to use.
Nonpublicly offered mutual funds.  These 
funds will send you a Form 1099-DIV, or a sub-
stitute form, showing your share of gross in-
come and investment expenses. You can claim 
the expenses only as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction subject to the 2% limit.
Investment Fees and Expenses
You can deduct investment fees, custodial fees, 
trust administration fees, and other expenses 
you paid for managing your investments that 
produce taxable income.
Legal Expenses
You can usually deduct legal expenses that you 
incur in attempting to produce or collect taxable 
income or that you pay in connection with the 
determination, collection, or refund of any tax.
You can also deduct legal expenses that 
are:
Related to either doing or keeping your job, 
such as those you paid to defend yourself 
against criminal charges arising out of your 
trade or business;
For tax advice related to a divorce, if the 
bill specifies how much is for tax advice 
and it's determined in a reasonable way; or
To collect taxable alimony.
You can deduct expenses of resolving tax 
issues relating to profit or loss from business 
(Schedule C or C-EZ), rentals or royalties 
(Schedule E), or farm income and expenses 
(Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. You 
deduct expenses of resolving nonbusiness tax 
issues on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Tax 
Preparation Fees, earlier.
Loss on Deposits
For information on whether, and if so, how, you 
may deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualified 
financial institution, see Loss on Deposits  in 
chapter 25.
Repayments of Income
If you had to repay an amount that you included 
in income in an earlier year, you may be able to 
deduct the amount you repaid. If the amount 
you had to repay was ordinary income of 
$3,000 or less, the deduction is subject to the 
2% limit. If it was more than $3,000, see Repay-
ments Under Claim of Right  under Deductions 
Not Subject to the 2% Limit, later.
Repayments of Social Security 
Benefits
For information on how to deduct your repay-
ments of certain social security benefits, see 
Repayments More Than Gross Benefits  in 
chapter 11.
Safe Deposit Box Rent
You can deduct safe deposit box rent if you use 
the box to store taxable income-producing 
stocks, bonds, or investment-related papers 
and documents. You can't deduct the rent if you 
use the box only for jewelry, other personal 
items, or tax-exempt securities.
Service Charges on Dividend 
Reinvestment Plans
You can deduct service charges you pay as a 
subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan. 
These service charges include payments for:
Holding shares acquired through a plan,
Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends, 
and
Keeping individual records and providing 
detailed statements of accounts.
Trustee's Administrative Fees for 
IRA
Trustee's administrative fees that are billed sep-
arately and paid by you in connection with your 
individual retirement arrangement (IRA) are de-
ductible (if they are ordinary and necessary) as 
a miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to 
the 2% limit. For more information about IRAs, 
see chapter 17.
Deductions Not 
Subject to the 2% Limit
You can deduct the items listed below as mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions. They aren't 
subject to the 2% limit. Report these items on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.
List of Deductions
Each of the following items is discussed in de-
tail after the list (except where indicated).
Amortizable premium on taxable bonds.
Casualty and theft losses from income- 
producing property.
Federal estate tax on income in respect of 
a decedent.
Gambling losses up to the amount of gam-
bling winnings.
Impairment-related work expenses of per-
sons with disabilities.
Loss from other activities from Sched-
ule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 2.
Losses from Ponzi-type investment 
schemes. See Losses from Ponzi-type in-
vestment schemes under Theft in chap-
ter 25.
Repayments of more than $3,000 under a 
claim of right.
Unrecovered investment in an annuity.
Amortizable Premium on Taxable 
Bonds
In general, if the amount you pay for a bond is 
greater than its stated principal amount, the ex-
cess is bond premium. You can elect to amor-
tize the premium on taxable bonds. The amorti-
zation of the premium is generally an offset to 
interest income on the bond rather than a sepa-
rate deduction item.
Part of the premium on some bonds may be 
a miscellaneous deduction not subject to the 
2% limit. For more information, see Amortizable 
Premium on Taxable Bonds  in Pub. 529, and 
Bond Premium Amortization  in chapter 3 of 
Pub. 550, Investment Income and Expenses.
Casualty and Theft Losses of 
Income-Producing Property
You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a 
miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject 
to the 2% limit if the damaged or stolen property 
was income-producing property (property held 
for investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds, 
gold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First, 
report the loss in Form 4684, Section B. You 
may also have to include the loss on Form 
4797, if you're otherwise required to file that 
form. To figure your deduction, add all casualty 
or theft losses from this type of property inclu-
ded on Form 4684, lines 32 and 38b, or Form 
4797, line 18a. For more information on casu-
alty and theft losses, see chapter 25.
Federal Estate Tax on Income in 
Respect of a Decedent
You can deduct the federal estate tax attributa-
ble to income in respect of a decedent that you 
as a beneficiary include in your gross income. 
Income in respect of the decedent is gross in-
come that the decedent would have received 
had death not occurred and that wasn't properly 
includible in the decedent's final income tax re-
turn. See Pub. 559 for more information.
Gambling Losses up to the
Amount of Gambling Winnings
You must report the full amount of your gam-
bling winnings for the year on Form 1040, 
line 21. You deduct your gambling losses for 
the year on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28. 
Page 204 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 202 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

You can't deduct gambling losses that are more 
than your winnings.
You can't reduce your gambling win-
nings by your gambling losses and re-
port the difference. You must report the 
full amount of your winnings as income and 
claim your losses (up to the amount of win-
nings) as an itemized deduction. Therefore, 
your records should show your winnings sepa-
rately from your losses.
Diary of winnings and losses. You 
must keep an accurate diary or similar 
record of your losses and winnings.
Your diary should contain at least the following 
information.
The date and type of your specific wager 
or wagering activity.
The name and address or location of the 
gambling establishment.
The names of other persons present with 
you at the gambling establishment.
The amount(s) you won or lost.
See Pub. 529 for more information.
Impairment-Related Work 
Expenses
If you have a physical or mental disability that 
limits your being employed, or substantially lim-
its one or more of your major life activities, such 
as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking, 
breathing, learning, and working, you can de-
duct your impairment-related work expenses.
Impairment-related work expenses are ordi-
nary and necessary business expenses for at-
tendant care services at your place of work and 
for other expenses in connection with your 
place of work that are necessary for you to be 
able to work.
Self-employed. If you're self-employed, en-
ter your impairment-related work expenses on 
the appropriate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E, or 
F) used to report your business income and ex-
penses.
Loss From Other Activities From 
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), Box 2
If the amount reported in Schedule K-1 (Form 
1065-B), box 2, is a loss, report it on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), line 28. It isn't subject to the 
passive activity limitations.
Repayments Under Claim of Right
If you had to repay more than $3,000 that you 
included in your income in an earlier year be-
cause at the time you thought you had an unre-
stricted right to it, you may be able to deduct the 
amount you repaid or take a credit against your 
tax. See Repayments in chapter 12 for more in-
formation.
Unrecovered Investment in 
Annuity
A retiree who contributed to the cost of an an-
nuity can exclude from income a part of each 
CAUTION
!
RECORDS
payment received as a tax-free return of the re-
tiree's investment. If the retiree dies before the 
entire investment is recovered tax free, any un-
recovered investment can be deducted on the 
retiree's final income tax return. See chapter 10 
for more information about the tax treatment of 
pensions and annuities.
Nondeductible 
Expenses
Examples of nondeductible expenses are listed 
next. The list is followed by discussions of addi-
tional nondeductible expenses.
List of Nondeductible 
Expenses
Broker's commissions that you paid in con-
nection with your IRA or other investment 
property.
Burial or funeral expenses, including the 
cost of a cemetery lot. 
Capital expenses.
Fees and licenses, such as car licenses, 
marriage licenses, and dog tags. 
Hobby losses, but see Hobby Expenses, 
earlier.
Home repairs, insurance, and rent.
Illegal bribes and kickbacks. See Bribes 
and kickbacks in chapter 11 of Pub. 535. 
Losses from the sale of your home, furni-
ture, personal car, etc.
Personal disability insurance premiums.
Personal, living, or family expenses.
The value of wages never received or lost 
vacation time.
Adoption Expenses
You can't deduct the expenses of adopting a 
child, but you may be able to take a credit for 
those expenses. See chapter 38.
Campaign Expenses
You can't deduct campaign expenses of a can-
didate for any office, even if the candidate is 
running for reelection to the office. These in-
clude qualification and registration fees for pri-
mary elections.
Legal fees. You can't deduct legal fees paid 
to defend charges that arise from participation 
in a political campaign.
Check-Writing Fees on Personal 
Account
If you have a personal checking account, you 
can't deduct fees charged by the bank for the 
privilege of writing checks, even if the account 
pays interest.
Club Dues
Generally, you can't deduct the cost of mem-
bership in any club organized for business, 
pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose. 
This includes business, social, athletic, lun-
cheon, sporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country 
clubs.
You can't deduct dues paid to an organiza-
tion if one of its main purposes is to:
Conduct entertainment activities for mem-
bers or their guests, or
Provide members or their guests with ac-
cess to entertainment facilities.
Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon 
clubs aren't deductible.
Commuting Expenses
You can't deduct commuting expenses (the 
cost of transportation between your home and 
your main or regular place of work). If you haul 
tools, instruments, or other items in your car to 
and from work, you can deduct only the addi-
tional cost of hauling the items such as the rent 
on a trailer to carry the items.
Fines or Penalties
You can't deduct fines or penalties you pay to a 
governmental unit for violating a law. This in-
cludes an amount paid in settlement of your ac-
tual or potential liability for a fine or penalty (civil 
or criminal). Fines or penalties include parking 
tickets, tax penalties, and penalties deducted 
from teachers' paychecks after an illegal strike.
Health Spa Expenses
You can't deduct health spa expenses, even if 
there is a job requirement to stay in excellent 
physical condition, such as might be required of 
a law enforcement officer.
Home Security System
You can't deduct the cost of a home security 
system as a miscellaneous deduction. How-
ever, you may be able to claim a deduction for a 
home security system as a business expense if 
you have a home office. See Home Office  un-
der Unreimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier, 
and Security system under Figuring the Deduc-
tion in Pub. 587.
Investment-Related Seminars
You can't deduct any expenses for attending a 
convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in-
vestment purposes.
Life Insurance Premiums
You can't deduct premiums you pay on your life 
insurance. You may be able to deduct, as ali-
mony, premiums you pay on life insurance poli-
cies assigned to your former spouse. See chap-
ter 18 for information on alimony.
Lobbying Expenses
You generally can't deduct amounts paid or in-
curred for lobbying expenses. These include 
expenses to:
Influence legislation;
Page 205 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 203

Participate or intervene in any political 
campaign for, or against, any candidate for 
public office;
Attempt to influence the general public, or 
segments of the public, about elections, 
legislative matters, or referendums; or
Communicate directly with covered execu-
tive branch officials in any attempt to influ-
ence the official actions or positions of 
those officials.
Lobbying expenses also include any amounts 
paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan-
ning, or coordination of any of these activities.
Dues used for lobbying.  If a tax-exempt 
organization notifies you that part of the dues or 
other amounts you pay to the organization are 
used to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses, 
you can't deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex-
penses in Pub. 529 for information on excep-
tions.
Lost or Mislaid Cash or Property
You can't deduct a loss based on the mere dis-
appearance of money or property. However, an 
accidental loss or disappearance of property 
can qualify as a casualty if it results from an 
identifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or 
unusual. See chapter 25.
Example. A car door is accidentally slam-
med on your hand, breaking the setting of your 
diamond ring. The diamond falls from the ring 
and is never found. The loss of the diamond is a 
casualty.
Lunches With Co-workers
You can't deduct the expenses of lunches with 
co-workers, except while traveling away from 
home on business. See chapter 26 for informa-
tion on deductible expenses while traveling 
away from home.
Meals While Working Late
You can't deduct the cost of meals while work-
ing late. However, you may be able to claim a 
deduction if the cost of meals is a deductible 
entertainment expense, or if you're traveling 
away from home. See chapter 26  for informa-
tion on deductible entertainment expenses and 
expenses while traveling away from home.
Personal Legal Expenses
You can't deduct personal legal expenses such 
as those for the following.
Custody of children.
Breach of promise to marry suit.
Civil or criminal charges resulting from a 
personal relationship.
Damages for personal injury, except for 
certain unlawful discrimination and whistle-
blower claims.
Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-
tion of a title).
Preparation of a will.
Property claims or property settlement in a 
divorce.
You can't deduct these expenses even if a 
result of the legal proceeding is the loss of in-
come-producing property.
Political Contributions
You can't deduct contributions made to a politi-
cal candidate, a campaign committee, or a 
newsletter fund. Advertisements in convention 
bulletins and admissions to dinners or pro-
grams that benefit a political party or political 
candidate aren't deductible.
Professional Accreditation Fees
You can't deduct professional accreditation 
fees such as the following.
Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini-
tial right to practice accounting.
Bar exam fees and incidental expenses in 
securing initial admission to the bar.
Medical and dental license fees paid to get 
initial licensing.
Professional Reputation
You can't deduct expenses of radio and TV ap-
pearances to increase your personal prestige or 
establish your professional reputation.
Relief Fund Contributions
You can't deduct contributions paid to a private 
plan that pays benefits to any covered em-
ployee who can't work because of any injury or 
illness not related to the job.
Residential Telephone Service
You can't deduct any charge (including taxes) 
for basic local telephone service for the first tel-
ephone line to your residence, even if it's used 
in a trade or business.
Stockholders' Meetings
You can't deduct transportation and other ex-
penses you pay to attend stockholders' meet-
ings of companies in which you own stock but 
have no other interest. You can't deduct these 
expenses even if you're attending the meeting 
to get information that would be useful in mak-
ing further investments.
Tax-Exempt Income Expenses
You can't deduct expenses to produce tax-ex-
empt income. You can't deduct interest on a 
debt incurred or continued to buy or carry
tax-exempt securities.
If you have expenses to produce both taxa-
ble and tax-exempt income, but you can't iden-
tify the expenses that produce each type of in-
come, you must divide the expenses based on 
the amount of each type of income to determine 
the amount that you can deduct.
Example. During the year, you received 
taxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt inter-
est of $1,200. In earning this income, you had 
total expenses of $500 during the year. You 
can't identify the amount of each expense item 
that is for each income item. Therefore, 80% 
($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the taxa-
ble interest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is for the 
tax-exempt interest. You can deduct, subject to 
the 2% limit, expenses of $400 (80% of $500).
Travel Expenses for Another 
Individual
You generally can't deduct travel expenses you 
pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, or other 
individual who accompanies you (or your em-
ployee) on business or personal travel unless 
the spouse, dependent, or other individual is an 
employee of the taxpayer, the travel is for a 
bona fide business purpose, and such expen-
ses would otherwise be deductible by the 
spouse, dependent, or other individual. See 
chapter 26  for more information on deductible 
travel expenses.
Voluntary Unemployment
Benefit Fund Contributions
You can't deduct voluntary unemployment ben-
efit fund contributions you make to a union fund 
or a private fund. However, you can deduct 
contributions as taxes if state law requires you 
to make them to a state unemployment fund 
that covers you for the loss of wages from un-
employment caused by business conditions.
Wristwatches
You can't deduct the cost of a wristwatch, even 
if there is a job requirement that you know the 
correct time to properly perform your duties.
29.
Limit on 
Itemized 
Deductions
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as California 
wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
CAUTION
!
Page 206 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 204 Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions

To learn whether this legislation was enacted, 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Disaster tax relief.  Disaster relief was enac-
ted for those impacted by Hurricane Harvey, 
Irma, or Maria, including a provision that may al-
low you to treat certain gifts made by cash or 
check as qualified contributions not subject to 
the limit on itemized deductions. See Pub. 976, 
Disaster Relief, for more information.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the overall limit on item-
ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). 
The following topics are included.
Who is subject to the limit.
Which itemized deductions are limited.
How to figure the limit.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Forms (and Instructions)
Itemized 
Deductions
Are You Subject to the 
Limit?
You are subject to the limit on certain itemized 
deductions if your adjusted gross income (AGI) 
is more than $313,800 if married filing jointly or 
qualifying widow(er), $287,650 if head of 
household, $261,500 if single, or $156,900 if 
married filing separately. Your AGI is the 
amount on Form 1040, line 38.
Which Itemized 
Deductions Are 
Limited?
The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-
tions are subject to the overall limit on itemized 
deductions.
Taxes paid—line 9.
Interest paid*—lines 10, 11, and 12.
Gifts to charity (other than qualified contri-
butions)—line 19.
Job expenses and certain miscellaneous 
deductions—line 27.
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
Other miscellaneous deductions—line 28, 
excluding gambling and casualty or theft 
losses.
*If Congress extends the deduction for mort-
gage insurance premiums, any amount inclu-
ded on line 13 will be included in this list of 
amounts subject to the overall limit on itemized 
deductions.
Which Itemized 
Deductions Aren't 
Limited?
The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-
tions aren't subject to the overall limit on item-
ized deductions. However, they are still subject 
to other applicable limits.
Medical and dental expenses—line 4.
Investment interest expense—line 14.
Gifts by cash or check that you elect to 
treat as qualified contributions—included 
on line 16.
Casualty and theft losses of personal use 
property—line 20.
Casualty and theft losses of income-pro-
ducing property—included on line 28.
Gambling losses—included on line 28.
How Do You Figure the 
Limit?
If you are subject to the limit, the total of all your 
itemized deductions is reduced by the smaller 
of:
80% of your itemized deductions that are 
subject to the overall limit (see Which Item-
ized Deductions Are Limited, earlier); or
3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-
ceeds $313,800 if married filing jointly or 
qualifying widow(er), $287,650 if head of 
household, $261,500 if single, or $156,900 
if married filing separately.
Before you figure the overall limit on item-
ized deductions, you first must complete 
Schedule A (Form 1040), lines 1 through 28, in-
cluding any related forms (such as Form 2106, 
Form 4684, etc.).
The overall limit on itemized deductions is 
figured after you have applied any other limit on 
the allowance of any itemized deduction. These 
other limits include charitable contribution limits 
(chapter 24 ), the limit on certain meal and en-
tertainment expenses ( chapter 26 ), and the 
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit on certain 
miscellaneous deductions (chapter 28).
Itemized Deductions Worksheet.  After you 
have completed Schedule A (Form 1040) 
through line 28, you can use the Itemized De-
ductions Worksheet in the Instructions for 
Schedule A (Form 1040) to figure your limit. En-
ter the result on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 29. Keep the worksheet for your records.
You should compare the amount of 
your standard deduction to the amount 
of your itemized deductions after ap-
plying the limit. Use the greater amount when 
completing Form 1040, line 40. See chapter 20 
for information on how to figure your standard 
deduction.
Example
For tax year 2017, Bill and Terry Willow are fil-
ing a joint return on Form 1040. Their adjusted 
gross income on line 38 is $325,500. Their 
Schedule A itemized deductions are as follows:
Taxes paid—line 9 ......... $ 17,900
Interest paid*—lines 10, 11, and 
12 .................... 45,000
Investment interest expense—
line 14 ................. 41,000
Gifts to charity—line 19 ....... 21,000
Job expenses—line 27 .......  17,240
Total ................. $142,140
*If Congress extends the deduction for mortgage 
insurance premiums, any amount on line 13 will 
be included in the total amount of interest paid.
The Willows’ investment interest expense 
deduction ($41,000 from Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 14) isn't subject to the overall limit on 
itemized deductions.
To figure their overall limit, the Willows use 
the Itemized Deductions Worksheet in the 
Schedule A (Form 1040) instructions. They fig-
ure that the smaller of 80% of their itemized de-
ductions that are subject to the overall limit and 
3% of the amount by which their adjusted gross 
income exceeds $313,800 is $351. Of their 
$142,140 total itemized deductions, the Willows 
can deduct only $141,789 ($142,140 - $351). 
They enter $141,789 on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 29.
TIP
Page 207 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 205

Part Six.
Figuring Your 
Taxes and 
Credits
The nine chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how to 
figure the tax of certain children who have more than $2,100 of unearned 
income. They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions, are 
subtracted directly from your tax and reduce your tax dollar for dollar. 
Chapter 36 discusses the earned income credit. Chapter 38 discusses a 
wide variety of other credits, such as the adoption credit.
30.
How To Figure 
Your Tax
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
After you have figured your income and deduc-
tions as explained in Parts One  through Five, 
your next step is to figure your tax. This chapter 
discusses:
The general steps you take to figure your 
tax,
An additional tax you may have to pay 
called the alternative minimum tax (AMT), 
and
The conditions you must meet if you want 
the IRS to figure your tax.
Figuring Your Tax
Your income tax is based on your taxable in-
come. After you figure your income tax and 
AMT, if any, subtract your tax credits and add 
any other taxes you may owe. The result is your 
total tax. Compare your total tax with your total 
payments to determine whether you are entitled 
to a refund or must make a payment.
CAUTION
!
This section provides a general outline of 
how to figure your tax. You can find 
step-by-step directions in the Instructions for 
Forms 1040EZ, 1040A, and 1040. If you are un-
sure of which tax form you should file, see 
Which Form Should I Use? in chapter 1.
Tax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax Table 
or the Tax Computation Worksheet  to figure 
their income tax. However, there are special 
methods if your income includes any of the fol-
lowing items.
A net capital gain. (See chapter 16.)
Qualified dividends taxed at the same 
rates as a net capital gain. (See chapters 8 
and 16.)
Lump-sum distributions. (See chapter 10.)
Farming or fishing income. (See Sched-
ule J (Form 1040), Income Averaging for 
Farmers and Fishermen.)
Tax for certain children who have un-
earned income. (See chapter 31.)
Parent's election to report child's interest 
and dividends. (See chapter 31.)
Foreign earned income exclusion or the 
housing exclusion. (See Form 2555, For-
eign Earned Income, or Form 2555-EZ, 
Foreign Earned Income Exclusion, and the 
Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet in 
the Form 1040 instructions.)
Credits. After you figure your income tax and 
any AMT (discussed later), determine if you are 
eligible for any tax credits. Eligibility information 
for these tax credits is discussed in chapters 32 
through 38 and your form instructions. The fol-
lowing table lists some of the credits you may 
be able to subtract from your tax and shows 
where you can find more information on each 
credit.
CREDITS
For information on:
See
chapter:
Adoption ................. 38
Alternative motor vehicle ......... 38
Child and dependent care ........ 32
Child tax ................. 34
Credit to holders of tax credit 
bonds ................. 38
Education ................ 35
Elderly or disabled ............ 33
Foreign tax ............... 38
Mortgage interest ............ 38
Plug-in electric drive motor credit .... 38
Premium tax credit ............ 37
Prior year minimum tax ......... 38
Residential energy ............ 38
Retirement savings contributions .... 38
Some credits (such as the earned income 
credit) aren’t listed because they are treated as 
payments. See Payments, later.
There are other credits that aren’t discussed 
in this publication. These include the following 
credits.
General business credit, which is made up 
of several separate business-related cred-
its. These generally are reported on Form 
3800, General Business Credit, and are 
discussed in chapter 4 of Pub. 334, Tax 
Guide for Small Business.
Renewable electricity, refined coal, and In-
dian coal production credit for electricity 
and refined coal produced at facilities 
placed in service after October 22, 2004 
(after October 2, 2008, for electricity pro-
duced from marine and hydrokinetic re-
newables). See Form 8835, Part II.
At the time this publication went to 
print, the Indian coal production credit 
had expired. You can't claim this credit 
for Indian coal produced and sold after 2016. 
To find out if legislation extended the credit so 
you can claim it on your 2017 return, go to Re-
cent Developments at IRS.gov/Pub17.
Work opportunity credit. See Form 5884.
Credit for employer social security and 
Medicare taxes paid on certain employee 
tips. See Form 8846.
Other taxes. After you subtract your tax cred-
its, determine whether there are any other taxes 
you must pay. This chapter doesn’t explain 
these other taxes. You can find that information 
in other chapters of this publication and your 
form instructions. See the following table for 
other taxes you may need to add to your in-
come tax.
CAUTION
!
Page 208 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 206 Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax

OTHER TAXES
For information on:
See
chapter:
Additional taxes on qualified retirement plans 
and IRAs ................. 10, 17
Household employment taxes ........ 32
Recapture of an education credit ....... 35
Social security and Medicare tax on 
wages .................. 5
Social security and Medicare tax on tips ... 6
Uncollected social security and Medicare tax 
on tips ................... 6
You also may have to pay AMT or make a 
shared responsibility payment  (both are dis-
cussed later in this chapter).
There are other taxes that aren’t discussed 
in this publication. These include the following 
items.
1. Self-employment tax. You must figure this 
tax if either of the following applies to you 
(or your spouse if you file a joint return).
a. Your net earnings from self-employ-
ment from other than church em-
ployee income were $400 or more. 
The term “net earnings from self-em-
ployment” may include certain non-
employee compensation and other 
amounts reported to you on Form 
1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. If 
you received a Form 1099-MISC, see 
the Instructions for Recipient on the 
back. Also see the Instructions for 
Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Em-
ployment Tax; and Pub. 334.
b. You had church employee income of 
$108.28 or more.
2. Additional Medicare Tax. You may be sub-
ject to a 0.9% Additional Medicare Tax 
that applies to Medicare wages, Railroad 
Retirement Act compensation, and 
self-employment income over a threshold 
based on your filing status. For more infor-
mation, see the Instructions for Form 
1040, line 62 and Form 8959.
3. Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT).You 
may be subject to NIIT. NIIT is a 3.8% tax 
on the lesser of net investment income or 
the excess of your modified adjusted 
gross income over a threshold amount. 
For more information, see the Instructions 
for Form 1040, line 62 and Form 8960.
4. Recapture taxes. You may have to pay 
these taxes if you previously claimed an 
investment credit, a low-income housing 
credit, a new markets credit, a qualified 
plug-in electric drive motor vehicle credit, 
an alternative motor vehicle credit, a credit 
for employer-provided child care facilities, 
an Indian employment credit, or other 
credits listed in the instructions for Form 
1040, line 62. For more information, see 
the instructions for Form 1040, line 62.
5. Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. If 
you are (or were) a 5% owner of a busi-
ness and you received a distribution that 
exceeds the benefits provided for you un-
der the qualified pension or annuity plan 
formula, you may have to pay this addi-
tional tax. See Tax on Excess Benefits in 
chapter 4 of Pub. 560, Retirement Plans 
for Small Business.
6. Uncollected social security and Medicare 
tax on group-term life insurance. If your 
former employer provides you with more 
than $50,000 of group-term life insurance 
coverage, you must pay the employee part 
of social security and Medicare taxes on 
those premiums. The amount should be 
shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with 
codes M and N.
7. Tax on golden parachute payments. This 
tax applies if you received an “excess par-
achute payment” (EPP) due to a change in 
a corporation's ownership or control. The 
amount should be shown in box 12 of your 
Form W-2 with code K. See the instruc-
tions for Form 1040, line 62.
8. Tax on accumulation distribution of trusts. 
This applies if you are the beneficiary of a 
trust that accumulated its income instead 
of distributing it currently. See Form 4970 
and its instructions.
9. Additional tax on HSA, MSA, or ABLE ac-
count. If amounts contributed to, or distrib-
uted from, your health savings account, 
medical savings account, or ABLE ac-
count don’t meet the rules for these ac-
counts, you may have to pay additional 
taxes. See Pub. 969, Health Savings Ac-
counts and Other Tax-Favored Health 
Plans; Form 8853, Archer MSAs and 
Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts; 
Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts 
(HSAs); and Form 5329, Additional Taxes 
on Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and 
Other Tax-Favored Accounts.
10. Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. This ap-
plies if amounts contributed to, or distrib-
uted from, your Coverdell ESA don’t meet 
the rules for these accounts. See Pub. 
970, Tax Benefits for Education, and Form 
5329.
11. Additional tax on qualified tuition pro-
grams. This applies to amounts distributed 
from qualified tuition programs that don’t 
meet the rules for these accounts. See 
Pub. 970 and Form 5329.
12. Excise tax on insider stock compensation 
from an expatriated corporation. You may 
owe a 15% excise tax on the value of non-
statutory stock options and certain other 
stock-based compensation held by you or 
a member of your family from an expatri-
ated corporation or its expanded affiliated 
group in which you were an officer, direc-
tor, or more-than-10% owner. For more in-
formation, see the instructions for Form 
1040, line 62.
13. Additional tax on income you received 
from a nonqualified deferred compensa-
tion plan that fails to meet certain require-
ments. This income should be shown in 
Form W-2, box 12, with code Z, or in Form 
1099-MISC, box 15b. For more informa-
tion, see the instructions for Form 1040, 
line 62.
14. Interest on the tax due on installment in-
come from the sale of certain residential 
lots and timeshares. For more information, 
see the instructions for Form 1040, line 62.
15. Interest on the deferred tax on gain from 
certain installment sales with a sales price 
over $150,000. For more information, see 
the instructions for Form 1040, line 62.
16. Repayment of first-time homebuyer credit. 
For more information, see Form 5405, Re-
payment of the First-Time Homebuyer 
Credit, and its instructions. Also see the 
instructions for Form 1040, line 60b.
Payments. After you determine your total tax, 
figure the total payments you have already 
made for the year. Include credits that are trea-
ted as payments. This chapter doesn’t explain 
these payments and credits. You can find that 
information in other chapters of this publication 
and your form instructions. See the following ta-
ble for amounts you can include in your total 
payments.
PAYMENTS
For information on:
See
chapter:
American opportunity credit ......... 35
Child tax credit (additional) ......... 34
Earned income credit ............ 36
Estimated tax paid ............. 4
Excess social security 
 and RRTA tax withheld .......... 38
Federal income tax withheld ........ 4
Health coverage tax credit ......... 38
Net premium tax credit ........... 37
Credit for tax on 
 undistributed capital gain ......... 38
Tax paid with extension ........... 1
Another credit that is treated as a payment 
is the credit for federal excise tax paid on fuels. 
This credit is for persons who have a nontaxa-
ble use of certain fuels, such as diesel fuel and 
kerosene. It is claimed on Form 1040, line 72. 
See Form 4136, Credit for Federal Tax Paid on 
Fuels.
Refund or balance due.  To determine 
whether you are entitled to a refund or whether 
you must make a payment, compare your total 
payments with your total tax. If you are entitled 
to a refund, see your form instructions for infor-
mation on having it directly deposited into one 
or more of your accounts (including a traditional 
IRA, Roth IRA, or a SEP-IRA), or to purchase 
U.S. savings bonds instead of receiving a paper 
check.
Alternative
Minimum Tax (AMT)
This section briefly discusses an additional tax 
you may have to pay.
The tax law gives special treatment to some 
kinds of income and allows special deductions 
and credits for some kinds of expenses. Tax-
payers who benefit from this special treatment 
may have to pay at least a minimum amount of 
tax through an additional tax called AMT.
You may have to pay the AMT if your taxa-
ble income for regular tax purposes, combined 
with certain adjustments and tax preference 
items, is more than a certain amount. See Form 
6251, Alternative Minimum Tax — Individuals.
Page 209 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 207

Adjustments and tax preference items.  The 
more common adjustments and tax preference 
items include:
Addition of personal exemptions,
Addition of the standard deduction (if 
claimed),
Addition of itemized deductions claimed 
for state and local taxes, certain interest, 
most miscellaneous deductions, and part 
of medical expenses,
Subtraction of any refund of state and local 
taxes included in gross income,
Changes to accelerated depreciation of 
certain property,
Difference between gain or loss on the 
sale of property reported for regular tax 
purposes and AMT purposes,
Addition of certain income from incentive 
stock options,
Change in certain passive activity loss de-
ductions,
Addition of certain depletion that is more 
than the adjusted basis of the property,
Addition of part of the deduction for certain 
intangible drilling costs, and
Addition of tax-exempt interest on certain 
private activity bonds.
More information. For more information about 
the AMT, see the instructions for Form 6251.
Tax Figured by IRS
If you file by the due date of your return (not 
counting extensions) – April 17, 2018, for most 
people – you can have the IRS figure your tax 
for you on Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 
1040.
If the IRS figures your tax and you paid too 
much, you will receive a refund. If you didn’t pay 
enough, you will receive a bill for the balance. 
To avoid interest or the penalty for late pay-
ment, you must pay the bill within 30 days of the 
date of the bill or by the due date for your return, 
whichever is later.
The IRS can also figure the credit for the 
elderly or the disabled and the earned income 
credit for you.
When the IRS cannot figure your tax.  The 
IRS can’t figure your tax for you if any of the fol-
lowing apply.
1. You want your refund directly deposited 
into your checking or savings account.
2. You want any part of your refund applied 
to your 2018 estimated tax.
3. You had income for the year from sources 
other than wages, salaries, tips, interest, 
dividends, taxable social security benefits, 
unemployment compensation, IRA distri-
butions, pensions, and annuities.
4. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more.
5. You itemize deductions.
6. You file any of the following forms.
a. Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income.
b. Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned In-
come Exclusion.
c. Form 4137, Social Security and Medi-
care Tax on Unreported Tip Income.
d. Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Dis-
tribution of Trusts.
e. Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distri-
butions.
f. Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.
g. Form 6251, Alternative Minimum 
Tax—Individuals.
h. Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs.
i. Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children 
Who Have Unearned Income.
j. Form 8814, Parents' Election To Re-
port Child's Interest and Dividends.
k. Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex-
penses.
l. Form 8853, Archer MSAs and 
Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts.
m. Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts 
(HSAs).
n. Form 8919, Uncollected Social Secur-
ity and Medicare Tax on Wages.
7. You must make a shared responsibility 
payment.
Shared responsibility payment.  You must 
make a shared responsibility payment with your 
tax return unless you and your spouse (if filing 
jointly), and anyone else you do or can claim as 
a dependent, had minimum essential coverage 
or a coverage exemption for each month during 
2017. Use the Shared Responsibility Payment 
Worksheet in the instructions for Form 8965 to 
figure your shared responsibility payment.
Filing the Return
After you complete the line entries for the tax 
form you are filing, fill in your name and ad-
dress. Enter your social security number in the 
space provided. If you are married, enter the 
social security numbers of you and your spouse 
even if you file separately. Sign and date your 
return and enter your occupation(s). If you are 
filing a joint return, both you and your spouse 
must sign it. Enter your daytime phone number 
in the space provided. This may help speed the 
processing of your return if we have a question 
that can be answered over the phone. If you are 
filing a joint return, you may enter either your or 
your spouse's daytime phone number.
If you want to allow a friend, family member, 
or any other person you choose to discuss your 
2017 tax return with the IRS, check the “Yes” 
box in the “Third party designee” area on your 
return. Also enter the designee's name, phone 
number, and any five digits the designee choo-
ses as his or her personal identification number 
(PIN). If you check the “Yes” box, you, and your 
spouse if filing a joint return, are authorizing the 
IRS to call the designee to answer any ques-
tions that may arise during the processing of 
your return.
Fill in and attach any schedules and forms 
asked for on the lines you completed to your 
paper return. Attach a copy of each of your 
Forms W-2 to your paper return. Also attach to 
your paper return any Form 1099-R you re-
ceived that has withholding tax in box 4.
Mail your return to the Internal Revenue 
Service Center for the area where you live. A list 
of Service Center addresses is in the instruc-
tions for your tax return.
Form 1040EZ Line Entries
Read lines 1 through 8b and fill in the lines that 
apply to you. Don’t complete lines 9 and 10. 
Complete line 11. Don’t complete lines 12 
through 14. If you are filing a joint return, use 
the space to the left of line 6 to separately show 
your taxable income and your spouse's taxable 
income.
The IRS can't figure your tax if you 
must include a shared responsibility 
payment on Form 1040EZ, line 11. See 
the instructions for Form 1040EZ and Form 
8965.
Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-
held on line 7. Federal income tax withheld is 
shown on Form W-2, box 2, or Form 1099, 
box 4.
Earned income credit.  If you can take this 
credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS can 
figure it for you. Enter “EIC” in the space to the 
left of line 8a. Enter the nontaxable combat pay 
you elect to include in earned income on 
line 8b.
If your credit for any year after 1996 was re-
duced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also 
have to file Form 8862 with your return. For de-
tails, see the Form 1040EZ instructions.
Form 1040A Line Entries
Read lines 1 through 27 and fill in the lines that 
apply to you. If you are filing a joint return, use 
the space to the left of the entry space for 
line 27 to separately show your taxable income 
and your spouse's taxable income. Skip lines 
28 and 30, but complete lines 29, 31 through 
35, 38, and 40 through 45 only if they apply to 
you. However, don’t complete lines 32 and 42a 
if you want the IRS to figure the credits shown 
on those lines. Also, enter any write-in informa-
tion that applies to you in the space to the left of 
line 46. Don’t complete lines 36, 37, 39, or 47 
through 51.
The IRS can’t figure your tax for you if 
you must include a shared responsibil-
ity payment on Form 1040A, line 38. 
See the instructions for Form 1040A and Form 
8965.
Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-
held that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or Form 
1099, box 4, on line 40. Enter any estimated tax 
payments you made on line 41.
Credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses. If you can take this credit, as discussed in 
chapter 32, complete Form 2441, Child and De-
pendent Care Expenses, and attach it to your 
return. Enter the amount of the credit on line 31. 
The IRS will not figure this credit.
Net premium tax credit.  If you can take this 
credit, as discussed in chapter 37 , complete 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 210 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 208 Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax

Form 8962, Premium Tax Credit, and attach it 
to your return. Enter the amount of the credit on 
line 45. The IRS will not figure this credit.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled.  If you 
can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33, 
the IRS can figure it for you. Enter “CFE” in the 
space to the left of line 32 and attach Sched-
ule R (Form 1040A or 1040), Credit for the Eld-
erly or the Disabled, to your paper return. On 
Schedule R (Form 1040A or 1040), check the 
box in Part I for your filing status and age. Com-
plete Part II and Part III, lines 11 and 13, if they 
apply.
Earned income credit.  If you can take this 
credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS can 
figure it for you. Enter “EIC” to the left of the en-
try space for line 42a. Enter the nontaxable 
combat pay you elect to include in earned in-
come on line 42b.
If you have a qualifying child, you must fill in 
Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040), Earned 
Income Credit, and attach it to your paper re-
turn. If you don’t provide the child's social se-
curity number on Schedule EIC, line 2, the 
credit will be reduced or disallowed unless the 
child was born and died in 2017.
If your credit for any year after 1996 was re-
duced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also 
have to file Form 8862 with your return. For de-
tails, see the Form 1040A instructions.
Form 1040 Line Entries
Read lines 1 through 43 and fill in the lines that 
apply to you. Don’t complete line 44.
If you are filing a joint return, use the space 
under the words “Adjusted Gross Income” on 
the front of your return to separately show your 
taxable income and your spouse's taxable in-
come.
Read lines 45 through 73. Fill in the lines 
that apply to you, but don’t fill in lines 55, 63, 
and 74. Also, don’t complete line 56 and lines 
75 through 79. Don’t fill in line 54, box “c,” if you 
are completing Schedule R (Form 1040A or 
1040), or line 66a if you want the IRS to figure 
the credits shown on those lines.
The IRS can’t figure your tax for you if 
you must include a shared responsibil-
ity payment on Form 1040, line 61. See 
the instructions for Form 1040 and Form 8965.
Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-
held that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or Form 
1099, box 4, on line 64. Enter any estimated tax 
payments you made on line 65.
Credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses. If you can take this credit, as discussed in 
chapter 32 , complete Form 2441 and attach it 
to your paper return. Enter the amount of the 
credit on line 49. The IRS will not figure this 
credit.
Net premium tax credit. If you take this credit, 
as discussed in chapter 37 , complete Form 
8962 and attach it to your return. Enter the 
amount of the credit on line 69. The IRS will not 
figure this credit.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled.  If you 
can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33, 
the IRS can figure it for you. Enter “CFE” on the 
CAUTION
!
line next to line 54, check box “c,” and attach 
Schedule R (Form 1040A or 1040) to your pa-
per return. On Schedule R (Form 1040A or 
1040), check the box in Part I for your filing sta-
tus and age. Complete Part II and Part III, lines 
11 and 13, if they apply.
Earned income credit.  If you can take this 
credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS can 
figure it for you. Enter “EIC” on the dotted line 
next to Form 1040, line 66a. Enter the nontaxa-
ble combat pay you elect to include in earned 
income on line 66b.
If you have a qualifying child, you must fill in 
Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040), Earned 
Income Credit, and attach it to your paper re-
turn. If you don’t provide the child's social se-
curity number on Schedule EIC, line 2, the 
credit will be reduced or disallowed unless the 
child was born and died in 2017.
If your credit for any year after 1996 was re-
duced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also 
have to file Form 8862 with your return. For de-
tails, see the Form 1040 instructions.
31.
Tax on 
Unearned 
Income of 
Certain Children
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following two rules 
that may affect the tax on unearned income of 
certain children.
CAUTION
!
1. If the child's interest and dividend income 
(including capital gain distributions) total 
less than $10,500, the child's parent may 
be able to choose to include that income 
on the parent's return rather than file a re-
turn for the child. (See Parent's Election 
To Report Child's Interest and Dividends, 
later.)
2. If the child's interest, dividends, and other 
unearned income total more than $2,100, 
part of that income may be taxed at the 
parent's tax rate instead of the child's tax 
rate. (See Tax for Certain Children Who 
Have Unearned Income, later.)
For these rules, the term “child” includes a le-
gally adopted child and a stepchild. These rules 
apply whether or not the child is a dependent. 
These rules don't apply if neither of the child's 
parents were living at the end of the year.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Tax Rules for Children and 
Dependents
Form (and Instructions)
Tax for Certain Children Who Have 
Unearned Income
Parents' Election To Report Child's 
Interest and Dividends
Which Parent's
Return To Use
If a child's parents are married to each other 
and file a joint return, use the joint return to fig-
ure the tax on the child's unearned income. The 
tax rate and other return information from that 
return are used to figure the child's tax as ex-
plained later under Tax for Certain Children 
Who Have Unearned Income.
Parents Who Don't File a 
Joint Return
For parents who don't file a joint return, the fol-
lowing discussions explain which parent's tax 
return must be used to figure the tax.
Only the parent whose tax return is used 
can make the election described under Parent's 
Election To Report Child's Interest and Divi-
dends.
Parents are married.  If the child's parents file 
separate returns, use the return of the parent 
with the greater taxable income.
Parents not living together.  If the child's 
parents are married to each other but not living 
together, and the parent with whom the child 
lives (the custodial parent) is considered un-
married, use the return of the custodial parent. If 
the custodial parent isn't considered unmarried, 
use the return of the parent with the greater tax-
able income.
For an explanation of when a married per-
son living apart from his or her spouse is 
  929
  8615
  8814
Page 211 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 31 Tax on Unearned Income of Certain Children Page 209

considered unmarried, see Head of Household 
in chapter 2.
Parents are divorced.  If the child's parents 
are divorced or legally separated, and the pa-
rent who had custody of the child for the greater 
part of the year (the custodial parent) hasn't re-
married, use the return of the custodial parent.
Custodial parent remarried.  If the custo-
dial parent has remarried, the stepparent (rather 
than the noncustodial parent) is treated as the 
child's other parent. Therefore, if the custodial 
parent and the stepparent file a joint return, use 
that joint return. Don't use the return of the non-
custodial parent.
If the custodial parent and the stepparent 
are married, but file separate returns, use the 
return of the one with the greater taxable in-
come. If the custodial parent and the stepparent 
are married but not living together, the earlier 
discussion under Parents not living together ap-
plies.
Parents never married.  If a child's parents 
have never been married to each other, but 
lived together all year, use the return of the pa-
rent with the greater taxable income. If the pa-
rents didn't live together all year, the rules ex-
plained earlier under Parents are divorced 
apply.
Widowed parent remarried.  If a widow or 
widower remarries, the new spouse is treated 
as the child's other parent. The rules explained 
earlier under Custodial parent remarried apply.
Parent's Election
To Report Child's
Interest and Dividends
You may be able to elect to include your child's 
interest and dividend income (including capital 
gain distributions) on your tax return. If you do, 
your child won't have to file a return.
You can make this election only if all the fol-
lowing conditions are met.
Your child was under age 19 (or under age 
24 if a full-time student) at the end of the 
year.
Your child had income only from interest 
and dividends (including capital gain distri-
butions and Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends).
The child's gross income was less than 
$10,500.
The child is required to file a return unless 
you make this election.
The child doesn't file a joint return for the 
year.
No estimated tax payment was made for 
the year, and no overpayment from the 
previous year (or from any amended re-
turn) was applied to this year under your 
child's name and social security number.
No federal income tax was taken out of 
your child's income under the backup with-
holding rules.
You are the parent whose return must be 
used when applying the special tax rules 
for children. (See Which Parent's Return 
To Use, earlier.)
These conditions are also shown in Figure 
31-A, later.
Certain January 1 birthdays.  A child born on 
January 1, 1999, is considered to be age 19 at 
the end of 2017. You can't make this election 
for such a child unless the child was a full-time 
student.
A child born on January 1, 1994, is consid-
ered to be age 24 at the end of 2017. You can't 
make this election for such a child.
Full-time student. A full-time student is a child 
who during some part of each of any 5 calendar 
months of the year was enrolled as a full-time 
student at a school, or took a full-time on-farm 
training course given by a school or a state, 
county, or local government agency. A school 
includes a technical, trade, or mechanical 
school. It doesn't include an on-the-job training 
course, correspondence school, or school offer-
ing courses only through the Internet.
How To Make the Election
Make the election by attaching Form 8814 to 
your Form 1040. (If you make this election, you 
can't file Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) Attach 
a separate Form 8814 for each child for whom 
you make the election. You can make the elec-
tion for one or more children and not for others.
Effect of Making the 
Election
The federal income tax on your child's income 
may be more if you make the Form 8814 elec-
tion.
Rate may be higher.  If your child received 
qualified dividends or capital gain distributions, 
you may pay up to $105 more tax if you make 
this election instead of filing a separate tax re-
turn for the child. This is because the tax rate on 
the child's income between $1,050 and $2,100 
is 10% if you make this election. However, if 
you file a separate return for the child, the tax 
rate may be as low as 0% because of the pref-
erential tax rates for qualified dividends and 
capital gain distributions.
Deductions you can't take.  By making the 
Form 8814 election, you can't take any of the 
following deductions that the child would be en-
titled to on his or her return.
The additional standard deduction if the 
child is blind.
The deduction for a penalty on an early 
withdrawal of your child's savings.
Itemized deductions (such as your child's 
investment expenses or charitable contri-
butions).
Reduced deductions or credits.  If you use 
Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross in-
come may reduce certain deductions or credits 
on your return including the following.
Deduction for contributions to a traditional 
individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
Deduction for student loan interest.
Itemized deductions for medical expenses, 
casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-
cellaneous expenses.
Credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses.
Child tax credit.
Education tax credits.
Earned income credit.
Penalty for underpayment of estimated tax.
If you make this election for 2017 and didn't 
have enough tax withheld or pay enough esti-
mated tax to cover the tax you owe, you may be 
subject to a penalty. If you plan to make this 
election for 2018, you may need to increase 
your federal income tax withholding or your esti-
mated tax payments to avoid the penalty. See 
chapter 4 for more information. 
Page 212 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 210 Chapter 31 Tax on Unearned Income of Certain Children

Tax for Certain 
Children Who Have 
Unearned Income
If a child's interest, dividends, and other un-
earned income total more than $2,100, part of 
that income may be taxed at the parent's tax 
rate instead of the child's tax rate. If the parent 
doesn't or can't choose to include the child's in-
come on the parent's return, use Form 8615 to 
figure the child's tax. Attach the completed form 
to the child's Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
When Form 8615 must be filed.  Form 8615 
must be filed for a child if all of the following 
statements are true.
1. The child's unearned income was more 
than $2,100.
2. The child is required to file a return for 
2017.
3. The child either:
a. Was under age 18 at the end of the 
year,
b. Was age 18 at the end of the year and 
didn't have earned income that was 
more than half of his or her support, or
c. Was a full-time student at least age 19 
and under age 24 at the end of 2017 
and didn't have earned income that 
was more than half of the child's sup-
port.
4. At least one of the child's parents was 
alive at the end of 2017.
5. The child doesn't file a joint return for 
2017.
These conditions are also shown in
Figure 31-B, later.
Earned income.  Earned income includes wa-
ges, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other 
compensation received for personal services 
you performed. It also includes any amount re-
ceived as a scholarship that you must include in 
income.
Unearned income defined.  Unearned in-
come is generally all income other than salar-
ies, wages, and other amounts received as pay 
for work actually done. It includes taxable inter-
est, dividends (including capital gain distribu-
tions), capital gains, unemployment compensa-
tion, taxable scholarship and fellowship grants 
not reported on Form W-2, the taxable part of 
social security and pension payments, and cer-
tain distributions from trusts. Unearned income 
includes amounts produced by assets the child 
obtained with earned income (such as interest 
on a savings account into which the child de-
posited wages).
Nontaxable income.  For this purpose, un-
earned income includes only amounts the child 
must include in total income. Nontaxable un-
earned income, such as tax-exempt interest 
and the nontaxable part of social security and 
pension payments, isn't included.
Income from property received as a gift.
A child's unearned income includes all income 
Figure 31-A. Can You Include Your Child's Income On Your Tax Return?
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Was your child under age 19 at the end 
of 2017?
Was your child under age 24 at the end 
of 2017?
Was your child a full-time student in 
2017?
Was the child’s only income interest and 
dividends (including capital gain 
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends)?
Was the child’s income less than 
$10,500?
Is your child required to /f_ile a tax return 
for 2017 if you don’t make this election?
Is your child /f_iling a joint return for 2017?
Did the child make any estimated tax 
payments for 2017?
Did the child have an overpayment of tax 
on his or her 2016 return (or on any 
amended return) applied to the 2017 
estimated tax?
Was any federal income tax withheld from 
the child’s income under backup 
withholding rules?
Are you the parent whose return must 
be used?*
You can include your child’s income on 
your tax return by completing Form 8814 
and attaching it to your return. If you do,  
your child isn’t required to /f_ile a return.
You can’t include 
your child’s income 
on your return.
Start Here
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use 
Page 213 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 31 Tax on Unearned Income of Certain Children Page 211

produced by property belonging to the child. 
This is true even if the property was transferred 
to the child, regardless of when the property 
was transferred or purchased or who transfer-
red it.
A child's unearned income includes income 
produced by property given as a gift to the 
child. This includes gifts to the child from grand-
parents or any other person and gifts made un-
der the Uniform Gift to Minors Act.
Example. Amanda Black, age 13, received 
the following income.
Dividends — $1,000
Wages — $2,100
Taxable interest — $1,200
Tax-exempt interest — $100
Capital gains — $300
Capital losses — ($200)
The dividends were qualified dividends on 
stock given to her by her grandparents.
Amanda's unearned income is $2,300. This 
is the total of the dividends ($1,000), taxable in-
terest ($1,200), and capital gains reduced by 
capital losses ($300 - $200 = $100). Her wages 
are earned (not unearned) income because 
they are received for work actually done. Her 
tax-exempt interest isn't included because it's 
nontaxable.
Trust income. If a child is the beneficiary of 
a trust, distributions of taxable interest, divi-
dends, capital gains, and other unearned in-
come from the trust are unearned income to the 
child.
However, for purposes of completing Form 
8615, a taxable distribution from a qualified dis-
ability trust is considered earned income, not 
unearned income.
Support. Your child's support includes all 
amounts spent to provide the child with food, 
lodging, clothing, education, medical and dental 
care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-
cessities. To figure your child's support, count 
support provided by you, your child, and others. 
However, a scholarship received by your child 
isn't considered support if your child is a 
full-time student. See chapter 3 for details about 
support.
Certain January 1 birthdays.  Use the follow-
ing chart to determine whether certain children 
with January 1 birthdays meet condition 3 under 
When Form 8615 must be filed.
Figure 31-B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your Child's Tax?
Start Here
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Was the child’s unearned income more than $2,100?
Is the child required to /f_ile a tax return for 2017?
Was the child under age 18 at the end of 2017?
Was the child age 18 at the end of 2017?
Was the child under age 24 at the end of 2017?
Was the child a full-time student in 2017?
Did the child have earned income that was more than 
half of his or her support?
Was at least one of the child’s parents alive at the end 
of 2017?
Is the child /f_iling a joint return for 2017?
Use Form 8615 to /f_igure the child’s tax. Attach it to the 
child’s return.
Note. If the child’s parent* chooses to report the child’s income 
by /f_iling Form 8814, the child isn’t required to /f_ile a tax return. 
Don’t use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child’s 
Interest and Dividends.)  
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Don’t use 
Form 8615 to 
/f_igure the 
child’s tax. 
Page 214 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 212 Chapter 31 Tax on Unearned Income of Certain Children

IF a child was 
born on...
THEN, at the end 
of 2017, the child 
is considered to 
be...
January 1, 2000 18*
January 1, 1999 19**
January 1, 1994 24***
*This child isn't under age 18. The child 
meets condition 3 only if the child didn't 
have earned income that was more than half 
of the child's support.
**This child meets condition 3 only if the 
child was a full-time student who didn't have 
earned income that was more than half of 
the child's support.
***Don't use Form 8615 for this child.
Alternative minimum tax.  A child may be 
subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if he 
or she has certain items given preferential treat-
ment under the tax law. See Alternative Mini-
mum Tax (AMT) in chapter 30.
For more information on who is liable for 
AMT and how to figure it, see Form 6251, Alter-
native Minimum Tax—Individuals. For informa-
tion on special limits that apply to a child who 
files Form 6251, see Certain Children Under 
Age 24 in the Instructions for Form 6251.
Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT).  A child 
whose tax is figured on Form 8615 may be sub-
ject to the NIIT. NIIT is a 3.8% tax on the lesser 
of the net investment income or the excess of 
the child's modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) over the threshold amount. Use Form 
8960, Net Investment Income Tax, to figure this 
tax. For more information on NIIT, go to IRS.gov 
and enter “Net Investment Income Tax” in the 
search box.
32.
Child and 
Dependent Care 
Credit
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
CAUTION
!
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Reminders
Taxpayer identification number needed for 
each qualifying person. You must include on 
line 2 of Form 2441 the name and taxpayer 
identification number (generally the social se-
curity number (SSN)) of each qualifying person. 
See Taxpayer identification number  under Who 
Is a Qualifying Person, later.
You may have to pay employment taxes.  If 
you pay someone to come to your home and 
care for your dependent or spouse, you may be 
a household employer who has to pay employ-
ment taxes. Usually, you aren’t a household 
employer if the person who cares for your de-
pendent or spouse does so at his or her home 
or place of business. See Do You Have House-
hold Employees, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the credit for child and 
dependent care expenses and covers the fol-
lowing topics.
Tests you must meet to claim the credit.
How to figure the credit.
How to claim the credit.
Employment taxes you may have to pay as 
a household employer.
You may be able to claim the credit if you 
pay someone to care for your dependent who is 
under age 13 or for your spouse or dependent 
who isn’t able to care for himself or herself. The 
credit can be up to 35% of your expenses. To 
qualify, you must pay these expenses so you 
can work or look for work.
This credit shouldn’t be confused with 
the child tax credit  discussed in chap-
ter 34.
Dependent care benefits. If you received any 
dependent care benefits from your employer 
during the year, you may be able to exclude 
from your income all or part of them. You must 
complete Form 2441, Part III, before you can 
figure the amount of your credit. See Depend-
ent Care Benefits  under How To Figure the 
Credit, later.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, 
and Filing Information
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
CAUTION
!
  501
  503 
Household Employer's Tax Guide
Form (and Instructions)
Child and Dependent Care 
Expenses
Household 
Employment Taxes
Application for IRS Individual 
Taxpayer Identification Number
Application for Taxpayer 
Identification Number for Pending 
U.S. Adoptions
Dependent Care Provider's 
Identification and Certification
Can You Claim the 
Credit?
To be able to claim the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses, you must file Form 
1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR, not Form 
1040EZ or Form 1040NR-EZ, and meet all the 
tests in Tests you must meet to claim a credit 
for child and dependent care expenses next.
Tests you must meet to claim a credit for 
child and dependent care expenses. 
1. Qualifying Person Test. The care must 
be for one or more qualifying persons who 
are identified on Form 2441. (See Who Is 
a Qualifying Person, later.)
2. Earned Income Test. You (and your 
spouse if filing jointly) must have earned 
income during the year. (However, see 
Rule for student-spouse or spouse not 
able to care for self under You Must Have 
Earned Income, later.)
3. Work-Related Expense Test. You must 
pay child and dependent care expenses 
so you (and your spouse if filing jointly) 
can work or look for work. (See Are These 
Work-Related Expenses, later.)
4. You must make payments for child and 
dependent care to someone you (and your 
spouse) can’t claim as a dependent. If you 
make payments to your child, he or she 
can’t be your dependent and must be age 
19 or older by the end of the year. You 
can’t make payments to:
a. Your spouse, or
b. The parent of your qualifying person if 
your qualifying person is your child 
and under age 13.
(See Payments to Relatives or De-
pendents under Are These Work-Related 
Expenses, later.)
5. Joint Return Test. Your filing status may 
be single, head of household, or qualifying 
widow(er). If you're married, you must file 
a joint return, unless an exception applies 
to you. (See What’s Your Filing Status, 
later.)
6. Provider Identification Test. You must 
identify the care provider on your tax re-
turn. (See Care Provider Identification 
Test, later.)
  926 
  2441 
  Schedule H (Form 1040)
  W-7
  W-7A
  W-10
Page 215 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 213

7. If you exclude or deduct dependent care 
benefits provided by a dependent care 
benefits plan, the total amount you ex-
clude or deduct must be less than the dol-
lar limit for qualifying expenses (generally, 
$3,000 if one qualifying person was cared 
for or $6,000 if two or more qualifying per-
sons were cared for). (If two or more quali-
fying persons were cared for, the amount 
you exclude or deduct will always be less 
than the dollar limit, since the total amount 
you can exclude or deduct is limited to 
$5,000. See Reduced Dollar Limit under 
How To Figure the Credit, later.)
These tests are presented in Figure 32-A  and 
are also explained in detail in this chapter.
Who Is a Qualifying 
Person?
Your child and dependent care expenses must 
be for the care of one or more qualifying per-
sons.
A qualifying person is:
1. Your qualifying child who is your depend-
ent and who was under age 13 when the 
care was provided (but see Child of di-
vorced or separated parents or parents liv-
ing apart, later),
2. Your spouse who wasn’t physically or 
mentally able to care for himself or herself 
and lived with you for more than half the 
year, or
3. A person who wasn’t physically or men-
tally able to care for himself or herself, 
lived with you for more than half the year, 
and either:
a. Was your dependent, or
b. Would have been your dependent ex-
cept that:
i. He or she received gross income 
of $4,050 or more,
ii. He or she filed a joint return, or
iii. You, or your spouse if filing 
jointly, could be claimed as a de-
pendent on someone else's 2017 
return.
Dependent defined. A dependent is a person, 
other than you or your spouse, for whom you 
can claim an exemption. To be your dependent, 
a person must be your qualifying child (or your 
qualifying relative).
Qualifying child.  To be your qualifying 
child, a child must live with you for more than 
half the year and meet other requirements.
More information.  For more information 
about who is a dependent or a qualifying child, 
see chapter 3.
Physically or mentally not able to care for 
oneself. Persons who can't dress, clean, or 
feed themselves because of physical or mental 
problems are considered not able to care for 
themselves. Also, persons who must have con-
stant attention to prevent them from injuring 
themselves or others are considered not able to 
care for themselves.
Person qualifying for part of year.  You de-
termine a person's qualifying status each day. 
For example, if the person for whom you pay 
child and dependent care expenses no longer 
qualifies on September 16, count only those ex-
penses through September 15. Also see Yearly 
limit under Dollar Limit, later.
Birth or death of otherwise qualifying per-
son. In determining whether a person is a qual-
ifying person, a person who was born or died in 
2017 is treated as having lived with you for 
more than half of 2017 if your home was the 
person's home for more than half the time he or 
she was alive in 2017.
Taxpayer identification number.  You must 
include on your return the name and taxpayer 
identification number (generally the SSN) of the 
qualifying person(s). If the correct information 
isn’t shown, the credit may be reduced or disal-
lowed.
Individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN) for aliens.  If your qualifying person is a 
nonresident or resident alien who doesn’t have 
and can’t get a SSN, use that person's ITIN. 
The ITIN is entered wherever an SSN is reques-
ted on a tax return. To apply for an ITIN, see 
Form W-7.
An ITIN is for tax use only. It doesn’t entitle 
the holder to social security benefits or change 
the holder's employment or immigration status 
under U.S. law.
Adoption taxpayer identification number 
(ATIN). If your qualifying person is a child who 
was placed in your home for adoption and for 
whom you don't have an SSN, you must get an 
ATIN for the child. To apply for an ATIN, see 
Form W-7A.
Child of divorced or separated parents or 
parents living apart.  Even if you can't claim 
your child as a dependent, he or she is treated 
as your qualifying person if:
The child was under age 13 or wasn’t 
physically or mentally able to care for him-
self or herself,
The child received over half of his or her 
support during the calendar year from one 
or both parents who are divorced or legally 
separated under a decree of divorce or 
separate maintenance, are separated un-
der a written separation agreement, or 
lived apart at all times during the last 6 
months of the calendar year,
The child was in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half the year, and
You were the child's custodial parent.
The custodial parent is the parent with 
whom the child lived for the greater number of 
nights in 2017. If the child was with each parent 
for an equal number of nights, the custodial pa-
rent is the parent with the higher adjusted gross 
income. For details and an exception for a pa-
rent who works at night, see Pub. 501.
The noncustodial parent can’t treat the child 
as a qualifying person even if that parent is enti-
tled to claim the child as a dependent under the 
special rules for a child of divorced or separated 
parents.
You Must Have Earned 
Income
To claim the credit, you (and your spouse if fil-
ing jointly) must have earned income during the 
year. 
Earned income.  Earned income includes wa-
ges, salaries, tips, other taxable employee com-
pensation, and net earnings from self-employ-
ment. A net loss from self-employment reduces 
earned income. Earned income also includes 
strike benefits and any disability pay you report 
as wages.
Generally, only taxable compensation is in-
cluded. However, you can elect to include non-
taxable combat pay in earned income. If you're 
filing a joint return and both you and your 
spouse received nontaxable combat pay, you 
can each make your own election. (In other 
words, if one of you makes the election, the 
other one can also make it but doesn’t have to.) 
You should figure your credit both ways and 
make the election if it gives you a greater tax 
benefit.
Members of certain religious faiths op-
posed to social security.  Certain income 
earned by persons who are members of certain 
religious faiths that are opposed to participation 
in Social Security Act programs and have an 
IRS-approved form that exempts certain in-
come from social security and Medicare taxes 
may not be considered earned income for this 
purpose. See You Must Have Earned Income in 
Pub. 503.
What isn't earned income?  Earned income 
doesn’t include:
Pensions and annuities,
Amounts reported on Form 1040, line 7 ex-
cluded as foreign earned income on Form 
2555, line 45 or Form 2555-EZ, line 18,
Medicaid waiver payments you exclude 
from income,
Social security and railroad retirement ben-
efits,
Workers' compensation,
Interest and dividends,
Unemployment compensation,
Scholarships or fellowship grants, except 
for those reported on a Form W-2 and paid 
to you for teaching or other services,
Nontaxable workfare payments,
Child support payments received,
Income of nonresident aliens that isn’t ef-
fectively connected with a U.S. trade or 
business, or
Any amount received for work while an in-
mate in a penal institution.
Rule for student-spouse or spouse not able 
to care for self.  Your spouse is treated as 
having earned income for any month that he or 
she is:
1. A full-time student, or
2. Physically or mentally not able to care for 
himself or herself. (Your spouse also must 
live with you for more than half the year.)
Page 216 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 214 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Figure 32-A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
Did you/one.superior have earned income during the year?
Did you pay the expenses to allow you/one.superior to work or look for work?
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could 
claim as a dependent?
Were your payments made to your spouse or to the parent of your 
qualifying person who is your qualifying child and under age 13?
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of 
19 at the end of the year?
Are you single? Are you /f_iling a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements 
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider’s name, address, 
and identifying number? 
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this 
information? (See Due diligence.) 
Did you pay expenses for more than one 
qualifying person?
Are you excluding or deducting at least $3,000 of 
dependent care bene/f_its?
You may be able to claim the child and 
dependent care credit. Fill out Form 2441.
You CAN’T claim the child and 
dependent care credit./two.superior
/one.superior This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
/two.superior If you had expenses that met the requirements for 2016, except that you didn’t pay them until 2017, you may be able to claim those expenses in 2017. 
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.    
Page 217 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 215

If you're filing a joint return, this rule also ap-
plies to you. You can be treated as having 
earned income for any month you're a full-time 
student or not able to care for yourself.
Figure the earned income of the nonworking 
spouse described under (1) or (2) above as ex-
plained under Earned Income Limit, later.
This rule applies to only one spouse for any 
1 month. If, in the same month, both you and 
your spouse don’t work and are either full-time 
students or not physically or mentally able to 
care for yourselves, only one of you can be 
treated as having earned income in that month. 
Full-time student. You're a full-time student 
if you're enrolled at a school for the number of 
hours or classes that the school considers full 
time. You must have been a full-time student for 
some part of each of 5 calendar months during 
the year. (The months need not be consecu-
tive.)
School. The term “school” includes high 
schools, colleges, universities, and technical, 
trade, and mechanical schools. A school 
doesn’t include an on-the-job training course, 
correspondence school, or school offering cour-
ses only through the Internet.
Are These Work-Related 
Expenses?
Child and dependent care expenses must be 
work-related to qualify for the credit. Expenses 
are considered work-related only if both of the 
following are true.
They allow you (and your spouse if filing 
jointly) to work or look for work.
They are for a qualifying person's care.
Working or Looking for Work
To be work-related, your expenses must allow 
you to work or look for work. If you're married, 
generally both you and your spouse must work 
or look for work. One spouse is treated as work-
ing during any month he or she is a full-time stu-
dent or isn’t physically or mentally able to care 
for himself or herself.
Your work can be for others or in your own 
business or partnership. It can be either full time 
or part time.
Work also includes actively looking for work. 
However, if you don’t find a job and have no 
earned income for the year, you can't take this 
credit. See You Must Have Earned Income, ear-
lier.
An expense isn’t considered work-related 
merely because you had it while you were work-
ing. The purpose of the expense must be to al-
low you to work. Whether your expenses allow 
you to work or look for work depends on the 
facts.
Example 1.  The cost of a babysitter while 
you and your spouse go out to eat isn’t normally 
a work-related expense.
Example 2. You work during the day. Your 
spouse works at night and sleeps during the 
day. You pay for care of your 5-year-old child 
during the hours when you're working and your 
spouse is sleeping. Your expenses are consid-
ered work-related.
Volunteer work.  For this purpose, you aren’t 
considered to be working if you do unpaid vol-
unteer work or volunteer work for a nominal sal-
ary.
Work for part of year.  If you work or actively 
look for work during only part of the period cov-
ered by the expenses, then you must figure 
your expenses for each day. For example, if 
you work all year and pay care expenses of 
$250 a month ($3,000 for the year), all the ex-
penses are work-related. However, if you work 
or look for work for only 2 months and 15 days 
during the year and pay expenses of $250 a 
month, your work-related expenses are limited 
to $625 (212 months × $250).
Temporary absence from work.  You don't 
have to figure your expenses for each day dur-
ing a short, temporary absence from work, such 
as for vacation or a minor illness, if you have to 
pay for care anyway. Instead, you can figure 
your credit including the expenses you paid for 
the period of absence.
An absence of 2 weeks or less is a short, 
temporary absence. An absence of more than 2 
weeks may be considered a short, temporary 
absence, depending on the circumstances.
Example. You pay a nanny to care for your 
2-year-old son and 4-year-old daughter so you 
can work. You become ill and miss 4 months of 
work but receive sick pay. You continue to pay 
the nanny to care for the children while you're ill. 
Your absence isn’t a short, temporary absence, 
and your expenses aren’t considered work-rela-
ted.
Part-time work.  If you work part-time, you 
generally must figure your expenses for each 
day. However, if you have to pay for care 
weekly, monthly, or in another way that includes 
both days worked and days not worked, you 
can figure your credit including the expenses 
you paid for days you didn’t work. Any day 
when you work at least 1 hour is a day of work.
Example 1. You work 3 days a week. While 
you work, your 6-year-old child attends a de-
pendent care center, which complies with all 
state and local regulations. You can pay the 
center $150 for any 3 days a week or $250 for 5 
days a week. Your child attends the center 5 
days a week. Your work-related expenses are 
limited to $150 a week.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1  except the center doesn’t offer a 
3-day option. The entire $250 weekly fee may 
be a work-related expense.
Care of a Qualifying Person
To be work-related, your expenses must be to 
provide care for a qualifying person.
You don't have to choose the least expen-
sive way of providing care. The cost of a paid 
care provider may be an expense for the care of 
a qualifying person even if another care pro-
vider is available at no cost.
Expenses are for the care of a qualifying 
person only if their main purpose is the person's 
well-being and protection. 
Expenses for household services qualify if 
part of the services is for the care of qualifying 
persons. See Household services, later.
Expenses not for care.  Expenses for care 
don’t include amounts you pay for food, lodg-
ing, clothing, education, and entertainment. 
However, you can include small amounts paid 
for these items if they are incidental to and can’t 
be separated from the cost of caring for the 
qualifying person.
Child support payments aren’t for care and 
don’t qualify for the credit.
Education. Expenses for a child in nursery 
school, preschool, or similar programs for chil-
dren below the level of kindergarten are expen-
ses for care. Expenses to attend kindergarten 
or a higher grade aren’t expenses for care. 
Don’t use these expenses to figure your credit.
However, expenses for before- or af-
ter-school care of a child in kindergarten or a 
higher grade may be expenses for care.
Summer school and tutoring programs 
aren’t for care.
Example 1. You take your 3-year-old child 
to a nursery school that provides lunch and ed-
ucational activities as a part of its preschool 
childcare service. The lunch and educational 
activities are incidental to the childcare, and 
their cost can't be separated from the cost of 
care. You can count the total cost when you fig-
ure the credit.
Example 2.  You place your 10-year-old 
child in a boarding school so you can work full 
time. Only the part of the boarding school ex-
pense that’s for the care of your child is a 
work-related expense. You can count that part 
of the expense in figuring your credit if it can be 
separated from the cost of education. You can’t 
count any part of the amount you pay the school 
for your child's education.
Care outside your home.  You can count the 
cost of care provided outside your home if the 
care is for your dependent under age 13 or any 
other qualifying person who regularly spends at 
least 8 hours each day in your home.
Dependent care center.  You can count 
care provided outside your home by a depend-
ent care center only if the center complies with 
all state and local regulations that apply to 
these centers.
A dependent care center is a place that pro-
vides care for more than six persons (other than 
persons who live there) and receives a fee, pay-
ment, or grant for providing services for any of 
those persons, even if the center isn’t run for 
profit.
Camp. The cost of sending your child to an 
overnight camp isn’t considered a work-related 
expense. The cost of sending your child to a 
day camp may be a work-related expense, 
even if the camp specializes in a particular ac-
tivity, such as computers or soccer.
Transportation. If a care provider takes a 
qualifying person to or from a place where care 
is provided, that transportation is for the care of 
the qualifying person. This includes transporta-
tion by bus, subway, taxi, or private car. How-
ever, transportation not provided by a care pro-
vider isn’t for the care of a qualifying person. 
Page 218 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 216 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Also, if you pay the transportation cost for the 
care provider to come to your home, that ex-
pense isn’t for care of a qualifying person.
Fees and deposits.  Fees you paid to an 
agency to get the services of a care provider, 
deposits you paid to an agency or preschool, 
application fees, and other indirect expenses 
are work-related expenses if you have to pay 
them to get care, even though they aren’t di-
rectly for care. However, a forfeited deposit isn’t 
for the care of a qualifying person if care isn’t 
provided.
Example 1. You paid a fee to an agency to 
get the services of the nanny who cares for your 
2-year-old daughter while you work. The fee 
you paid is a work-related expense.
Example 2.  You placed a deposit with a 
preschool to reserve a place for your 3-year-old 
child. You later sent your child to a different pre-
school and forfeited the deposit. The forfeited 
deposit isn’t for care and so isn’t a work-related 
expense.
Household services.  Expenses you pay for 
household services are work-related expenses 
if they are at least partly for the well-being and 
protection of a qualifying person.
Household services are ordinary and usual 
services done in and around your home that are 
necessary to run your home. They include the 
services of a housekeeper, maid, or cook. How-
ever, they don’t include the services of a chauf-
feur, bartender, or gardener. See Household 
Services in Pub. 503 for more information.
In this chapter, the term housekeeper refers 
to any household employee whose services in-
clude the care of a qualifying person.
Taxes paid on wages.  The taxes you pay 
on wages for qualifying child and dependent 
care services are work-related expenses. See 
Do You Have Household Employees, later.
Payments to Relatives or 
Dependents
You can count work-related payments you 
make to relatives who aren’t your dependents, 
even if they live in your home. However, don’t 
count any amounts you pay to:
1. A dependent for whom you (or your 
spouse if filing jointly) can claim an ex-
emption,
2. Your child who was under age 19 at the 
end of the year, even if he or she isn’t your 
dependent,
3. A person who was your spouse any time 
during the year, or
4. The parent of your qualifying person if 
your qualifying person is your child and 
under age 13.
What's Your Filing Status?
Generally, married couples must file a joint re-
turn to take the credit. However, if you’re legally 
separated or living apart from your spouse, you 
may be able to file a separate return and still 
take the credit.
Legally separated.  You aren’t considered 
married if you’re legally separated from your 
spouse under a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance. You may be eligible to take the 
credit on your return using head of household 
filing status.
Married and living apart.  You aren’t consid-
ered married and are eligible to take the credit if 
all the following apply.
1. You file a return apart from your spouse.
2. Your home is the home of a qualifying per-
son for more than half the year.
3. You pay more than half the cost of keeping 
up your home for the year.
4. Your spouse doesn’t live in your home for 
the last 6 months of the year.
Note. You also may be able to claim the 
child and dependent care credit using the mar-
ried filing separate filing status. See Not legally 
separated in Pub. 503.
Costs of keeping up a home.  The costs of 
keeping up a home normally include property 
taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges, 
home repairs, insurance on the home, and food 
eaten at home.
The costs of keeping up a home don’t in-
clude payments for clothing, education, medical 
treatment, vacations, life insurance, transporta-
tion, or mortgage principal.
They also don’t include the purchase, per-
manent improvement, or replacement of prop-
erty. For example, you can’t include the cost of 
replacing a water heater. However, you can in-
clude the cost of repairing a water heater.
Death of spouse.  If your spouse died during 
the year and you don’t remarry before the end 
of the year, you generally must file a joint return 
to take the credit. If you do remarry before the 
end of the year, the credit can be claimed on 
your deceased spouse's return.
Care Provider 
Identification Test
You must identify all persons or organizations 
that provide care for your child or dependent. 
Use Form 2441, Part I, to show the information.
If you don’t have any care providers and 
you're filing Form 2441 only to report taxable in-
come in Part III, enter “none” in line 1, column 
(a).
Information needed. To identify the care pro-
vider, you must give the provider's:
1. Name,
2. Address, and
3. Taxpayer identification number.
If the care provider is an individual, the tax-
payer identification number is his or her SSN or 
ITIN. If the care provider is an organization, 
then it is the employer identification number 
(EIN).
You don’t have to show the taxpayer identifi-
cation number if the care provider is a tax-ex-
empt organization (such as a church or school). 
In this case, enter “Tax-Exempt” in the space 
where Form 2441 asks for the number.
If you can’t provide all of the information or if 
the information is incorrect, you must be able to 
show that you used due diligence (discussed 
later) in trying to furnish the necessary informa-
tion.
Getting the information.  You can use Form 
W-10 to request the required information from 
the care provider. If you don't use Form W-10, 
you can get the information from one of the 
other sources listed in the instructions for Form 
W-10 including:
1. A copy of the provider's social security 
card,
2. A copy of the provider's completed Form 
W-4 if he or she is your household em-
ployee,
3. A copy of the statement furnished by your 
employer if the provider is your employer's 
dependent care plan, or
4. A letter or invoice from the provider if it 
shows the information.
You should keep this information with 
your tax records. Don’t send Form 
W-10 (or other document containing 
this information) to the Internal Revenue Serv-
ice.
Due diligence. If the care provider information 
you give is incorrect or incomplete, your credit 
may not be allowed. However, if you can show 
that you used due diligence in trying to supply 
the information, you can still claim the credit.
You can show due diligence by getting and 
keeping the provider's completed Form W-10 or 
one of the other sources of information just lis-
ted. Care providers can be penalized if they 
don't provide this information to you or if they 
provide incorrect information.
Provider refusal.  If the provider refuses to 
give you their identifying information, you 
should report on Form 2441 whatever informa-
tion you have (such as the name and address). 
Enter “See Attached Statement” in the columns 
calling for the information you don't have. Then 
attach a statement explaining that you reques-
ted the information from the care provider, but 
the provider didn't give you the information. Be 
sure to write your name and SSN on this state-
ment. The statement will show that you used 
due diligence in trying to furnish the necessary 
information.
U.S. citizens and resident aliens living 
abroad. If you're living abroad, your care pro-
vider may not have, and may not be required to 
get, a U.S. taxpayer identification number (for 
example, an SSN or EIN). If so, enter “LAFCP” 
(Living Abroad Foreign Care Provider) in the 
space for the care provider's taxpayer identifi-
cation number.
How To Figure
the Credit
Your credit is a percentage of your work-related 
expenses. Your expenses are subject to the 
earned income limit and the dollar limit. The 
percentage is based on your adjusted gross in-
come.
RECORDS
Page 219 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 217

Figuring Total
Work-Related Expenses
To figure the credit for 2017 work-related ex-
penses, count only those you paid by Decem-
ber 31, 2017.
Expenses prepaid in an earlier year.  If you 
pay for services before they are provided, you 
can count the prepaid expenses only in the year 
the care is received. Claim the expenses for the 
later year as if they were actually paid in that 
later year.
Expenses not paid until the following year. 
Don’t count 2016 expenses that you paid in 
2017 as work-related expenses for 2017. You 
may be able to claim an additional credit for 
them on your 2017 return, but you must figure it 
separately. See Payments for prior year's ex-
penses under Amount of Credit in Pub. 503.
If you had expenses in 2017 that you 
didn’t pay until 2018, you can't count 
them when figuring your 2017 credit. 
You may be able to claim a credit for them on 
your 2018 return.
Expenses reimbursed.  If a state social serv-
ices agency pays you a nontaxable amount to 
reimburse you for some of your child and de-
pendent care expenses, you can’t count the ex-
penses that are reimbursed as work-related ex-
penses.
Example. You paid work-related expenses 
of $3,000. you're reimbursed $2,000 by a state 
social services agency. You can use only 
$1,000 to figure your credit.
Medical expenses.  Some expenses for the 
care of qualifying persons who aren’t able to 
care for themselves may qualify as work-related 
expenses and also as medical expenses. You 
can use them either way, but you can’t use the 
same expenses to claim both a credit and a 
medical expense deduction.
If you use these expenses to figure the 
credit and they are more than the earned in-
come limit or the dollar limit, discussed later, 
you can add the excess to your medical expen-
ses. However, if you use your total expenses to 
figure your medical expense deduction, you 
can’t use any part of them to figure your credit.
Amounts excluded from your income 
under your employer's dependent care 
benefits plan can’t be used to claim a 
medical expense deduction.
Dependent Care Benefits
If you receive dependent care benefits, your 
dollar limit for purposes of the credit may be re-
duced. See Reduced Dollar Limit , later. But, 
even if you can't take the credit, you may be 
able to take an exclusion or deduction for the 
dependent care benefits.
Dependent care benefits.  Dependent care 
benefits include:
1. Amounts your employer paid directly to ei-
ther you or your care provider for the care 
of your qualifying person while you work,
TIP
CAUTION
!
2. The fair market value of care in a daycare 
facility provided or sponsored by your em-
ployer, and
3. Pre-tax contributions you made under a 
dependent care flexible spending arrange-
ment.
Your salary may have been reduced to pay for 
these benefits. If you received benefits as an 
employee, they should be shown in box 10 of 
your Form W-2. See Statement for employee , 
later. Benefits you received as a partner should 
be shown in box 13 of your Schedule K-1 (Form 
1065) with code O. Enter the amount of these 
benefits on Form 2441, Part III, line 12.
Exclusion or deduction. If your employer pro-
vides dependent care benefits under a qualified 
plan, you may be able to exclude these benefits 
from your income. Your employer can tell you 
whether your benefit plan qualifies. To claim the 
exclusion, you must complete Part III of Form 
2441. You can't use Form 1040EZ.
If you're self-employed and receive benefits 
from a qualified dependent care benefit plan, 
you're treated as both employer and employee. 
Therefore, you wouldn’t get an exclusion from 
wages. Instead, you would get a deduction on 
Form 1040, Schedule C, line 14; Schedule E, 
line 19 or 28; or Schedule F, line 15. To claim 
the deduction, you must use Form 2441.
The amount you can exclude or deduct is 
limited to the smallest of:
1. The total amount of dependent care bene-
fits you received during the year,
2. The total amount of qualified expenses 
you incurred during the year,
3. Your earned income,
4. Your spouse's earned income, or
5. $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-
rately).
The definition of earned income for the exclu-
sion or deduction is the same as the definition 
used when figuring the credit except that 
earned income for the exclusion or deduction 
doesn’t include any dependent care benefits 
you receive. See Earned Income Limit, later.
You can choose to include your non-
taxable combat pay in earned income 
when figuring your exclusion or deduc-
tion, even if you choose not to include it in 
earned income for the earned income credit or 
the credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses.
Statement for employee.  Your employer 
must give you a Form W-2 (or similar state-
ment) showing in box 10 the total amount of de-
pendent care benefits provided to you during 
the year under a qualified plan. Your employer 
will also include any dependent care benefits 
over $5,000 in your wages shown on your Form 
W-2 in box 1.
Effect of exclusion on credit.  If you exclude 
dependent care benefits from your income, the 
amount of the excluded benefits:
1. Isn’t included in your work-related expen-
ses, and
2. Reduces the dollar limit, discussed later.
TIP
Earned Income Limit
The amount of work-related expenses you use 
to figure your credit can’t be more than:
1. Your earned income for the year if you're 
single at the end of the year, or
2. The smaller of your or your spouse's 
earned income for the year if you're mar-
ried at the end of the year.
Earned income is defined under You Must Have 
Earned Income, earlier.
For purposes of item (2), use your 
spouse's earned income for the entire 
year, even if you were married for only 
part of the year.
Separated spouse. If you're legally separated 
or married and living apart from your spouse (as 
described under What’s Your Filing Status , ear-
lier), you aren’t considered married for purpo-
ses of the earned income limit. Use only your in-
come in figuring the earned income limit.
Surviving spouse. If your spouse died during 
the year and you file a joint return as a surviving 
spouse, you may, but aren’t required to, take 
into account the earned income of your spouse 
who died during the year.
Community property laws. You should disre-
gard community property laws when you figure 
earned income for this credit.
You or your spouse is a student or not able 
to care for self.  Your spouse who is either a 
full-time student or not able to care for himself 
or herself is treated as having earned income. 
His or her earned income for each month is 
considered to be at least $250 if there is one 
qualifying person in your home, or at least $500 
if there are two or more.
Spouse works. If your spouse works during 
that month, use the higher of $250 (or $500) or 
his or her actual earned income for that month.
Spouse qualifies for part of month. If your 
spouse is a full-time student or not able to care 
for himself or herself for only part of a month, 
the full $250 (or $500) still applies for that 
month.
You are a student or not able to care for 
self.  These rules also apply if you're a student 
or not able to care for yourself and you're filing a 
joint return. For each month or part of a month 
you're a student or not able to care for yourself, 
your earned income is considered to be at least 
$250 (or $500). If you also work during that 
month, use the higher of $250 (or $500) or your 
actual earned income for that month.
Both spouses qualify.  If, in the same 
month, both you and your spouse are either 
full-time students or not able to care for your-
selves, only one spouse can be considered to 
have this earned income of $250 (or $500) for 
that month.
Dollar Limit
There is a dollar limit on the amount of your 
work-related expenses you can use to figure 
the credit. This limit is $3,000 for one qualifying 
TIP
Page 220 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 218 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

person, or $6,000 for two or more qualifying 
persons.
If you paid work-related expenses for 
the care of two or more qualifying per-
sons, the applicable dollar limit is 
$6,000. This $6,000 limit doesn’t need to be 
divided equally among them. For example, if 
your work-related expenses for the care of one 
qualifying person are $3,200 and your work-re-
lated expenses for another qualifying person 
are $2,800, you can use the total, $6,000, when 
figuring the credit.
Yearly limit.  The dollar limit is a yearly limit. 
The amount of the dollar limit remains the same 
no matter how long, during the year, you have a 
qualifying person in your household. Use the 
$3,000 limit if you paid work-related expenses 
for the care of one qualifying person at any time 
during the year. Use $6,000 if you paid work-re-
lated expenses for the care of more than one 
qualifying person at any time during the year.
Reduced Dollar Limit
If you received dependent care benefits that 
you exclude or deduct from your income, you 
must subtract that amount from the dollar limit 
that applies to you. Your reduced dollar limit is 
figured on Form 2441, Part III. See Dependent 
Care Benefits, earlier, for information on exclud-
ing or deducting these benefits.
Example 1. George is a widower with one 
child and earns $24,000 a year. He pays 
work-related expenses of $2,900 for the care of 
his 4-year-old child and qualifies to claim the 
credit for child and dependent care expenses. 
His employer pays an additional $1,000 under a 
dependent care benefit plan. This $1,000 is ex-
cluded from George's income.
Although the dollar limit for his work-related 
expenses is $3,000 (one qualifying person), 
George figures his credit on only $2,000 of the 
$2,900 work-related expenses he paid. This is 
because his dollar limit is reduced as shown 
next.
George's Reduced Dollar Limit
1. Maximum allowable expenses for one 
qualifying person ........... $3,000
2. Minus: Dependent care benefits 
George excludes from income .... −1,000
3. Reduced dollar limit on expenses 
George can use for the credit ..... $2,000
Example 2. Randall is married and both he 
and his wife are employed. Each has earned in-
come in excess of $6,000. They have two chil-
dren, Anne and Andy, ages 2 and 4, who attend 
a daycare facility licensed and regulated by the 
state. Randall's work-related expenses are 
$6,000 for the year.
Randall's employer has a dependent care 
assistance program as part of its cafeteria plan, 
which allows employees to make pre-tax contri-
butions to a dependent care flexible spending 
arrangement. Randall has elected to take the 
maximum $5,000 exclusion from his salary to 
cover dependent care expenses through this 
program.
Although the dollar limit for his work-related 
expenses is $6,000 (two or more qualifying 
TIP
persons), Randall figures his credit on only 
$1,000 of the $6,000 work-related expense 
paid. This is because his dollar limit is reduced 
as shown next.
Randall's Reduced Dollar Limit
1. Maximum allowable expenses for two 
qualifying persons ........... $6,000
2. Minus: Dependent care benefits Randall 
selects from employer's cafeteria plan 
and excludes from income ....... −5,000
3. Reduced dollar limit on expenses 
Randall can use for the credit ...... $1,000
Amount of Credit
To determine the amount of your credit, multiply 
your work-related expenses (after applying the 
earned income and dollar limits) by a percent-
age. This percentage depends on your adjusted 
gross income shown on Form 1040, line 38, or 
Form 1040A, line 22. The following table shows 
the percentage to use based on adjusted gross 
income.
IF your adjusted gross 
income is:
THEN the 
percentage 
is:
Over:
But 
not 
over:
$    0 $15,000 35%
15,000 17,000 34%
17,000 19,000 33%
19,000 21,000 32%
21,000 23,000 31%
23,000 25,000 30%
25,000 27,000 29%
27,000 29,000 28%
29,000 31,000 27%
31,000 33,000 26%
33,000 35,000 25%
35,000 37,000 24%
37,000 39,000 23%
39,000 41,000 22%
41,000 43,000 21%
43,000 No limit 20%
How To Claim the 
Credit
To claim the credit, you can file Form 1040, 
Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR. You can’t claim 
the credit on Form 1040EZ or Form 
1040NR-EZ.
Form 1040, 1040A, or Form 1040NR.  You 
must complete Form 2441 and attach it to your 
Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR. En-
ter the credit on Form 1040, line 49; Form 
1040A, line 31; or Form 1040NR, line 47.
Limit on credit.  The amount of credit you can 
claim is generally limited to the amount of your 
tax. For more information, see the Instructions 
for Form 2441.
Tax credit not refundable.  You can’t get a 
refund for any part of the credit that’s more than 
this limit.
Recordkeeping. You should keep re-
cords of your work-related expenses. 
Also, if your dependent or spouse isn’t 
able to care for himself or herself, your records 
should show both the nature and the length of 
the disability. Other records you should keep to 
support your claim for the credit are described 
earlier under Care Provider Identification Test.
Do You Have 
Household 
Employees?
If you pay someone to come to your home and 
care for your dependent or spouse, you may be 
a household employer. If you're a household 
employer, you will need an EIN and you may 
have to pay employment taxes. If the individuals 
who work in your home are self-employed, you 
aren’t liable for any of the taxes discussed in 
this section. Self-employed persons who are in 
business for themselves aren’t household em-
ployees. Usually, you aren’t a household em-
ployer if the person who cares for your depend-
ent or spouse does so at his or her home or 
place of business.
If you use a placement agency that exerci-
ses control over what work is done and how it 
will be done by a babysitter or companion who 
works in your home, the worker isn’t your em-
ployee. This control could include providing 
rules of conduct and appearance and requiring 
regular reports. In this case, you don’t have to 
pay employment taxes. But, if an agency merely 
gives you a list of sitters and you hire one from 
that list, and pay the sitter directly, the sitter 
may be your employee.
If you have a household employee, you may 
be subject to:
1. Social security and Medicare taxes,
2. Federal unemployment tax, and
3. Federal income tax withholding.
Social security and Medicare taxes are gener-
ally withheld from the employee's pay and 
matched by the employer. Federal unemploy-
ment (FUTA) tax is paid by the employer only 
and provides for payments of unemployment 
compensation to workers who have lost their 
jobs. Federal income tax is withheld from the 
employee's total pay if the employee asks you 
to do so and you agree.
For more information on a household em-
ployer's tax responsibilities, see Pub. 926 and 
Schedule H (Form 1040) and its instructions.
State employment tax. You also may have to 
pay state unemployment tax. Contact your state 
unemployment tax office for information. You 
should also find out whether you need to pay or 
collect other state employment taxes or carry 
workers' compensation insurance. For a list of 
state unemployment tax agencies, visit the U.S. 
Department of Labor's website. A link to that 
website is in Pub. 926, or you can find it with an 
online search.
RECORDS
Page 221 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 219

33.
Credit for the 
Elderly or the 
Disabled
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Introduction
If you qualify, you may be able to reduce the tax 
you owe by taking the credit for the elderly or 
the disabled on Schedule R (Form 1040A or 
1040).
This chapter explains:
Who qualifies for the credit for the elderly 
or the disabled, and
How to claim the credit.
You may be able to take the credit for the 
elderly or the disabled if:
You are age 65 or older at the end of 2017, 
or
You retired on permanent and total disabil-
ity and have taxable disability income.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Tax Guide for Seniors
Form (and Instructions)
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
CAUTION
!
  524 
  554 
  Schedule R (Form 1040A or 1040) 
Are You Eligible
for the Credit?
You can take the credit for the elderly or the dis-
abled if you meet both of the following require-
ments.
You are a qualified individual.
Your income isn't more than certain limits.
You can use Figure 33-A  and Table 33-1  as 
guides to see if you are eligible for the credit. 
Use Figure 33-A first to see if you are a qualified 
individual. If you are, go to Table 33-1 to make 
sure your income isn't too high to take the 
credit.
You can take the credit only if you file 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can't 
take the credit if you file Form 1040EZ 
or Form 1040NR.
Qualified Individual
You are a qualified individual for this credit if 
you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, and ei-
ther of the following applies.
1. You were age 65 or older at the end of 
2017.
2. You were under age 65 at the end of 2017 
and all three of the following statements 
are true.
a. You retired on permanent and total 
disability (explained later).
b. You received taxable disability in-
come for 2017.
c. On January 1, 2017, you had not 
reached mandatory retirement age 
(defined later under Disability in-
come).
Age 65.  You are considered to be age 65 on 
the day before your 65th birthday. Therefore, if 
you were born on January 1, 1953, you are con-
sidered to be age 65 at the end of 2017.
Death of a taxpayer. If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2017, consider 
the taxpayer to be age 65 at the end of 2017 if 
he or she was age 65 or older on the day before 
their death. For example, if the taxpayer was 
born on February 14, 1952, and died on Febru-
ary 13, 2017, the taxpayer is considered age 65 
at the time of death. However, if the taxpayer 
died on February 12, 2017, the taxpayer isn't 
considered age 65 at the time of death or at the 
end of 2017.
U.S. Citizen or Resident Alien
You must be a U.S. citizen or resident alien (or 
be treated as a resident alien) to take the credit. 
Generally, you can't take the credit if you were a 
nonresident alien at any time during the tax 
year.
Exceptions. You may be able to take the 
credit if you are a nonresident alien who is mar-
ried to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end 
of the tax year and you and your spouse 
choose to treat you as a U.S. resident alien. If 
TIP
you make that choice, both you and your 
spouse are taxed on your worldwide incomes.
If you were a nonresident alien at the begin-
ning of the year and a resident alien at the end 
of the year, and you were married to a U.S. citi-
zen or resident alien at the end of the year, you 
may be able to choose to be treated as a U.S. 
resident alien for the entire year. In that case, 
you may be allowed to take the credit.
For information on these choices, see chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Married Persons
Generally, if you are married at the end of the 
tax year, you and your spouse must file a joint 
return to take the credit. However, if you and 
your spouse didn't live in the same household 
at any time during the tax year, you can file ei-
ther a joint return or separate returns and still 
take the credit.
Head of household.  You can file as head of 
household and qualify to take the credit, even if 
your spouse lived with you during the first 6 
months of the year, if you meet certain tests. 
See Head of Household  in chapter 2 for the 
tests you must meet.
Under Age 65
If you are under age 65 at the end of 2017, you 
can qualify for the credit only if you are retired 
on permanent and total disability (discussed 
next) and have taxable disability income (dis-
cussed later under Disability income ). You are 
retired on permanent and total disability if:
You were permanently and totally disabled 
when you retired, and
You retired on disability before the close of 
the tax year.
Even if you don't retire formally, you may be 
considered retired on disability when you have 
stopped working because of your disability.
If you retired on disability before 1977, and 
weren't permanently and totally disabled at the 
time, you can qualify for the credit if you were 
permanently and totally disabled on January 1, 
1976, or January 1, 1977.
You are considered to be under age 65 
at the end of 2017 if you were born af-
ter January 1, 1953.
Permanent and total disability.  You have a 
permanent and total disability if you can't en-
gage in any substantial gainful activity because 
of your physical or mental condition. A qualified 
physician must certify that the condition has las-
ted or can be expected to last continuously for 
12 months or more, or that the condition can be 
expected to result in death. See Physician's 
statement, later.
Substantial gainful activity.  Substantial 
gainful activity is the performance of significant 
duties over a reasonable period of time while 
working for pay or profit, or in work generally 
done for pay or profit. Full-time work (or 
part-time work done at your employer's conven-
ience) in a competitive work situation for at least 
the minimum wage conclusively shows that you 
are able to engage in substantial gainful activity.
TIP
Page 222 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 220 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Note. Information on minimum wage rates 
is available on the Department of Labor's Wage 
and Hour Division webpage at www.dol.gov/
general/topic/wages/minimumwage.
Substantial gainful activity isn't work you do 
to take care of yourself or your home. It isn't un-
paid work on hobbies, institutional therapy or 
training, school attendance, clubs, social pro-
grams, and similar activities. However, the na-
ture of the work you perform may show that you 
are able to engage in substantial gainful activity.
The fact that you haven't worked or have 
been unemployed for some time isn't, of itself, 
conclusive evidence that you can't engage in 
substantial gainful activity. See Pub. 524 for 
some examples of activity that may constitute 
substantial gainful activity.
Sheltered employment.  Certain work of-
fered at qualified locations to physically or men-
tally impaired persons is considered sheltered 
employment. These qualified locations include 
work centers that are certified by the Depart-
ment of Labor (formerly referred to as sheltered 
workshops), hospitals, and similar institutions; 
homebound programs; and Department of Vet-
erans Affairs (VA) sponsored homes.
Compared to commercial employment, pay 
is lower for sheltered employment. Therefore, 
one usually doesn't look for sheltered employ-
ment if he or she can get other employment. 
The fact that one has accepted sheltered em-
ployment isn't proof of the person's ability to en-
gage in substantial gainful activity.
Physician's statement.  If you are under age 
65, you must have your physician complete a 
statement certifying that you had a permanent 
and total disability on the date you retired. You 
can use the statement in the Instructions for 
Schedule R.
You don't have to file this statement with 
your Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but you must 
keep it for your records.
Veterans. If the Department of Veterans Af-
fairs (VA) certifies that you have a permanent 
and total disability, you can substitute VA Form 
21-0172, Certification of Permanent and Total 
Disability, for the physician's statement you are 
required to keep. VA Form 21-0172 must be 
signed by a person authorized by the VA to do 
so. You can get this form from your local VA re-
gional office.
Physician's statement obtained in earlier 
year. If you got a physician's statement in an 
earlier year and, due to your continued disabled 
condition, you were unable to engage in any 
substantial gainful activity during 2017, you may 
not need to get another physician's statement 
for 2017. For a detailed explanation of the con-
ditions you must meet, see the instructions for 
Schedule R, Part II. If you meet the required 
conditions, check the box on your Schedule R, 
Part II, line 2.
If you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I of 
Schedule R, enter in the space above the box 
on line 2 in Part II the first name(s) of the 
spouse(s) for whom the box is checked. 
Disability income.  If you are under age 65, 
you must also have taxable disability income to 
qualify for the credit. Disability income must 
meet both of the following requirements.
1. It must be paid under your employer's ac-
cident or health plan or pension plan.
2. It must be included in your income as wa-
ges (or payments instead of wages) for the 
time you are absent from work because of 
permanent and total disability.
Payments that aren't disability income. 
Any payment you receive from a plan that 
doesn't provide for disability retirement isn't dis-
ability income. Any lump-sum payment for ac-
crued annual leave that you receive when you 
retire on disability is a salary payment and isn't 
disability income. 
For purposes of the credit for the elderly or 
the disabled, disability income doesn't include 
amounts you receive after you reach mandatory 
retirement age. Mandatory retirement age is the 
age set by your employer at which you would 
have had to retire, had you not become disa-
bled.
Income Limits
To determine if you can claim the credit, you 
must consider two income limits. The first limit 
Figure 33-A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
Were you married at the end of the tax
year?
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Did you receive taxable disability
bene/f_its during the tax year?
You are a quali/f_ied
individual and may be able
to take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled
unless your income
exceeds the limits in
Table 33-1. Yes
You aren’t a quali/f_ied
individual and can’t
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
Yes
No
Yes
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of the tax year, see U.S. Citizen or
Resident Alien under Qualiﬁed Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident alien, answer “Yes” to this question.
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become disabled.
START HERE
2
3
Did you live with your
spouse at any time
during the tax year?
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident alien?2
No
Yes
Are you /f_iling a joint
return with your spouse?
Yes
Were you 65 or older at the end of
the tax year?
No
Are you retired on permanent and
total disability?
No
No
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before the tax      year?        3
No
1
1 However, you may be able to claim this credit even if you lived with your spouse during the /f_irst 6 months of the tax year, as long as you qualify to /f_ile as head of 
household. You qualify to /f_ile as head of household if you are considered unmarried and meet certain other conditions. See chapter 2 for more information.
Page 223 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 221

is the amount of your adjusted gross income 
(AGI). The second limit is the amount of nontax-
able social security and other nontaxable pen-
sions, annuities, or disability income you re-
ceived. The limits are shown in Table 33-1.
If your AGI and nontaxable pensions, annui-
ties, or disability income are less than the in-
come limits, you may be able to claim the credit. 
See How To Claim the Credit, later.
If your AGI or your nontaxable pen-
sions, annuities, or disability income 
are equal to or more than the income 
limits, you can't take the credit.
How To Claim the 
Credit
You can figure the credit yourself or the IRS will 
figure it for you. If you want to figure the credit 
yourself, skip to Credit Figured by You, later.
CAUTION
!
Credit Figured for You
If you want the IRS to figure the credit for you, 
read the following discussion for the form you 
will file (Form 1040 or 1040A).
Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure your 
credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries  under Tax 
Figured by IRS in chapter 30.
Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure your 
credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries  under Tax 
Figured by IRS in chapter 30.
If you want the IRS to figure your tax, see 
chapter 30.
Credit Figured by You
To figure the credit yourself, first check the box 
in Part I of Schedule R that applies to you. Only 
check one box in Part I. If you check box 2, 4, 5, 
6, or 9 in Part I, also complete Part II of Sched-
ule R.
Next, figure the amount of your credit using 
Part III of Schedule R. For a step-by-step dis-
cussion about filling out Part III of Schedule R, 
see Figuring the Credit Yourself in Pub. 524.
Finally, report the amount from line 22 of 
Schedule R on your tax return. If you file Form 
1040A, enter the amount from Schedule R, 
line 22, on Form 1040A, line 32. If you file Form 
1040, include the amount from Schedule R, 
line 22, on line 54; check box c and enter “Sch 
R” on the line next to that box.
Limit on credit.  The amount of the credit you 
can claim is generally limited to the amount of 
your tax. Use the Credit Limit Worksheet in the 
Instructions for Schedule R to determine if your 
credit is limited.
Table 33-1. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
THEN, even if you qualify (see Figure 33-A), you CANNOT take the credit if...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)* is 
equal to or more than...
OR the total of your nontaxable social 
security and other nontaxable 
pension(s), annuities, or disability 
income is equal to or more than...
single, head of household, or 
qualifying widow(er)
$17,500 $5,000
married filing jointly and only one 
spouse qualifies in Figure 33-A
$20,000 $5,000
married filing jointly and both 
spouses qualify in Figure 33-A
$25,000 $7,500
married filing separately and you 
lived apart from your spouse for all 
of 2017
$12,500 $3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 22, or Form 1040, line 38.
Page 224 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 222 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

34.
Child Tax Credit
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can't be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Disaster tax relief.  Disaster tax relief was 
enacted for those impacted by Hurricane Har-
vey, Irma, or Maria, including provisions which 
allow taxpayers to use their 2016 earned in-
come to figure their 2017 additional child tax 
credit. See Pub. 976, Disaster Relief, for more 
information.
Form 8862 may be required.  If your child tax 
credit (CTC) or additional child tax credit 
(ACTC) was denied or reduced for any reason 
other than a math or clerical error  for any tax 
year beginning after 2015, you may be required 
to attach a completed Form 8862, Information 
To Claim Certain Refundable Credits After Dis-
allowance, to your 2017 tax return to claim the 
credit in 2017. See Form 8862 and its instruc-
tions for details.
Reminders
Taxpayer identification number (TIN) nee-
ded by due date of return.  If you do not have 
a social security number (SSN) or IRS individ-
ual taxpayer identification number (ITIN) by the 
due date of your 2017 return (including exten-
sions), you cannot claim the CTC or the ACTC 
on either your original or an amended 2017 re-
turn, even if you later get an SSN or ITIN. Also, 
neither credit is allowed on either your original 
or an amended 2017 return for a child who does 
not have an SSN, ITIN, or IRS adoption tax-
payer identification number (ATIN) by the due 
date of your return (including extensions), even 
if that child later gets one of those numbers.
If you apply for an ATIN or ITIN on or before 
the due date of your 2017 return (including ex-
tensions) and the IRS issues you an ATIN or 
ITIN as a result of the application, the IRS will 
consider your ATIN or ITIN as issued on or be-
fore the due date of your return.
Refunds for 2017 tax returns claiming the 
ACTC cannot be issued before February 15, 
CAUTION
!
2018.  Due to changes in the law, if you claim 
the ACTC on your income tax return, the IRS 
cannot issue your refund before February 15. 
This applies to the entire refund, not just the 
portion associated with the ACTC. Hardship 
claims for these refunds will not be accepted 
prior to February 15, as this refund hold is re-
quired by law.
The IRS will begin accepting and processing 
tax returns once the filing season begins. 
Check Where’s My Refund?  on IRS.gov after 
February 15 for your personalized refund sta-
tus. It's updated once a day and remains the 
best way to check the status of your refund.
New 2- and 10-year bans for disregarding 
CTC or ACTC rules.  If you claim the CTC or 
ACTC, but you are not eligible for the credit and 
it is later determined that your error was due to 
reckless or intentional disregard of the CTC or 
ACTC rules, you will not be allowed to claim ei-
ther credit for 2 years. If it is determined that 
your error was due to fraud, you will not be al-
lowed to claim either credit for 10 years. You 
may also have to pay penalties.
Introduction
The child tax credit is a credit that may reduce 
your tax by as much as $1,000 for each of your 
qualifying children.
The additional child tax credit is a credit you 
may be able to take if you are not able to claim 
the full amount of the child tax credit.
The child tax credit and the additional 
child tax credit should not be confused 
with the child and dependent care 
credit discussed in chapter 32.
If you have no tax.  Credits, such as the child 
tax credit or the child and dependent care 
credit, reduce your tax. If your tax on Form 
1040, line 47, or Form 1040A, line 30, is zero, 
you can't claim the child tax credit because 
there is no tax to reduce. However, you may 
qualify for the additional child tax credit on 
line 67 (Form 1040) or line 43 (Form 1040A).
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Child Tax Credit
Form (and Instructions)
Child Tax Credit
Qualifying Child
A qualifying child for purposes of the child tax 
credit is a child who:
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 
child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis-
ter, half brother, half sister, or a descend-
ant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild, niece, or nephew);
2. Was under age 17 at the end of 2017;
3. Did not provide over half of his or her own 
support for 2017;
CAUTION
!
  972
  Schedule 8812 (Form 1040A or 1040)
4. Lived with you for more than half of 2017 
(see Exceptions to time lived with you, 
later);
5. Is claimed as a dependent on your return;
6. Does not file a joint return for the year (or 
files it only to claim a refund of withheld in-
come tax or estimated tax paid); and
7. Was a U.S. citizen, a U.S. national, or a 
resident of the United States. If the child 
was adopted, see Adopted child, later.
For each qualifying child, you must check 
the box on Form 1040 or Form 1040A, line 6c.
Example 1. Your son turned 17 on Decem-
ber 30, 2017. He is a citizen of the United 
States and you claimed him as a dependent on 
your return. He is not a qualifying child for the 
child tax credit because he was not under age 
17 at the end of 2017.
Example 2.  Your daughter turned 8 years 
old in 2017. She is not a citizen of the United 
States, has an ITIN, and lived in Mexico all of 
2017. She is not a qualifying child for the child 
tax credit because she was not a U.S. citizen or 
national or a resident of the United States for 
2017.
Filers who have certain child dependents 
with an ITIN.  If you are claiming a child tax 
credit or additional child tax credit for a child 
you identified on your tax return with an ITIN in-
stead of an SSN, you must complete Part I of 
Schedule 8812 (Form 1040A or 1040).
Although a child may be your dependent, 
you may claim a child tax credit or additional 
child tax credit only for a dependent who is a 
citizen, national, or resident of the United 
States. To be treated as a resident of the United 
States, a child generally will need to meet the 
requirements of the substantial presence test. 
For more information about the substantial 
presence test, see Pub. 519, U.S. Tax Guide for 
Aliens.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. An adopted child in-
cludes a child lawfully placed with you for legal 
adoption.
If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national and 
your adopted child lived with you all year as a 
member of your household in 2017, that child 
meets condition (7) above to be a qualifying 
child for the child tax credit.
Exceptions to time lived with you.  A child is 
considered to have lived with you for more than 
half of 2017 if the child was born or died in 2017 
and your home was this child's home for more 
than half the time he or she was alive. Tempo-
rary absences by you or the child for special cir-
cumstances, such as for school, vacation, busi-
ness, medical care, military service, or 
detention in a juvenile facility, count as time the 
child lived with you.
There are also exceptions for kidnapped 
children and children of divorced or separated 
parents. For details, see Residency Test  in 
chapter 3.
Qualifying child of more than one person. 
A special rule applies if your qualifying child is 
the qualifying child of more than one person. 
Page 225 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 223

For details, see Special Rule for Qualifying 
Child of More Than One Person in chapter 3.
Amount of Credit
The maximum amount you can claim for the 
credit is $1,000 for each qualifying child.
Limits on the Credit
You must reduce your child tax credit if either 
(1) or (2) below applies.
1. The amount on Form 1040, line 47, or 
Form 1040A, line 30, is less than the 
credit. If this amount is zero, you cannot 
take this credit because there is no tax to 
reduce. But you may be able to take the 
additional child tax credit. See Additional 
Child Tax Credit, later.
2. Your modified adjusted gross income 
(AGI) is more than the amount shown be-
low for your filing status.
a. Married filing jointly—$110,000.
b. Single, head of household, or qualify-
ing widow(er)—$75,000.
c. Married filing separately—$55,000.
Modified AGI.  For purposes of the child tax 
credit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus the 
following amounts that may apply to you.
Any amount excluded from income be-
cause of the exclusion of income from
Puerto Rico. On the dotted line next to 
Form 1040, line 38, enter the amount ex-
cluded and identify it as “EPRI.” Also at-
tach a copy of any Form(s) 499R-2/W-2PR 
to your return.
Any amount on line 45 or line 50 of Form 
2555, Foreign Earned Income.
Any amount on line 18 of Form 2555-EZ, 
Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563, Ex-
clusion of Income for Bona Fide Residents 
of American Samoa.
If you do not have any of the above, your 
modified AGI is the same as your AGI.
AGI. Your AGI is the amount on Form 1040, 
line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22.
Claiming the Credit
To claim the child tax credit, you must file Form 
1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot claim the 
child tax credit on Form 1040EZ. You must pro-
vide the name and identification number (usu-
ally an SSN) on your tax return for each qualify-
ing child.
If you claim the child tax credit with a 
child identified by an ITIN, you must 
also file Schedule 8812.
To figure your credit, first review the Child 
Tax Credit Worksheet in your Form 1040 or 
1040A instructions. If you are instructed to use 
Pub. 972, you may not use the worksheet in 
your tax return instructions; instead, you must 
use Pub. 972 to figure the credit. If you are not 
instructed to use Pub. 972, you may use the 
CAUTION
!
Child Tax Credit Worksheet in your Form 1040 
or 1040A instructions or Pub. 972 to figure the 
credit.
Additional Child Tax 
Credit
This credit is for certain individuals who get less 
than the full amount of the child tax credit. The 
additional child tax credit may give you a refund 
even if you do not owe any tax.
If your main home was located in an 
area affected by Hurricane Harvey, 
Irma, or Maria, you can elect to use 
your 2016 earned income for the additional 
child tax credit. See the Instructions for Sched-
ule 8812 for more information.
Foreign earned income. If you file Form 2555 
or 2555-EZ (both relating to foreign earned in-
come), you cannot claim the additional child tax 
credit.
How to claim the additional child tax credit. 
To claim the additional child tax credit, follow 
the steps below.
1. Make sure you figured the amount, if any, 
of your child tax credit. See Claiming the 
Credit, earlier.
2. If you answered “Yes” on line 9 or line 10 
of the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in the 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions, or 
line 13 of the Child Tax Credit Worksheet 
in Pub. 972, use Parts II through IV of 
Schedule 8812 to see if you can take the 
additional child tax credit.
3. If you have an additional child tax credit on 
line 13 of Schedule 8812, carry it to Form 
1040, line 67, or Form 1040A, line 43.
Completing Schedule 
8812 (Form 1040A or 
1040)
Schedule 8812 contains four parts, but can also 
be thought of as having two sections. Part I is 
distinct and separate from Parts II–IV.
If all your children are identified by 
SSNs or IRS ATINs and you are not 
claiming the additional child tax credit, 
you do not need to complete or attach Schedule 
8812 to your tax return.
Part I
Complete Part I only if you are claiming the 
child tax credit for a child identified by an IRS 
ITIN. When completing Part I, answer the ques-
tions only with regard to children identified by 
an ITIN; you do not need to complete Part I of 
Schedule 8812 for any child who is identified by 
an SSN or an IRS ATIN. If all the children for 
whom you checked the box in column 4 of 
line 6c on your Form 1040 or Form 1040A are 
identified by an SSN or an ATIN, you do not 
need to complete Part I of Schedule 8812.
CAUTION
!
TIP
Parts II–IV
Parts II–IV help you figure your additional child 
tax credit. Generally, you should complete Parts 
II–IV only if you are instructed to do so after 
completing the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in 
your tax return instructions or Pub. 972. See 
How to claim the additional child tax credit , ear-
lier.
35.
Education 
Credits
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return. 
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted, 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Form 8862 may be required.  If your Ameri-
can opportunity credit was denied or reduced 
for any reason other than a math or clerical er-
ror for any tax year beginning after 2015, you 
may be required to attach a completed Form 
8862, Information To Claim Certain Refundable 
Credits After Disallowance, to your 2017 tax re-
turn to claim the credit in 2017. See Form 8862 
and its instructions for details.
Limits on modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI). The lifetime learning credit MAGI limit 
increases to $132,000 if you are filing married 
filing jointly ($66,000 if you are filing single, 
head of household, or qualifying widow(er)). 
The American opportunity credit MAGI limits re-
main unchanged. See Table 35-1.
Reminders
Form 1098-T requirement.  For tax years be-
ginning after June 29, 2015, the law requires a 
taxpayer (or a dependent) to have received a 
Form 1098-T from an eligible educational insti-
tution in order to claim the American opportunity 
credit or the lifetime learning credit.
CAUTION
!
Page 226 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 224 Chapter 35 Education Credits

However, a taxpayer may claim one of these 
education benefits if the student does not re-
ceive a Form 1098-T because the student’s ed-
ucational institution is not required to send a 
Form 1098-T to the student under existing rules 
(for example, if the student is a nonresident 
alien, has qualified education expenses paid 
entirely with scholarships, has qualified educa-
tion expenses paid under a formal billing ar-
rangement, or is enrolled in courses for which 
no credit is awarded). If a student’s educational 
institution is not required to provide a Form 
1098-T to the student, a taxpayer may claim 
one of these education benefits without a Form 
1098-T if the taxpayer otherwise qualifies, can 
demonstrate that the taxpayer (or a dependent) 
was enrolled at an eligible educational institu-
tion, and can substantiate the payment of quali-
fied tuition and related expenses.
To claim the American opportunity 
credit, you must provide the educa-
tional institution's employer identifica-
tion number (EIN) on your Form 8863. You 
should be able to obtain this information from 
Form 1098-T or the educational institution.
Ban on claiming the American opportunity 
credit. If you claim the American opportunity 
credit even though you're not eligible, you may 
be banned from claiming the credit for 2 or 10 
years depending on your conduct. See the Cau-
tion statement under Introduction, later.
Taxpayer identification number (TIN) nee-
ded by due date of return. If you don’t have a 
TIN by the due date of your 2017 return (includ-
ing extensions), you can’t claim the American 
opportunity credit on either your original or an 
amended 2017 return, even if you later get a 
CAUTION
!
TIN. Also, the American opportunity credit isn’t 
allowed on either your original or an amended 
2017 return for a student who doesn’t have a 
TIN by the due date of your return (including ex-
tensions), even if that student later gets a TIN.
Introduction
For 2017, there are two tax credits available to 
help you offset the costs of higher education by 
reducing the amount of your income tax. They 
are:
The American opportunity credit, and
The lifetime learning credit.
This chapter will present an overview of these 
education credits. To get the detailed informa-
tion you will need to claim either of the credits, 
and for examples illustrating that information, 
see chapters 2 and 3 of Pub. 970.
Can you claim more than one education 
credit this year?  For each student, you can 
elect for any year only one of the credits. For 
example, if you choose to claim the American 
opportunity credit for a child on your 2017 tax 
return, you can’t, for that same child, also claim 
the lifetime learning credit for 2017.
If you are eligible to claim the American op-
portunity credit and you are also eligible to 
claim the lifetime learning credit for the same 
student in the same year, you can choose to 
claim either credit, but not both.
If you pay qualified education expenses for 
more than one student in the same year, you 
can choose to claim the American opportunity 
and the lifetime learning credits on a per-stu-
dent, per-year basis. This means that, for 
example, you can claim the American opportu-
nity credit for one student and the lifetime learn-
ing credit for another student in the same year.
The American opportunity credit will al-
ways be greater than or equal to the 
lifetime learning credit for any student 
who is eligible for both credits. However, if any 
of the conditions for the American opportunity 
credit, listed in Table 35-1 , aren’t met for any 
student, you can’t take the American opportu-
nity credit for that student. You may be able to 
take the lifetime learning credit for part or all of 
that student's qualified education expenses in-
stead. See chapter 19  and chapter 27  of this 
publication, and also Pub. 970, for information 
on other education benefits.
Don't claim the American opportunity 
credit for 2 years after there was a final 
determination that your claim was due 
to reckless or intentional disregard of the rules, 
or 10 years after there was a final determination 
that your claim was due to fraud.
Differences between the American opportu-
nity and lifetime learning credits.  There are 
several differences between these two credits. 
These differences are summarized in Ta-
ble 35-1.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Tax Benefits for Education
TIP
CAUTION
!  970
Table 35-1. Comparison of Education Credits for 2017
Caution. You can claim both the American opportunity credit and the lifetime learning credit on the same return—but not for the same student.
American Opportunity Credit Lifetime Learning Credit
Maximum credit Up to $2,500 credit per eligible student Up to $2,000 credit per return
Limit on modified 
adjusted gross income 
(MAGI)
$180,000 if married filing jointly; 
$90,000 if single, head of household, or qualifying 
widow(er)
$132,000 if married filing jointly; 
$66,000 if single, head of household, or qualifying 
widow(er) 
Refundable or 
nonrefundable
40% of credit may be refundable Nonrefundable—credit limited to the amount of tax you 
must pay on your taxable income
Number of years of 
postsecondary education
Available ONLY if the student had not completed the first 
4 years of postsecondary education before 2017
Available for all years of postsecondary education and for 
courses to acquire or improve job skills
Number of tax years 
credit available
Available ONLY for 4 tax years per eligible student 
(including any year(s) the Hope scholarship credit was 
claimed)
Available for an unlimited number of tax years
Type of program required Student must be pursuing a program leading to a degree 
or other recognized education credential 
Student does not need to be pursuing a program leading 
to a degree or other recognized education credential
Number of courses Student must be enrolled at least half-time for at least 
one academic period beginning during 2017 (or the first 3 
months of 2018 if the qualified expenses were paid in 
2017)
Available for one or more courses
Felony drug conviction At the end of 2017, the student had not been convicted 
of a felony for possessing or distributing a controlled 
substance
Felony drug convictions do not make the student 
ineligible
Qualified expenses Tuition, required enrollment fees, and course materials 
that the student needs for a course of study whether or 
not the materials are bought at the educational institution 
as a condition of enrollment or attendance
Tuition and required enrollment fees (including amounts 
required to be paid to the institution for course-related 
books, supplies, and equipment) 
Payments for academic 
periods
Payments made in 2017 for academic periods beginning in 2017 or beginning in the first 3 months of 2018 
TIN needed by filing due 
date
Filers and students must have a TIN by the due date of 
their 2017 return (including extensions) 
Educational institution's 
EIN
You must provide the educational institution's employer 
identification number (EIN) on your Form 8863
Page 227 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 225

Form (and Instructions)
Education Credits (American 
Opportunity and Lifetime Learning 
Credits)
Who Can Claim an 
Education Credit
You may be able to claim an education credit if 
you, your spouse, or a dependent you claim on 
your tax return was a student enrolled at or at-
tending an eligible educational institution. For 
2017, the credits are based on the amount of 
qualified education expenses paid for the stu-
dent in 2017 for academic periods beginning in 
2017 and in the first 3 months of 2018.
For example, if you paid $1,500 in Decem-
ber 2017 for qualified tuition for the spring 2018 
semester beginning in January 2018, you may 
be able to use that $1,500 in figuring your 2017 
education credit(s).
Academic period.  An academic period in-
cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other 
period of study (such as a summer school ses-
sion) as reasonably determined by an educa-
tional institution. If an educational institution 
uses credit hours or clock hours and doesn’t 
have academic terms, each payment period 
can be treated as an academic period.
Eligible educational institution.  An eligible 
educational institution is generally any college, 
university, vocational school, or other postse-
condary educational institution eligible to partic-
ipate in a student aid program administered by 
the U.S. Department of Education. Virtually all 
accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary 
(privately owned profit-making) postsecondary 
institutions meet this definition. The educational 
institution should be able to tell you if it is an eli-
gible educational institution.
Certain educational institutions located out-
side the United States also participate in the 
U.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu-
dent Aid (FSA) programs.
Who can claim a dependent's expenses.  If 
an exemption is allowed for any person who 
claims the student as a dependent, all qualified 
education expenses of the student are treated 
as having been paid by that person. Therefore, 
only that person can claim an education credit 
for the student. If a student is not claimed as a 
dependent on another person's tax return, only 
the student can claim a credit.
Expenses paid by a third party.  Qualified 
education expenses paid on behalf of the stu-
dent by someone other than the student (such 
as a relative) are treated as paid by the student. 
However, qualified education expenses paid (or 
treated as paid) by a student who is claimed as 
a dependent on your tax return are treated as 
paid by you. Therefore, you are treated as hav-
ing paid expenses that were paid by the third 
party. For more information and an example, 
see Who Can Claim a Dependent's Expenses 
in Pub. 970, chapter 2 or 3.
Who cannot claim a credit.  You can’t claim 
an education credit if any of the following apply.
1. Your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately.
  8863 
2. You are claimed as a dependent on an-
other person's tax return, such as your pa-
rent's return.
3. You (or your spouse) were a nonresident 
alien for any part of 2017 and the nonresi-
dent alien did not elect to be treated as a 
resident alien for tax purposes.
4. You didn't have a social security number 
(SSN) (or individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN)) by the due date of your 
2017 return (including extensions), you 
can't claim the American opportunity credit 
on either your original or an amended 
2017 return, even if you later get an SSN 
(or ITIN). Also, you can't claim this credit 
on your original or an amended 2017 re-
turn for a student who didn't have an SSN, 
adoption taxpayer identification number 
(ATIN), or ITIN by the due date of your re-
turn (including extensions), even if the stu-
dent later gets one of those numbers.
5. Your MAGI is one of the following.
a. American opportunity credit: 
$180,000 or more if married filing 
jointly; or $90,000 or more if single, 
head of household, or qualifying 
widow(er).
b. Lifetime learning credit: $132,000 or 
more if married filing jointly; or 
$66,000 or more if single, head of 
household, or qualifying widow(er).
Generally, your MAGI is the amount on your 
Form 1040, line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22. 
However, if you are filing Form 2555, Form 
2555-EZ, or Form 4563, or are excluding in-
come from Puerto Rico, add to the amount on 
your Form 1040, line 38, or Form 1040A, 
line 22, the amount of income you excluded. 
For details, see Pub. 970.
Figure 35-A may be helpful in determining if 
you can claim an education credit on your tax 
return.
Qualified Education 
Expenses
Generally, qualified education expenses are 
amounts paid in 2017 for tuition and fees re-
quired for the student's enrollment or attend-
ance at an eligible educational institution. It 
doesn’t matter whether the expenses were paid 
in cash, by check, by credit or debit card, or 
with borrowed funds.
For course-related books, supplies, and 
equipment, only certain expenses qualify.
American opportunity credit: Qualified edu-
cation expenses include amounts spent on 
books, supplies, and equipment needed 
for a course of study, whether or not the 
materials are purchased from the educa-
tional institution as a condition of enroll-
ment or attendance.
Lifetime learning credit: Qualified educa-
tion expenses include amounts for books, 
supplies, and equipment only if required 
to be paid to the institution as a condition 
of enrollment or attendance.
Qualified education expenses include nona-
cademic fees, such as student activity fees, ath-
letic fees, or other expenses unrelated to the 
academic course of instruction, only if the fee 
must be paid to the institution as a condition of 
enrollment or attendance. However, fees for 
personal expenses (described below) are never 
qualified education expenses.
Qualified education expenses for either 
credit do not include amounts paid for the fol-
lowing.
Personal expenses. This means room and 
board, insurance, medical expenses (in-
cluding student health fees), transporta-
tion, and other similar personal, living, or 
family expenses.
Any course or other education involving 
sports, games, or hobbies, or any noncre-
dit course, unless such course or other ed-
ucation is part of the student's degree pro-
gram or (for the lifetime learning credit 
only) helps the student acquire or improve 
job skills.
The student may receive Form 1098-T, Tui-
tion Statement, from the institution reporting ei-
ther payments received in 2017 (box 1) or 
amounts billed in 2017 (box 2). However, the 
amount on your Form 1098-T, box 1 or 2, may 
be different from the amount you paid (or are 
treated as having paid). In completing Form 
8863, use only the amounts you actually paid 
(plus any amounts you are treated as having 
paid) in 2017, reduced as necessary, as descri-
bed in Adjustments to Qualified Education Ex-
penses, later. See chapters 2 and 3 of Pub. 970 
for more information on Form 1098-T.
Qualified education expenses paid on be-
half of the student by someone other than the 
student (such as a relative) are treated as paid 
by the student. Qualified education expenses 
paid (or treated as paid) by a student who is 
claimed as a dependent on your tax return are 
treated as paid by you.
If you or the student takes a deduction for 
higher education expenses, such as on Sched-
ule A or C (Form 1040), you can’t use those ex-
penses in your qualified education expenses 
when figuring your education credits.
Qualified education expenses for any 
academic period must be reduced by 
any tax-free educational assistance al-
locable to that academic period. See Adjust-
ments to Qualified Education Expenses, later.
Prepaid expenses.  Qualified education ex-
penses paid in 2017 for an academic period 
that begins in the first 3 months of 2018 can be 
used in figuring an education credit for 2017 
only. See Academic period , earlier. For exam-
ple, if you pay $2,000 in December 2017 for 
qualified tuition for the 2018 winter quarter that 
begins in January 2018, you can use that 
$2,000 in figuring an education credit for 2017 
only (if you meet all the other requirements).
You cannot use any amount you paid 
in 2016 or 2018 to figure the qualified 
education expenses you use to figure 
your 2017 education credit(s).
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 228 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 226 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Paid with borrowed funds.  You can claim an 
education credit for qualified education expen-
ses paid with the proceeds of a loan. Use the 
expenses to figure the credit for the year in 
which the expenses are paid, not the year in 
which the loan is repaid. Treat loan payments 
sent directly to the educational institution as 
paid on the date the institution credits the stu-
dent's account.
Student withdraws from class(es).  You can 
claim an education credit for qualified education 
expenses not refunded when a student with-
draws.
No Double Benefit Allowed
You can’t do any of the following.
Deduct higher education expenses on your 
income tax return (as, for example, a busi-
ness expense) and also claim an educa-
tion credit based on those same expenses.
Claim more than one education credit 
based on the same qualified education ex-
penses.
Claim an education credit based on the 
same expenses used to figure the tax-free 
portion of a distribution from a Coverdell 
education savings account (ESA) or quali-
fied tuition program (QTP).
Claim an education credit based on quali-
fied education expenses paid with educa-
tional assistance, such as a tax-free schol-
arship, grant, or employer-provided 
educational assistance. See Adjustments 
to Qualified Education Expenses next.
Adjustments to Qualified 
Education Expenses
For each student, reduce the qualified educa-
tion expenses paid in 2017 by or on behalf of 
that student under the following rules. The re-
sult is the amount of adjusted qualified educa-
tion expenses for each student.
Tax-free educational assistance.  For 
tax-free educational assistance received in 
2017, reduce the qualified educational expen-
ses for each academic period by the amount of 
tax-free educational assistance allocable to that 
academic period. See Academic period, earlier.
Tax-free educational assistance includes:
The tax-free parts of scholarships and fel-
lowship grants (including Pell grants) (see 
chapter 12 of this publication and chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 970 for more information),
The tax-free part of employer-provided ed-
ucational assistance (see Pub. 970),
Veterans' educational assistance (see 
chapter 1 of Pub. 970), and
Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments 
(other than gifts or inheritances) received 
as educational assistance.
You may be able to increase the com-
bined value of an education credit if the 
student includes some or all of a schol-
arship or fellowship grant in income in the year 
it is received. See Coordination with Pell grants 
and other scholarships , later. Also, for more in-
formation, see examples in Coordination with 
Pell grants and other scholarships  in chapters 2 
and 3 of Pub. 970.
Generally, any scholarship or fellowship 
grant is treated as tax-free educational assis-
tance. However, a scholarship or fellowship 
grant isn’t treated as tax-free educational assis-
tance to the extent the student includes it in 
gross income (the student may or may not be 
required to file a tax return) for the year the 
scholarship or fellowship grant is received and 
either:
The scholarship or fellowship grant (or any 
part of it) must be applied (by its terms) to 
expenses (such as room and board) other 
than qualified education expenses as de-
fined in Qualified education expenses in 
Pub. 970, chapter 1; or
The scholarship or fellowship grant (or any 
part of it) may be applied (by its terms) to 
expenses (such as room and board) other 
than qualified education expenses as de-
fined in Qualified education expenses in 
Pub. 970, chapter 1.
Coordination with Pell grants and other 
scholarships.  You may be able to increase 
an education credit and reduce your total tax or 
increase your tax refund if the student (you, 
your spouse, or your dependent) chooses to in-
clude all or part of certain scholarships or fel-
lowship grants in income. The scholarship or 
fellowship grant must be one that may qualify 
as a tax-free scholarship under the rules dis-
cussed in chapter 1 of Pub. 970. Also, the 
scholarship or fellowship grant must be one that 
may (by its terms) be used for expenses other 
than qualified education expenses (such as 
room and board).
The fact that the educational institution ap-
plies the scholarship or fellowship grant to 
qualified education expenses (such as tuition 
and related fees) doesn’t prevent the student 
from choosing to apply certain scholarships or 
fellowship grants to other expenses (such as 
room and board). By choosing to do so, the stu-
dent will include the part applied to other expen-
ses (such as room and board) in gross income 
and may be required to file a tax return. How-
ever, this allows payments made in cash, by 
check, by credit or debit card, or with borrowed 
funds such as a student loan, to be applied to 
qualified education expenses. These payments, 
unlike certain scholarships or fellowship grants, 
will not reduce the qualified education expen-
ses available to figure an education credit. The 
result is generally a larger education credit that 
reduces your total tax or increases your tax re-
fund.
Example 1.  Last year, your child gradu-
ated from high school and enrolled in college 
for the fall semester. You and your child meet 
all other requirements to claim the American op-
portunity credit, and you need to determine ad-
justed qualified education expenses to figure 
the credit.
TIP
Your child has $5,000 of qualified education 
expenses and $4,000 of room and board. Your 
child received a $5,000 Pell grant and took out 
a $2,750 student loan to pay these expenses. 
You paid the remaining $1,250. The Pell grant 
by its terms may be used for any of these ex-
penses.
If you and your child choose to apply the 
Pell grant to the qualified education expenses, it 
will qualify as a tax-free scholarship under the 
rules discussed in chapter 1 of Pub. 970. Your 
child will not include any part of the Pell grant in 
gross income. After reducing qualified educa-
tion expenses by the tax-free scholarship, you 
will have $0 ($5,000 – $5,000) of adjusted quali-
fied education expenses available to figure your 
credit. Your credit will be $0.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1. If, unlike in Example 1, you and your 
child choose to apply only $1,000 of the Pell 
grant to the qualified education expenses and 
to apply the remaining $4,000 to room and 
board, only $1,000 will qualify as a tax-free 
scholarship.
Your child will include the $4,000 applied to 
room and board in gross income, and it will be 
treated as earned income for purposes of deter-
mining whether your child is required to file a 
tax return. If the $4,000 is your child’s only in-
come, your child will not be required to file a tax 
return.
After reducing qualified education expenses 
by the tax-free scholarship, you will have 
$4,000 ($5,000 – $1,000) of adjusted qualified 
education expenses available to figure your 
credit. Your refundable American opportunity 
credit will be $1,000. Your nonrefundable credit 
may be as much as $1,500, but depends on 
your tax liability.
If you aren’t otherwise required to file a tax 
return, you should file to get a refund of your 
$1,000 refundable credit, but your tax liability 
and nonrefundable credit will be $0.
Note.  The result may be different if your 
child has other income or if you are the student. 
If you are the student and you claim the earned 
income credit, choosing not to apply a Pell 
grant to qualified education expenses may de-
crease your earned income credit at certain in-
come levels by increasing your adjusted gross 
income. For more information, see Coordination 
with Pell grants and other scholarships  in chap-
ters 2 and 3 of Pub. 970.
Tax-free educational assistance treated as 
a refund.  Some tax-free educational assis-
tance received after 2017 may be treated as a 
refund of qualified education expenses paid in 
2017. This tax-free educational assistance is 
any tax-free educational assistance received by 
you or anyone else after 2017 for qualified edu-
cation expenses paid on behalf of a student in 
2017 (or attributable to enrollment at an eligible 
educational institution during 2017).
If this tax-free educational assistance is re-
ceived after 2017 but before you file your 2017 
income tax return, see Refunds received after 
2017 but before your income tax return is filed , 
later. If this tax-free educational assistance is 
received after 2017 and after you file your 2017 
income tax return, see Refunds received after 
Page 229 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 227

2017 and after your income tax return is filed , 
later.
Refunds. A refund of qualified education ex-
penses may reduce qualified education expen-
ses for the tax year or may require you to repay 
(recapture) the credit that you claimed in an 
earlier year. Some tax-free educational assis-
tance received after 2017 may be treated as a 
refund. See Tax-free educational assistance , 
earlier.
Refunds received in 2017.  For each stu-
dent, figure the adjusted qualified education ex-
penses for 2017 by adding all the qualified edu-
cation expenses paid in 2017 and subtracting 
any refunds of those expenses received from 
the eligible educational institution during 2017.
Refunds received after 2017 but before 
your income tax return is filed.  If anyone re-
ceives a refund after 2017 of qualified educa-
tion expenses paid on behalf of a student in 
2017 and the refund is received before you file 
your 2017 income tax return, reduce the 
amount of qualified education expenses for 
2017 by the amount of the refund.
Refunds received after 2017 and after 
your income tax return is filed.  If anyone re-
ceives a refund after 2017 of qualified educa-
tion expenses paid on behalf of a student in 
2017 and the refund is received after you file 
your 2017 income tax return, you may need to 
repay some or all of the credit that you claimed. 
See Credit recapture next.
Credit recapture.  If any tax-free educational 
assistance for the qualified education expenses 
paid in 2017, or any refund of your qualified ed-
ucation expenses paid in 2017, is received after 
you file your 2017 income tax return, you must 
recapture (repay) any excess credit. You do this 
by refiguring the amount of your adjusted quali-
fied education expenses for 2017 by reducing 
the expenses by the amount of the refund or 
tax-free educational assistance. You then refig-
ure your education credit(s) for 2017 and figure 
the amount by which your 2017 tax liability 
would have increased if you had claimed the re-
figured credit(s). Include that amount as an ad-
ditional tax for the year the refund or tax-free 
assistance was received.
Example. You paid $8,000 for tuition and 
fees in December 2017 for your child's spring 
semester beginning in January 2018. You filed 
your 2017 tax return on February 3, 2018, and 
claimed a lifetime learning credit of $1,600 
($8,000 qualified education expense paid x 
0.20). You claimed no other tax credits. After 
you filed your return, your child withdrew from 
two courses and you received a refund of 
$1,400. You must refigure your 2017 lifetime 
learning credit using $6,600 ($8,000 qualified 
education expenses − $1,400 refund). The re-
figured credit is $1,320 and your tax liability in-
creased by $280. You must include the differ-
ence of $280 ($1,600 credit originally claimed − 
$1,320 refigured credit) as additional tax on 
your 2018 income tax return. See the instruc-
tions for your 2018 income tax return to deter-
mine where to include this tax.
If you also pay qualified education ex-
penses in both 2017 and 2018 for an 
academic period that begins in the first 
3 months of 2018 and you receive tax-free edu-
cational assistance, or a refund, as described 
above, you may choose to reduce your qualified 
education expenses for 2018 instead of reduc-
ing your expenses for 2017.
Amounts that do not reduce qualified edu-
cation expenses. Do not reduce qualified ed-
ucation expenses by amounts paid with funds 
the student receives as:
Payment for services, such as wages;
A loan;
A gift;
An inheritance; or
A withdrawal from the student's personal 
savings.
Don’t reduce the qualified education expen-
ses by any scholarship or fellowship grant re-
ported as income on the student's tax return in 
the following situations.
The use of the money is restricted, by the 
terms of the scholarship or fellowship 
grant, to costs of attendance (such as 
room and board) other than qualified edu-
cation expenses, as defined in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 970.
The use of the money is not restricted.
For examples, see chapter 2 in Pub. 970.
CAUTION
!
Page 230 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 228 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Figure 35-A. Can You Claim an Education Credit for 2017?
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Did you* pay quali/f_ied education expenses in 2017 for an eligible student?
Did the academic period for which you paid quali/f_ied education 
expenses begin in 2017 or the /f_irst 3 months of 2018?
Is the eligible student you, your spouse (if married /f_iling jointly), or your 
dependent for whom you claim an exemption on your tax return?
Are you listed as a dependent on another person’s tax return?
Is your /f_iling status married /f_iling separately?
For any part of 2017, were you (or your spouse) a nonresident alien 
who did not elect to be treated as a resident alien for tax purposes?
Is your modi/f_ied adjusted gross income (MAGI) less than $66,000 
($132,000 if married /f_iling jointly) for the lifetime learning credit or less than 
$90,000 ($180,000 if married /f_iling jointly) for the American opportunity 
credit?
Did you use the same expenses to take a deduction?
Were the same expenses paid entirely with tax-free scholarship, 
grant, or employer-provided educational assistance?
Did you or someone else receive a refund of all the expenses?
You cannot          
claim an education 
credit for 2017
You can claim 
an education credit 
for 2017**
* Quali/f_ied education expenses paid by a dependent for whom you claim an exemption, or by a third party for that dependent, are considered paid by you.
** Your education credits may be limited to your tax liability minus certain credits. See Form 8863 for more details.
Page 231 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 229

36.
Earned Income 
Credit (EIC)
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can't be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Disaster relief.  If you were affected by Hurri-
cane Harvey, Irma, or Maria, you may be able 
to figure your 2017 EIC using your 2016 earned 
income if your 2017 earned income is less than 
your 2016 earned income. See Pub. 976.
Earned income amount is more.  The maxi-
mum amount of income you can earn and still 
get the credit has increased. You may be able 
to take the credit if:
You have three or more qualifying children 
and you earned less than $48,340 
($53,930 if married filing jointly),
You have two qualifying children and you 
earned less than $45,007 ($50,597 if mar-
ried filing jointly),
You have one qualifying child and you 
earned less than $39,617 ($45,207 if mar-
ried filing jointly), or
You don't have a qualifying child and you 
earned less than $15,010 ($20,600 if mar-
ried filing jointly).
Your adjusted gross income also must be less 
than the amount in the above list that applies to 
you. For details, see Rules 1 and 15, later.
Childless EIC. You may be able to qualify for 
the EIC under the rules for taxpayers without a 
qualifying child if you have a qualifying child for 
the EIC who is claimed as a qualifying child by 
another taxpayer.
Investment income amount is more.  The 
maximum amount of investment income you 
CAUTION
!
can have and still get the credit has increased 
to $3,450. See Rule 6, later.
Reminders
Delayed refund if claiming the EIC.  Due to 
changes in the law, the IRS can't issue refunds 
before February 15, 2018, for returns that claim 
the EIC. This applies to the entire refund, not 
just the portion associated with the EIC.
Increased EIC on certain joint returns.  A 
married person filing a joint return may get more 
EIC than someone with the same income but a 
different filing status. As a result, the EIC table 
has different columns for married persons filing 
jointly than for everyone else. When you look up 
your EIC in the EIC Table, be sure to use the 
correct column for your filing status and the 
number of children you have.
Online help.  You can use the EITC Assistant 
at IRS.gov/EITC to find out if you are eligible for 
the credit. The EITC Assistant is available in 
English and Spanish.
EIC questioned by IRS. The IRS may ask you 
to provide documents to prove you are entitled 
to claim the EIC. We will tell you what docu-
ments to send us. These may include: birth cer-
tificates, school records, medical records, etc. 
The process of establishing your eligibility will 
delay your refund.
Introduction
The earned income credit (EIC) is a tax credit 
for certain people who work and have less than 
$53,930 of earned income. A tax credit usually 
means more money in your pocket. It reduces 
the amount of tax you owe. The EIC may also 
give you a refund.
How do you get the EIC?  To claim the EIC, 
you must:
1. Qualify by meeting certain rules; and
2. File a tax return, even if you:
a. Don't owe any tax,
b. Didn't earn enough money to file a re-
turn, or
c. Didn't have income taxes withheld 
from your pay.
Figure your EIC by using a worksheet in the 
instructions for Form 1040, Form 1040A, or 
Form 1040EZ. Or, if you prefer, you can let the 
IRS figure the credit for you.
How will this chapter help you? This chapter 
will explain the following.
The rules you must meet to qualify for the 
EIC.
How to figure the EIC.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Earned Income Credit (EIC)  596
Form (and Instructions)
Earned Income Credit 
(Qualifying Child Information)
Information To Claim Certain 
Refundable Credits After 
Disallowance
Do You Qualify for the 
Credit?
To qualify to claim the EIC, you must first meet 
all of the rules explained in Part A. Rules for Ev-
eryone. Then you must meet the rules in Part B. 
Rules if You Have a Qualifying Child , or Part C. 
Rules if You Don’t Have a Qualifying Child . 
There is one final rule you must meet in Part D. 
Figuring and Claiming the EIC . You qualify for 
the credit if you meet all the rules in each part 
that applies to you.
If you have a qualifying child, the rules in 
Parts A, B, and D apply to you.
If you don't have a qualifying child, the 
rules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you.
Table 36-1, Earned Income Credit in a Nut-
shell. Use Table 36–1 as a guide to Parts A, B, 
C, and D. The table is a summary of all the rules 
in each part.
Do you have a qualifying child?  You have a 
qualifying child only if you have a child who 
meets the four tests described in Rule 8, later, 
and illustrated in Figure 36–1.
If Improper Claim
Made in Prior Year
If your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied 
or reduced for any reason other than a math or 
clerical error, you must attach a completed 
Form 8862 to your next tax return to claim the 
EIC. You must also qualify to claim the EIC by 
meeting all the rules described in this chapter.
However, if your EIC was denied or reduced 
as a result of a math or clerical error, don't at-
tach Form 8862 to your next tax return. For ex-
ample, if your arithmetic is incorrect, the IRS 
can correct it. If you don't provide a correct so-
cial security number, the IRS can deny the EIC. 
These kinds of errors are called math or clerical 
errors.
If your EIC for any year after 1996 was de-
nied and it was determined that your error was 
due to reckless or intentional disregard of the 
EIC rules, then you can't claim the EIC for the 
next 2 years. If your error was due to fraud, then 
you can't claim the EIC for the next 10 years.
More information. See chapter 5 in Pub. 596 
for more detailed information about the disal-
lowance period and Form 8862.
Part A. Rules for 
Everyone
This part of the chapter discusses Rules 1 
through 7. You must meet all seven rules to 
qualify for the EIC. If you don't meet all seven 
rules, you can't get the credit and you don't 
need to read the rest of the chapter.
  Schedule EIC
  8862
Page 232 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 230 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

If you meet all seven rules in this part, then 
read either Part B or Part C (whichever applies) 
for more rules you must meet.
Rule 1. Your AGI Must Be 
Less Than:
$48,340 ($53,930 for married filing jointly) 
if you have three or more qualifying chil-
dren,
$45,007 ($50,597 for married filing jointly) 
if you have two qualifying children,
$39,617 ($45,207 for married filing jointly) 
if you have one qualifying child, or
$15,010 ($20,600 for married filing jointly) 
if you don't have a qualifying child.
Adjusted gross income (AGI).  AGI is the 
amount on line 38 (Form 1040), line 22 (Form 
1040A), or line 4 (Form 1040EZ). If your AGI is 
equal to or more than the applicable limit listed 
above, you can't claim the EIC.
Example. Your AGI is $40,550, you are sin-
gle, and you have one qualifying child. You 
can't claim the EIC because your AGI isn't less 
than $39,617. However, if your filing status was 
married filing jointly, you might be able to claim 
the EIC because your AGI is less than $45,207.
Community property.  If you are married, 
but qualify to file as head of household under 
special rules for married taxpayers living apart 
(see Rule 3 , later), and live in a state that has 
community property laws, your AGI includes 
that portion of both your and your spouse's wa-
ges that you are required to include in gross in-
come. This is different from the community 
property rules that apply under Rule 7, later.
Rule 2. You Must Have a 
Valid Social Security 
Number (SSN)
To claim the EIC, you (and your spouse, if filing 
a joint return) must have a valid SSN issued by 
the Social Security Administration (SSA) by the 
due date of your 2017 return (including exten-
sions). Any qualifying child listed on Sched-
ule EIC also must have a valid SSN by the due 
date of your 2017 return (including extensions). 
(See Rule 8 , later, if you have a qualifying 
child.)
If your social security card (or your spouse's, 
if filing a joint return) says “Not valid for employ-
ment” and your SSN was issued so that you (or 
your spouse) could get a federally funded bene-
fit, you can't get the EIC. An example of a feder-
ally funded benefit is Medicaid.
If you have a card with the legend “Not valid 
for employment” and your immigration status 
has changed so that you are now a U.S. citizen 
or permanent resident, ask the SSA for a new 
social security card without the legend.
U.S. citizen.  If you were a U.S. citizen when 
you received your SSN, you have a valid SSN.
Valid for work only with INS or DHS authori-
zation. If your social security card reads “Valid 
for work only with INS authorization” or “Valid 
for work only with DHS authorization,” you have 
a valid SSN, but only if that authorization is still 
valid.
SSN missing or incorrect.  If an SSN for you 
or your spouse is missing from your tax return 
or is incorrect, you may not get the EIC. If an 
SSN for you or your spouse is missing from 
your return because either you or your spouse 
didn't have a valid SSN by the due date of your 
2017 return (including extensions), and you 
later get a valid SSN, you can't file an amended 
return to claim the EIC.
Other taxpayer identification number.  You 
can't get the EIC if, instead of an SSN, you (or 
your spouse, if filing a joint return) have an indi-
vidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). 
ITINs are issued by the IRS to noncitizens who 
can't get an SSN.
No SSN. If you don't have a valid SSN by the 
due date of your 2017 return (including exten-
sions), put “No” next to line 66a (Form 1040), 
line 42a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form 
1040EZ). You can't claim the EIC on either your 
original or an amended 2017 return.
Getting an SSN.  If you (or your spouse, if 
filing a joint return) don't have an SSN, you can 
apply for one by filing Form SS-5, Application 
for a Social Security Card, with the SSA. You 
can get Form SS-5 online at SSA.gov, from 
your local SSA office, or by calling the SSA at 
1-800-772-1213.
Filing deadline approaching and still no 
SSN. If the filing deadline is approaching and 
you still don't have an SSN, you can request an 
automatic 6-month extension of time to file your 
return. You can get this extension by filing Form 
4868, Application for Automatic Extension of 
Table 36-1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
First, you must meet all the rules in this column. Second, you must meet all the rules in one of 
these columns, whichever applies.
Third, you must meet the 
rule in this column.
Part A.
Rules for Everyone
Part B. 
Rules if You Have a 
Qualifying Child
Part C. 
Rules if You Don’t 
Have a Qualifying 
Child
Part D.
Figuring and Claiming the 
EIC
1. Your adjusted gross 
income (AGI) must be 
less than:
• $48,340 ($53,930 for 
married filing jointly) if 
you have three or more 
qualifying children,
 
• $45,007 ($50,597 for 
married filing jointly) if 
you have two qualifying 
children,
 
•$39,617 ($45,207 for 
married filing jointly) if 
you have one qualifying 
child, or 
 
• $15,010 ($20,600 for 
married filing jointly) if 
you don't have a 
qualifying child.
2. You must have a valid 
social security number 
(SSN) by the due date of 
your 2017 return 
(including extensions). 
3. Your filing status can't 
be “Married filing 
separately.”
4. You must be a U.S. 
citizen or resident alien 
all year. 
5. You can't file Form 
2555 or Form 2555-EZ 
(relating to foreign 
earned income).
6. Your investment 
income must be $3,450 
or less. 
7. You must have 
earned income. 
8. Your child must meet 
the relationship, age, 
residency, and joint return 
tests. 
9. Your qualifying child 
can't be used by more 
than one person to claim 
the EIC. 
10. You can't be a 
qualifying child of another 
person. 
11. You must be at 
least age 25 but under 
age 65. 
12. You can't be the 
dependent of another 
person. 
13. You can't be a 
qualifying child of 
another person.
14. You must have 
lived in the United 
States more than half 
of the year. 
15. Your earned income must 
be less than:
• $48,340 ($53,930 for 
married filing jointly) if you 
have three or more qualifying 
children,
 
• $45,007 ($50,597 for 
married filing jointly) if you 
have two qualifying children,
 
• $39,617 ($45,207 for 
married filing jointly) if you 
have one qualifying child, or 
 
• $15,010 ($20,600 for 
married filing jointly) if you 
don't have a qualifying child.
Page 233 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 231

Time to File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. 
For more information, see chapter 1.
Rule 3. Your Filing Status 
Can't Be Married Filing 
Separately
If you are married, you usually must file a joint 
return to claim the EIC. Your filing status can't 
be “Married filing separately.”
Spouse didn't live with you.  If you are mar-
ried and your spouse didn't live in your home at 
any time during the last 6 months of the year, 
you may be able to file as head of household, 
instead of married filing separately. In that case, 
you may be able to claim the EIC. For detailed 
information about filing as head of household, 
see chapter 2. 
Rule 4. You Must Be a
U.S. Citizen or Resident
Alien All Year
If you (or your spouse, if married) were a non-
resident alien for any part of the year, you can't 
claim the EIC unless your filing status is married 
filing jointly. You can use that filing status only if 
one spouse is a U.S. citizen or resident alien 
and you choose to treat the nonresident spouse 
as a U.S. resident. If you make this choice, you 
and your spouse are taxed on your worldwide 
income. If you (or your spouse, if married) were 
a nonresident alien for any part of the year and 
your filing status isn't married filing jointly, enter 
“No” on the dotted line next to line 66a (Form 
1040) or in the space to the left of line 42a 
(Form 1040A). If you need more information on 
making this choice, get Pub. 519, U.S. Tax 
Guide for Aliens.
Rule 5. You Can't File 
Form 2555 or Form 
2555-EZ
You can't claim the EIC if you file Form 2555, 
Foreign Earned Income, or Form 2555-EZ, For-
eign Earned Income Exclusion. You file these 
forms to exclude income earned in foreign 
countries from your gross income, or to deduct 
or exclude a foreign housing amount. U.S. pos-
sessions aren't foreign countries. See Pub. 54, 
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens 
Abroad, for more detailed information.
Rule 6. Your Investment 
Income Must Be $3,450 or 
Less
You can't claim the EIC unless your investment 
income is $3,450 or less. If your investment in-
come is more than $3,450, you can't claim the 
credit. For most people, investment income is 
the total of the following amounts.
Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040 or 
1040A).
Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form 1040 
or 1040A).
Dividend income (line 9a of Form 1040 or 
1040A).
Capital gain net income (line 13 of Form 
1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of Form 
1040A).
If you file Form 1040EZ, your investment in-
come is the total of the amount of line 2 and the 
amount of any tax-exempt interest you wrote to 
the right of the words “Form 1040EZ” on line 2.
However, see Rule 6  in chapter 1 of Pub. 
596 if:
You are filing Schedule E (Form 1040), 
Form 4797, or Form 8814;
You are reporting income from the rental of 
personal property on Form 1040, line 21; 
or
You have income or loss from a passive 
activity.
Rule 7. You Must Have 
Earned Income
This credit is called the “earned income” credit 
because, to qualify, you must work and have 
earned income. If you are married and file a 
joint return, you meet this rule if at least one 
spouse works and has earned income. If you 
are an employee, earned income includes all 
the taxable income you get from your employer. 
If you are self-employed or a statutory em-
ployee, you will figure your earned income on 
EIC Worksheet B in the instructions for Form 
1040.
Earned Income
Earned income includes all of the following 
types of income.
1. Wages, salaries, tips, and other taxable 
employee pay. Employee pay is earned in-
come only if it is taxable. Nontaxable em-
ployee pay, such as certain dependent 
care benefits and adoption benefits, isn't 
earned income. But there is an exception 
for nontaxable combat pay, which you can 
choose to include in earned income, as 
explained below.
2. Net earnings from self-employment.
3. Gross income received as a statutory em-
ployee.
Wages, salaries, and tips.  Wages, salaries, 
and tips you receive for working are reported to 
you on Form W-2, in box 1. You should report 
these on line 1 (Form 1040EZ) or line 7 (Forms 
1040A and 1040).
Nontaxable combat pay election.  You can 
elect to include your nontaxable combat pay in 
earned income for the EIC. Electing to include 
nontaxable combat pay in earned income may 
increase or decrease your EIC. Figure the credit 
with and without your nontaxable combat pay 
before making the election.
If you make the election, you must include in 
earned income all nontaxable combat pay you 
received. If you are filing a joint return and both 
you and your spouse received nontaxable com-
bat pay, you can each make your own election. 
In other words, if one of you makes the election, 
the other one can also make it but does not 
have to.
The amount of your nontaxable combat pay 
should be shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 
with code “Q.”
Self-employed persons and statutory em-
ployees. If you are self-employed or received 
income as a statutory employee, you must use 
the Form 1040 instructions to see if you qualify 
to get the EIC.
Approved Form 4361 or Form 4029
This section is for persons who have an ap-
proved:
Form 4361, Application for Exemption 
From Self-Employment Tax for Use by 
Ministers, Members of Religious Orders 
and Christian Science Practitioners; or
Form 4029, Application for Exemption 
From Social Security and Medicare Taxes 
and Waiver of Benefits.
Each approved form exempts certain in-
come from social security taxes. Each form is 
discussed here in terms of what is or isn't 
earned income for the EIC.
Form 4361.  Whether or not you have an ap-
proved Form 4361, amounts you received for 
performing ministerial duties as an employee 
count as earned income. This includes wages, 
salaries, tips, and other taxable employee com-
pensation.
If you have an approved Form 4361, a non-
taxable housing allowance or the nontaxable 
rental value of a home isn't earned income. 
Also, amounts you received for performing min-
isterial duties, but not as an employee, don't 
count as earned income. Examples include 
fees for performing marriages and honoraria for 
delivering speeches.
Form 4029.  Whether or not you have an ap-
proved Form 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and 
other taxable employee compensation count as 
earned income. However, amounts you re-
ceived as a self-employed individual don't count 
as earned income. Also, in figuring earned in-
come, don't subtract losses on Schedule C, 
C-EZ, or F from wages on line 7 of Form 1040. 
Disability Benefits
If you retired on disability, taxable benefits you 
receive under your employer's disability retire-
ment plan are considered earned income until 
you reach minimum retirement age. Minimum 
retirement age generally is the earliest age at 
which you could have received a pension or an-
nuity if you weren't disabled. You must report 
your taxable disability payments on line 7 of ei-
ther Form 1040 or Form 1040A until you reach 
minimum retirement age.
Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
mum retirement age, payments you receive are 
taxable as a pension and aren't considered 
earned income. Report taxable pension pay-
ments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b (or 
Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b). 
Disability insurance payments.  Payments 
you received from a disability insurance policy 
that you paid the premiums for aren't earned 
Page 234 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 232 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

income. It doesn't matter whether you have 
reached minimum retirement age. If this policy 
is through your employer, the amount may be 
shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with code 
“J.”
Income That Is Not Earned Income
Examples of items that aren't earned income in-
clude interest and dividends, pensions and an-
nuities, social security and railroad retirement 
benefits (including disability benefits), alimony 
and child support, welfare benefits, workers' 
compensation benefits, unemployment com-
pensation (insurance), nontaxable foster care 
payments, and veterans' benefits, including VA 
rehabilitation payments. Don't include any of 
these items in your earned income.
Earnings while an inmate.  Amounts received 
for work performed while an inmate in a penal 
institution aren't earned income when figuring 
the EIC. This includes amounts for work per-
formed while in a work release program or while 
in a halfway house.
Workfare payments.  Nontaxable workfare 
payments aren't earned income for the EIC. 
These are cash payments certain people re-
ceive from a state or local agency that adminis-
ters public assistance programs funded under 
the federal Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families (TANF) program in return for certain 
work activities such as (1) work experience ac-
tivities (including remodeling or repairing public 
housing) if private sector employment isn't 
available, or (2) community service program ac-
tivities.
Community property.  If you are married, but 
qualify to file as head of household under spe-
cial rules for married taxpayers living apart (see 
Rule 3, earlier), and live in a state that has com-
munity property laws, your earned income for 
the EIC doesn't include any amount earned by 
your spouse that is treated as belonging to you 
under those laws. That amount isn't earned in-
come for the EIC, even though you must include 
it in your gross income on your income tax re-
turn. Your earned income includes the entire 
amount you earned, even if part of it is treated 
as belonging to your spouse under your state's 
community property laws.
Nevada, Washington, and California do-
mestic partners.  If you are a registered do-
mestic partner in Nevada, Washington, or Cali-
fornia, the same rules apply. Your earned 
income for the EIC doesn't include any amount 
earned by your partner. Your earned income in-
cludes the entire amount you earned. For de-
tails, see Pub. 555, Community Property.
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) pay-
ments. If you were receiving social security re-
tirement benefits or social security disability 
benefits at the time you received any CRP pay-
ments, your CRP payments aren't earned in-
come for the EIC.
Nontaxable military pay.  Nontaxable pay for 
members of the Armed Forces isn't considered 
earned income for the EIC. Examples of non-
taxable military pay are combat pay, the Basic 
Allowance for Housing (BAH), and the Basic Al-
lowance for Subsistence (BAS). See Pub. 3, 
Armed Forces' Tax Guide, for more information.
Combat pay. You can elect to include 
your nontaxable combat pay in earned 
income for the EIC. See Nontaxable 
combat pay election, earlier.
Part B. Rules
if You Have a 
Qualifying Child
If you have met all of the rules in Part A , read 
Part B to see if you have a qualifying child.
Part B  discusses Rules 8  through 10. You 
must meet all three of these rules, in addition to 
the rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for the EIC 
with a qualifying child.
You must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A to 
claim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You can't 
file Form 1040EZ.) You also must complete 
Schedule EIC and attach it to your return. If you 
meet all the rules in Part A  and this part, read 
Part D to find out what to do next.
If you don't meet Rule 8, you don't have 
a qualifying child. Read Part C  to find 
out if you can get the EIC without a 
qualifying child.
Rule 8. Your Child Must 
Meet the Relationship, 
Age, Residency, and Joint 
Return Tests
Your child is a qualifying child if your child 
meets four tests. The four tests are:
1. Relationship, 
2. Age, 
3. Residency, and
4. Joint return.
The four tests are illustrated in Figure 36–1. 
The paragraphs that follow contain more infor-
mation about each test.
Relationship Test
To be your qualifying child, a child must be 
your:
Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a 
descendant of any of them (for example, 
your grandchild); or
Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, 
stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of 
any of them (for example, your niece or 
nephew).
The following definitions clarify the relationship 
test.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Foster child. For the EIC, a person is your fos-
ter child if the child is placed with you by an au-
thorized placement agency or by judgement, 
decree, or other order of any court of competent 
TIP
CAUTION
!
jurisdiction. An authorized placement agency 
includes:
A state or local government agency,
A tax-exempt organization licensed by a 
state, and
An Indian tribal government or an organi-
zation authorized by an Indian tribal gov-
ernment to place Indian children.
Example. Debbie, who is 12 years old, was 
placed in your care 2 years ago by an author-
ized agency responsible for placing children in 
foster homes. Debbie is your foster child.
Age Test
Your child must be:
1. Under age 19 at the end of 2017 and 
younger than you (or your spouse, if filing 
jointly);
2. Under age 24 at the end of 2017, a stu-
dent, and younger than you (or your 
spouse, if filing jointly); or
3. Permanently and totally disabled at any 
time during 2017, regardless of age.
The following examples and definitions clarify 
the age test.
Example 1—Child not under age 19. 
Your son turned 19 on December 10. Unless he 
was permanently and totally disabled or a stu-
dent, he isn't a qualifying child because, at the 
end of the year, he wasn't under age 19.
Example 2—Child not younger than you 
or your spouse.  Your 23-year-old brother, 
who is a full-time student and unmarried, lives 
with you and your spouse. He isn't disabled. 
Both you and your spouse are 21 years old and 
you file a joint return. Your brother isn't your 
qualifying child because he isn't younger than 
you or your spouse.
Example 3—Child younger than your 
spouse but not younger than you.  The facts 
are the same as in Example 2 except that your 
spouse is 25 years old. Because your brother is 
younger than your spouse, he is your qualifying 
child even though he isn't younger than you.
Student defined. To qualify as a student, your 
child must be, during some part of each of any 5 
calendar months during the calendar year:
1. A full-time student at a school that has a 
regular teaching staff, course of study, and 
regular student body at the school; or
2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
ing course given by a school described in 
(1), or a state, county, or local govern-
ment.
The 5 calendar months need not be consecu-
tive.
A full-time student is a student who is enrol-
led for the number of hours or courses the 
school considers to be full-time attendance.
School defined.  A school can be an ele-
mentary school, junior or senior high school, 
college, university, or technical, trade, or 
Page 235 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 233

mechanical school. However, on-the-job train-
ing courses, correspondence schools, and 
schools offering courses only through the Inter-
net don't count as schools for the EIC.
Vocational high school students.  Stu-
dents who work in co-op jobs in private industry 
as a part of a school's regular course of class-
room and practical training are considered 
full-time students.
Permanently and totally disabled. Your child 
is permanently and totally disabled if both of the 
following apply.
1. He or she can't engage in any substantial 
gainful activity because of a physical or 
mental condition.
2. A doctor determines the condition has las-
ted or can be expected to last continu-
ously for at least a year or can lead to 
death.
Residency Test
Your child must have lived with you in the Uni-
ted States for more than half of 2017.
You can't claim the EIC for a child who 
didn't live with you for more than half of 
the year, even if you paid most of the 
child's living expenses. The IRS may ask you 
for documents to show you lived with each 
qualifying child. Documents you might want to 
keep for this purpose include school and child 
care records and other records that show your 
child's address.
The following paragraphs clarify the resi-
dency test.
United States.  This means the 50 states and 
the District of Columbia. It doesn't include Pu-
erto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.
Homeless shelter. Your home can be any lo-
cation where you regularly live. You don't need 
a traditional home. For example, if your child 
lived with you for more than half the year in one 
or more homeless shelters, your child meets the 
residency test. 
Military personnel stationed outside the 
United States.  U.S. military personnel sta-
tioned outside the United States on extended 
active duty are considered to live in the United 
States during that duty period for purposes of 
the EIC.
Extended active duty.  Extended active 
duty means you are called or ordered to duty for 
an indefinite period or for a period of more than 
90 days. Once you begin serving your extended 
active duty, you are still considered to have 
been on extended active duty even if you don't 
serve more than 90 days.
Birth or death of a child.  A child who was 
born or died in 2017 is treated as having lived 
with you for more than half of 2017 if your home 
was the child's home for more than half the time 
he or she was alive in 2017.
Temporary absences. Count time that you or 
your child is away from home on a temporary 
absence due to a special circumstance as time 
the child lived with you. Examples of a special 
circumstance include illness, school attend-
CAUTION
!
ance, business, vacation, military service, and 
detention in a juvenile facility.
Kidnapped child. A kidnapped child is treated 
as living with you for more than half of the year if 
the child lived with you for more than half the 
part of the year before the date of the kidnap-
ping or following the date of the child's return. 
The child must be presumed by law enforce-
ment authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your family or 
your child's family. This treatment applies for all 
years until the child is returned. However, the 
last year this treatment can apply is the earlier 
of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
If your qualifying child has been kidnapped 
and meets these requirements, enter “KC,” in-
stead of a number, on line 6 of Schedule EIC.
Joint Return Test
To meet this test, the child can't file a joint re-
turn for the year.
Exception. An exception to the joint return test 
applies if your child and his or her spouse file a 
joint return only to claim a refund of income tax 
withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1—Child files joint return.  You 
supported your 18-year-old daughter, and she 
lived with you all year while her husband was in 
the Armed Forces. He earned $25,000 for the 
year. The couple files a joint return. Because 
your daughter and her husband filed a joint re-
turn, she isn't your qualifying child.
Example 2—Child files joint return only 
to claim a refund of withheld tax.  Your 
18-year-old son and his 17-year-old wife had 
$800 of wages from part-time jobs and no other 
income. They don't have a child. Neither is re-
quired to file a tax return. Taxes were taken out 
of their pay, so they filed a joint return only to 
get a refund of the withheld taxes. The excep-
tion to the joint return test applies, so your son 
may be your qualifying child if all the other tests 
are met.
Example 3—Child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in Example 2  except no 
taxes were taken out of your son's pay. He and 
his wife aren't required to file a tax return, but 
they file a joint return to claim an American op-
portunity credit of $124 and get a refund of that 
amount. Because claiming the American oppor-
tunity credit is their reason for filing the return, 
they aren't filing it only to get a refund of income 
tax withheld or estimated tax paid. The excep-
tion to the joint return test doesn't apply, so your 
son isn't your qualifying child.
Married child. Even if your child doesn't file a 
joint return, if your child was married at the end 
of the year, he or she can't be your qualifying 
child unless:
1. You can claim an exemption for the child; 
or
2. The reason you can't claim an exemption 
for the child is that you let the child's other 
parent claim the exemption under the Spe-
cial rule for divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart), later.
Social security number (SSN).  The qualify-
ing child must have a valid SSN by the due date 
of your 2017 return (including extensions) un-
less the child was born and died in 2017 and 
you attach to your return a copy of the child's 
birth certificate, death certificate, or hospital re-
cords showing a live birth. You can't claim the 
EIC on the basis of a qualifying child if:
1. The qualifying child's SSN is missing from 
your tax return or is incorrect;
2. The qualifying child's social security card 
says “Not valid for employment” and was 
issued for use in getting a federally funded 
benefit; or
3. Instead of an SSN, the qualifying child 
has:
a. An individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN), which is issued to a 
noncitizen who can't get an SSN; or
b. An adoption taxpayer identification 
number (ATIN), which is issued to 
adopting parents who can't get an 
SSN for the child being adopted until 
the adoption is final.
If you have more than one qualifying child 
and only one has a valid SSN, you can use only 
that child to claim the EIC. For more information 
about SSNs, see Rule 2.
Rule 9. Your Qualifying 
Child Can't Be Used by 
More Than One Person To 
Claim the EIC
Sometimes a child meets the tests to be a quali-
fying child of more than one person. However, 
only one of these persons can actually treat the 
child as a qualifying child. Only that person can 
use the child as a qualifying child to take all of 
the following tax benefits (provided the person 
is eligible for each benefit).
1. The exemption for the child.
2. The child tax credit.
3. Head of household filing status.
4. The credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
5. The exclusion for dependent care bene-
fits.
6. The EIC.
The other person can't take any of these 
benefits based on this qualifying child. In other 
words, you and the other person can't agree to 
divide these tax benefits between you.
The tiebreaker rules explained next explain 
who, if anyone, can claim the EIC when more 
than one person has the same qualifying child. 
However, the tiebreaker rules don't apply if the 
other person is your spouse and you file a joint 
return.
Page 236 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 234 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Figure 36-1. Tests for Qualifying Child
AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your . . .
was . . . 
Under age 19 at the end of 2017 and younger than you
                  (or your spouse, if /f_iling jointly) 
OR
Under age 24 at the end of 2017, a student, and younger than you 
                             (or your spouse, if /f_iling jointly) 
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year,
regardless of age 
Who lived with you in the United States for more than
half of 2017.
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
AND
Who is not /f_iling a joint return for 2017 (or is /f_iling a 
joint return for 2017 only to claim a refund of income tax withheld 
or estimated tax paid) 
Joint Return
Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a descendant of 
any of them (for example, your grandchild)
/uni25B2!
CAUTION
You can’t claim the EIC for a child who didn’t live with you 
for more than half of the year, even if you paid most of the 
child’s living expenses. The IRS may ask you for documents to
show you lived with each qualifying child. Documents you might want 
to keep for this purpose include school and child care records and 
other records that show your child’s address.
TIP
If the child didn’t live with you for more than half of the year 
because of a temporary absence, birth, death, or kidnapping, 
see Temporary absences, Birth or death of child, or
OR
                 Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother,
         stepsister, or a descendant of any of them (for example, your
                                           niece or nephew)
Caution: Figure 36-1 is an overview of the tests to claim a qualifying child. For details, see the rest of this chapter.
Kidnapped child in this chapter.
Page 237 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 235

Tiebreaker rules. To determine which person 
can treat the child as a qualifying child to claim 
the six tax benefits just listed, the following tie-
breaker rules apply.
If only one of the persons is the child's pa-
rent, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the parent.
If the parents file a joint return together and 
can claim the child as a qualifying child, 
the child is treated as the qualifying child of 
the parents.
If the parents don't file a joint return to-
gether but both parents claim the child as a 
qualifying child, the IRS will treat the child 
as the qualifying child of the parent with 
whom the child lived for the longer period 
of time during the year. If the child lived 
with each parent for the same amount of 
time, the IRS will treat the child as the qual-
ifying child of the parent who had the 
higher adjusted gross income (AGI) for the 
year.
If no parent can claim the child as a quali-
fying child, the child is treated as the quali-
fying child of the person who had the high-
est AGI for the year.
If a parent can claim the child as a qualify-
ing child but no parent does so claim the 
child, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the person who had the highest 
AGI for the year, but only if that person's 
AGI is higher than the highest AGI of any of 
the child's parents who can claim the child.
If you have a qualifying child for the EIC 
who is claimed as a qualifying child by 
another taxpayer, you may be able to 
qualify for the EIC under the rules for taxpayers 
without a qualifying child. See Part C, later.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and 
the other person may be able to choose which 
of you claims the child as a qualifying child. See 
Examples 1 through 12, later.
If you can't claim the EIC because your qual-
ifying child is treated under the tiebreaker rules 
as the qualifying child of another person for 
2017, you may be able to take the EIC using a 
different qualifying child, or take the EIC using 
the rules in Part C for people who don't have a 
qualifying child.
If the other person can't claim the EIC.  If 
you and someone else have the same qualify-
ing child but the other person can't claim the 
EIC because he or she isn't eligible or his or her 
earned income or AGI is too high, you may be 
able to treat the child as a qualifying child. See 
Examples 6 and 7, later. But you can't treat the 
child as a qualifying child to claim the EIC if the 
other person uses the child to claim any of the 
other six tax benefits listed earlier.
Examples. The following examples may 
help you in determining whether you can claim 
the EIC when you and someone else have the 
same qualifying child.
Example 1—Child lived with parent and 
grandparent. You and your 2-year-old son 
Jimmy lived with your mother all year. You are 
25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is 
$9,000. Your only income was $9,000 from a 
part-time job. Your mother's only income was 
TIP
$20,000 from her job, and her AGI is $20,000. 
Jimmy's father didn't live with you or Jimmy. 
The special rule explained later for divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart) 
doesn't apply. Jimmy is a qualifying child of 
both you and your mother because he meets 
the relationship, age, residency, and joint return 
tests for both you and your mother. However, 
only one of you can treat him as a qualifying 
child to claim the EIC (and the other tax benefits 
listed earlier for which that person qualifies). He 
isn't a qualifying child of anyone else, including 
his father. If you don't claim Jimmy as a qualify-
ing child for the EIC or any of the other tax ben-
efits listed earlier, your mother can treat him as 
a qualifying child to claim the EIC (and any of 
the other tax benefits listed earlier for which she 
qualifies).
Example 2—Parent has higher AGI than 
grandparent. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 1  except your AGI is $25,000. Because 
your mother's AGI isn't higher than yours, she 
can't claim Jimmy as a qualifying child. Only 
you can claim him.
Example 3—Two persons claim same 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except that you and your mother both claim 
Jimmy as a qualifying child. In this case, you as 
the child's parent will be the only one allowed to 
claim Jimmy as a qualifying child for the EIC 
and the other tax benefits listed earlier for which 
you qualify. The IRS will disallow your mother's 
claim to the EIC with a qualifying child and any 
of the other tax benefits listed earlier based on 
Jimmy. Your mother can't take the EIC for a tax-
payer without a qualifying child because her 
AGI is more than $15,010.
Example 4—Qualifying children split be-
tween two persons.  The facts are the same 
as in Example 1 except that you also have two 
other young children who are qualifying children 
of both you and your mother. Only one of you 
can claim each child. However, if your mother's 
AGI is higher than yours, you can allow your 
mother to claim one or more of the children. For 
example, if you claim one child, your mother 
can claim the other two.
Example 5—Taxpayer who is a qualify-
ing child. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 1 except that you are only 18 years old. This 
means you are a qualifying child of your mother. 
Because of Rule 10, discussed next, you can't 
claim the EIC and can't claim Jimmy as a quali-
fying child. Only your mother may be able to 
treat Jimmy as a qualifying child to claim the 
EIC. If your mother meets all the other require-
ments for claiming the EIC and you don't claim 
Jimmy as a qualifying child for any of the other 
tax benefits listed earlier, your mother can claim 
both you and Jimmy as qualifying children for 
the EIC.
Example 6—Grandparent with too much 
earned income to claim EIC.  The facts are 
the same as in Example 1  except that your 
mother earned $50,000 from her job. Because 
your mother's earned income is too high for her 
to claim the EIC, only you can claim the EIC us-
ing your son.
Example 7—Parent with too much 
earned income to claim EIC.  The facts are 
the same as in Example 1  except that you 
earned $50,000 from your job and your AGI is 
$50,500. Your earned income is too high for 
you to claim the EIC. But your mother can't 
claim the EIC either, because her AGI isn't 
higher than yours.
Example 8—Separated parents.  You, 
your husband, and your 10-year-old son Joey 
lived together until August 1, 2017, when your 
husband moved out of the household. In August 
and September, Joey lived with you. For the 
rest of the year, Joey lived with your husband, 
who is Joey's father. Joey is a qualifying child of 
both you and your husband because he lived 
with each of you for more than half the year and 
because he met the relationship, age, and joint 
return tests for both of you. At the end of the 
year, you and your husband still weren't di-
vorced, legally separated, or separated under a 
written separation agreement, so the special 
rule for divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart) doesn't apply.
You and your husband will file separate re-
turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat Joey 
as a qualifying child. This means, if your hus-
band doesn't claim Joey as a qualifying child for 
any of the tax benefits listed earlier, you can 
claim him as a qualifying child for any tax bene-
fit listed earlier for which you qualify. However, 
your filing status is married filing separately, so 
you can't claim the EIC or the credit for child 
and dependent care expenses. See Rule 3.
Example 9—Separated parents claim 
same child. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 8 except that you and your husband both 
claim Joey as a qualifying child. In this case, 
only your husband will be allowed to treat Joey 
as a qualifying child. This is because, during 
2017, the boy lived with him longer than with 
you. You can't claim the EIC (either with or with-
out a qualifying child) because your filing status 
is married filing separately. Your husband's fil-
ing status is also married filing separately, so he 
can't claim the EIC or the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses. See Rule 3, earlier.
Example 10—Unmarried parents.  You, 
your 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived 
together all year. You and your son's father 
aren't married. Your son is a qualifying child of 
both you and his father because he meets the 
relationship, age, residency, and joint return 
tests for both you and his father. Your earned 
income and AGI are $12,000, and your son's fa-
ther's earned income and AGI are $14,000. Nei-
ther of you had any other income. Your son's fa-
ther agrees to let you treat the child as a 
qualifying child. This means, if your son's father 
doesn't claim your son as a qualifying child for 
the EIC or any of the other tax benefits listed 
earlier, you can claim him as a qualifying child 
for the EIC and any of the other tax benefits lis-
ted earlier for which you qualify.
Example 11—Unmarried parents claim 
same child. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 10 except that you and your son's father 
both claim your son as a qualifying child. In this 
case, only your son's father will be allowed to 
treat your son as a qualifying child. This is 
Page 238 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 236 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

because his AGI, $14,000, is more than your 
AGI, $12,000. You can claim the EIC without a 
qualifying child.
Example 12—Child didn't live with a pa-
rent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your si-
ster's child, lived with your mother all year. You 
are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your 
only income was from a part-time job. Your 
mother's AGI is $15,000. Her only income was 
from her job. Your niece's parents file jointly, 
have an AGI of less than $9,000, and don't live 
with you or their child. Your niece is a qualifying 
child of both you and your mother because she 
meets the relationship, age, residency, and joint 
return tests for both you and your mother. How-
ever, only your mother can treat her as a quali-
fying child. This is because your mother's AGI, 
$15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300.
Special rule for divorced or separated pa-
rents (or parents who live apart). A child will 
be treated as the qualifying child of his or her 
noncustodial parent (for purposes of claiming 
an exemption and the child tax credit, but not 
for the EIC) if all of the following statements are 
true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance;
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement; or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of 2017, whether or not they 
are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her 
support for the year from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of 2017.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs Form 8332 
or a substantially similar statement 
that he or she will not claim the child 
as a dependent for the year, and the 
noncustodial parent attaches the form 
or statement to his or her return. If the 
divorce decree or separation agree-
ment went into effect after 1984 and 
before 2009, the noncustodial parent 
may be able to attach certain pages 
from the decree or agreement instead 
of Form 8332.
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance or written separa-
tion agreement that applies to 2017 
provides that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
and the noncustodial parent provides 
at least $600 for support of the child 
during 2017.
For details, see chapter 3. If a child is treated as 
the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent 
under this special rule for children of divorced 
or separated parents (or parents who live 
apart), only the noncustodial parent can claim 
an exemption and the child tax credit for the 
child. However, only the custodial parent, if eli-
gible, or another eligible taxpayer can claim the 
child as a qualifying child for the EIC. For details 
and examples, see Applying the tiebreaker 
rules to divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart) in chapter 3.
Rule 10. You Can't Be a 
Qualifying Child of 
Another Taxpayer
You are a qualifying child of another taxpayer 
(such as your parent, guardian, or foster parent) 
if all of the following statements are true.
1. You are that person's son, daughter, step-
child, foster child, or a descendant of any 
of them. Or, you are that person's brother, 
sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, 
or stepsister (or a descendant of any of 
them).
2. You were:
a. Under age 19 at the end of the year 
and younger than that person (or that 
person's spouse, if the person files 
jointly);
b. Under age 24 at the end of the year, a 
student, and younger than that person 
(or that person's spouse, if the person 
files jointly); or
c. Permanently and totally disabled, re-
gardless of age.
3. You lived with that person in the United 
States for more than half of the year.
4. You aren't filing a joint return for the year 
(or are filing a joint return only to claim a 
refund of withheld income tax or estimated 
tax paid).
For more details about the tests to be a qualify-
ing child, see Rule 8, earlier.
If you are a qualifying child of another tax-
payer, you can't claim the EIC. This is true even 
if the person for whom you are a qualifying child 
doesn't claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to 
claim the EIC. Put “No” beside line 66a (Form 
1040) or line 42a (Form 1040A).
Example. You and your daughter lived with 
your mother all year. You are 22 years old, un-
married, and attended a trade school full time. 
You had a part-time job and earned $5,700. 
You had no other income. Because you meet 
the relationship, age, residency, and joint return 
tests, you are a qualifying child of your mother. 
She can claim the EIC if she meets all the other 
requirements. Because you are your mother's 
qualifying child, you can't claim the EIC. This is 
so even if your mother can't or doesn't claim the 
EIC.
Child of person not required to file a return. 
You aren't the qualifying child of another tax-
payer (and so may qualify to claim the EIC) if 
the person for whom you meet the relationship, 
age, residency, and joint return tests isn't re-
quired to file an income tax return and either:
Doesn't file an income tax return, or
Files a return only to get a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example. The facts are the same as in the 
last example except your mother had no gross 
income, isn't required to file a 2017 tax return, 
and doesn't file a 2017 tax return. As a result, 
you aren't your mother's qualifying child. You 
can claim the EIC if you meet all the other re-
quirements to do so.
See Rule 10  in Pub. 596 for additional ex-
amples.
Part C. Rules
if You Don't Have
a Qualifying Child
Read this part if you:
1. Don't have a qualifying child, and
2. Have met all the rules in Part A.
Part C discusses Rules 11 through 14. You 
must meet all four of these rules, in addition to 
the rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for the EIC 
without a qualifying child.
If you have a qualifying child, the rules 
in this part don't apply to you. You can 
claim the credit only if you meet all the 
rules in Parts A, B, and D. See Rule 8, earlier, to 
find out if you have a qualifying child.
Rule 11. You Must Be at 
Least Age 25 but Under
Age 65
You must be at least age 25 but under age 65 at 
the end of 2017. If you are married filing a joint 
return, either you or your spouse must be at 
least age 25 but under age 65 at the end of 
2017. It doesn't matter which spouse meets the 
age test, as long as one of the spouses does.
You meet the age test if you were born after 
December 31, 1952, and before January 2, 
1993. If you are married filing a joint return, you 
meet the age test if either you or your spouse 
was born after December 31, 1952, and before 
January 2, 1993.
If neither you nor your spouse meets the age 
test, you can't claim the EIC. Put “No” next to 
line 66a (Form 1040), line 42a (Form 1040A), or 
line 8a (Form 1040EZ).
Example 1. You are age 28 and unmarried. 
You meet the age test.
Example 2—Spouse meets age test. You 
are married and filing a joint return. You are age 
23 and your spouse is age 27. You meet the 
age test because your spouse is at least age 25 
but under age 65.
Death of spouse. If you are filing a joint return 
with your spouse who died in 2017, you meet 
the age test if your spouse was at least age 25 
but under age 65 at the time of death.
Your spouse is considered to reach age 25 
on the day before his or her 25th birthday. How-
ever, the rule for reaching age 65 is different; 
your spouse reaches age 65 on his or her 65th 
birthday.
Even if your spouse was born before Janu-
ary 2, 1993, he or she isn't considered at least 
age 25 at the end of 2017 unless he or she was 
at least age 25 at the time of death.
CAUTION
!
Page 239 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 237

Example 1.  You are married and filing a 
joint return with your spouse who died in August 
2017. You are age 67. Your spouse would have 
become age 65 in November 2017. Because 
your spouse was under age 65 when she died, 
you meet the age test.
Example 2. Your spouse was born on Feb-
ruary 14, 1992, and died on February 13, 2017. 
Your spouse is considered age 25 at the time of 
death. However, if your spouse died on Febru-
ary 12, 2017, your spouse isn't considered age 
25 at the time of death and isn't at least age 25 
at the end of 2017.
Death of taxpayer.  If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2017, see Death 
of taxpayer  in Pub. 596 to determine whether 
the age test in Rule 11 is met.
Rule 12. You Can't Be the 
Dependent of Another 
Person
If you aren't filing a joint return, you meet this 
rule if:
You checked box 6a on Form 1040 or 
1040A; or
You didn't check the “You” box on line 5 of 
Form 1040EZ, and you entered $10,400 
on that line.
If you are filing a joint return, you meet this 
rule if:
You checked both box 6a and box 6b on 
Form 1040 or 1040A; or
You and your spouse didn't check either 
the “You” box or the “Spouse” box on line 5 
of Form 1040EZ, and you entered $20,800 
on that line.
If you aren't sure whether someone else can 
claim you (or your spouse, if filing a joint return) 
as a dependent, read the rules for claiming a 
dependent in chapter 3.
If someone else can claim you (or your 
spouse, if filing a joint return) as a dependent on 
his or her return, but doesn't, you still can't claim 
the credit.
Example 1. In 2017, you were age 25, sin-
gle, and living at home with your parents. You 
worked and weren't a student. You earned 
$7,500. Your parents can't claim you as a de-
pendent. When you file your return, you claim 
an exemption for yourself by not checking the 
“You” box on line 5 of your Form 1040EZ and 
by entering $10,400 on that line. You meet this 
rule. You can claim the EIC if you meet all the 
other requirements.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 except that you earned $2,000. Your 
parents can claim you as a dependent but de-
cide not to. You don't meet this rule. You can't 
claim the credit because your parents could 
have claimed you as a dependent.
Joint returns. You generally can't be claimed 
as a dependent by another person if you are 
married and file a joint return.
However, another person may be able to 
claim you as a dependent if you and your 
spouse file a joint return only to get a refund of 
income tax withheld or estimated tax paid. But 
neither you nor your spouse can be claimed as 
a dependent by another person if you claim the 
EIC on your joint return.
Example 1. You are 26 years old. You and 
your wife live with your parents and had $800 of 
wages from part-time jobs and no other income. 
Neither you nor your wife is required to file a tax 
return. You don't have a child. Taxes were 
taken out of your pay, so you file a joint return 
only to get a refund of the withheld taxes. Your 
parents aren't disqualified from claiming an ex-
emption for you just because you filed a joint re-
turn. They can claim exemptions for you and 
your wife if all the other tests to do so are met.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1  except no taxes were taken out of 
your pay. Also, you and your wife aren't re-
quired to file a tax return, but you file a joint re-
turn to claim an EIC of $63 and get a refund of 
that amount. Because claiming the EIC is your 
reason for filing the return, you aren't filing it 
only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid. Your parents can't claim an 
exemption for either you or your wife.
Rule 13. You Can't Be a 
Qualifying Child of 
Another Taxpayer
You are a qualifying child of another taxpayer 
(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if all 
of the following statements are true.
1. You are that person's son, daughter, step-
child, foster child, or a descendant of any 
of them. Or, you are that person's brother, 
sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, 
or stepsister (or a descendant of any of 
them).
2. You were:
a. Under age 19 at the end of the year 
and younger than that person (or that 
person's spouse, if the person files 
jointly);
b. Under age 24 at the end of the year, a 
student (as defined in Rule 8, earlier), 
and younger than that person (or that 
person's spouse, if the person files 
jointly); or
c. Permanently and totally disabled, re-
gardless of age.
3. You lived with that person in the United 
States for more than half of the year.
4. You aren't filing a joint return for the year 
(or are filing a joint return only to claim a 
refund of withheld income tax or estimated 
tax paid).
For more details about the tests to be a 
qualifying child, see Rule 8, earlier.
If you are a qualifying child of another tax-
payer, you can't claim the EIC. This is true even 
if the person for whom you are a qualifying child 
doesn't claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to 
claim the EIC. Put “No” next to line 66a (Form 
1040), line 42a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form 
1040EZ).
Example. You lived with your mother all 
year. You are age 26, unmarried, and perma-
nently and totally disabled. Your only income 
was from a community center where you went 
three days a week to answer telephones. You 
earned $5,000 for the year and provided more 
than half of your own support. Because you 
meet the relationship, age, residency, and joint 
return tests, you are a qualifying child of your 
mother for the EIC. She can claim the EIC if she 
meets all the other requirements. Because you 
are a qualifying child of your mother, you can't 
claim the EIC. This is so even if your mother 
can't or doesn’t claim the EIC.
Joint returns. You generally can't be a qualify-
ing child of another taxpayer if you are married 
and file a joint return.
However, you may be a qualifying child of 
another taxpayer if you and your spouse file a 
joint return for the year only to get a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid. But 
neither you nor your spouse can be a qualifying 
child of another taxpayer if you claim the EIC on 
your joint return.
Child of person not required to file a return. 
You aren't the qualifying child of another tax-
payer (and so may qualify to claim the EIC) if 
the person for whom you meet the relationship, 
age, residency, and joint return tests isn't re-
quired to file an income tax return and either:
Doesn't file an income tax return, or
Files a return only to get a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example. You lived all year with your fa-
ther. You are 27 years old, unmarried, perma-
nently and totally disabled, and earned 
$13,000. You have no other income, no chil-
dren, and provided more than half of your own 
support. Your father had no gross income, isn't 
required to file a 2017 tax return, and doesn't 
file a 2017 tax return. As a result, you aren't 
your father's qualifying child. You can claim the 
EIC if you meet all the other requirements to do 
so.
See Rule 13  in Pub. 596 for additional ex-
amples.
Rule 14. You Must Have 
Lived in the United States 
More Than Half of the Year
Your home (and your spouse's, if filing a joint 
return) must have been in the United States for 
more than half the year.
If it wasn't, put “No” next to line 66a (Form 
1040), line 42a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form 
1040EZ).
United States.  This means the 50 states and 
the District of Columbia. It doesn't include Pu-
erto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.
Homeless shelter. Your home can be any lo-
cation where you regularly live. You don't need 
a traditional home. If you lived in one or more 
homeless shelters in the United States for more 
than half the year, you meet this rule.
Military personnel stationed outside the 
United States.  U.S. military personnel sta-
tioned outside the United States on extended 
Page 240 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 238 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

active duty (defined in Rule 8, earlier) are con-
sidered to live in the United States during that 
duty period for purposes of the EIC.
Part D. Figuring and 
Claiming the EIC
Read this part if you have met all the rules in 
Parts A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and C.
Part D  discusses Rule 15 . You must meet 
this rule, in addition to the rules in Parts A and 
B, or Parts A and C, to qualify for the EIC.
This part of the chapter also explains how to 
figure the amount of your credit. You have two 
choices.
1. Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If you 
want to do this, see The IRS Will Figure 
the EIC for You, later.
2. Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to do 
this, see How To Figure the EIC Yourself, 
later.
Rule 15. Your Earned 
Income Must Be Less 
Than:
$48,340 ($53,930 for married filing jointly) 
if you have three or more qualifying chil-
dren,
$45,007 ($50,597 for married filing jointly) 
if you have two qualifying children,
$39,617 ($45,207 for married filing jointly) 
if you have one qualifying child, or
$15,010 ($20,600 for married filing jointly) 
if you don't have a qualifying child.
Earned income generally means wages, sal-
aries, tips, other taxable employee pay, and net 
earnings from self-employment. Employee pay 
is earned income only if it is taxable. Nontaxa-
ble employee pay, such as certain dependent 
care benefits and adoption benefits, isn't 
earned income. But there is an exception for 
nontaxable combat pay, which you can choose 
to include in earned income. Earned income is 
explained in detail in Rule 7, earlier.
Figuring earned income.  If you are self-em-
ployed, a statutory employee, or a member of 
the clergy or a church employee who files 
Schedule SE (Form 1040), you will figure your 
earned income when you fill out Part 4 of EIC 
Worksheet B in the Form 1040 instructions.
Otherwise, figure your earned income by us-
ing the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040 in-
structions for lines 66a and 66b or the Form 
1040A instructions for lines 42a and 42b, or the 
worksheet in Step 2  of the Form 1040EZ in-
structions for lines 8a and 8b.
When using one of those worksheets to fig-
ure your earned income, you will start with the 
amount on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or 
line 1 (Form 1040EZ). You will then reduce that 
amount by any amount included on that line and 
described in the following list.
Scholarship or fellowship grants not repor-
ted on a Form W-2.
Inmate's income.
Pension or annuity from deferred compen-
sation plans.
Certain Medicaid waiver payments.
Scholarship or fellowship grants not repor-
ted on a Form W-2.  A scholarship or fellow-
ship grant that wasn't reported to you on a Form 
W-2 isn't considered earned income for the EIC.
Inmate's income.  Amounts received for work 
performed while an inmate in a penal institution 
aren't earned income for the EIC. This includes 
amounts received for work performed while in a 
work release program or while in a halfway 
house. If you received any amount for work 
done while an inmate in a penal institution and 
that amount is included in the total on line 7 
(Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or line 1 (Form 
1040EZ), put “PRI” and the amount on the dot-
ted line next to line 7 (Form 1040), in the space 
to the left of the entry space for line 7 (Form 
1040A), or in the space to the left of line 1 
(Form 1040EZ).
Pension or annuity from deferred compen-
sation plans. A pension or annuity from a non-
qualified deferred compensation plan or a non-
governmental section 457 plan isn't considered 
earned income for the EIC. If you received such 
an amount and it was included in the total on 
line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or line 1 
(Form 1040EZ), put “DFC” and the amount on 
the dotted line next to line 7 (Form 1040), in the 
space to the left of the entry space for line 7 
(Form 1040A), or in the space to the left of 
line 1 (Form 1040EZ). This amount may be re-
ported in box 11 of your Form W-2. If you re-
ceived such an amount but box 11 is blank, 
contact your employer for the amount received 
as a pension or annuity.
Medicaid waiver payments.  Medicaid waiver 
payments you exclude from income aren't 
earned income for the EIC. These are pay-
ments received for providing nonmedical sup-
port services under a plan of care to someone 
in your home. If these payments were incor-
rectly reported to you in box 1 of Form(s) W-2 
and you included them in the total on line 7 of 
Form 1040 because you could not get a correc-
ted Form W-2, report them as described in the 
instructions for Form 1040, line 21. For more in-
formation about these payments, see chap-
ter 12 or Pub. 525.
Clergy. If you are a member of the clergy who 
files Schedule SE and the amount on line 2 of 
that schedule includes an amount that was also 
reported on line 7 (Form 1040), subtract that 
amount from the amount on line 7 (Form 1040) 
and enter the result on line 1 of the worksheet in 
Step 5  of the Form 1040 instructions for lines 
66a and 66b. Put “Clergy” on the dotted line 
next to line 66a (Form 1040).
Church employees.  A church employee 
means an employee (other than a minister or 
member of a religious order) of a church or 
qualified church-controlled organization that is 
exempt from employer social security and Med-
icare taxes. If you received wages as a church 
employee and included any amount on both 
line 5a of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form 1040), 
subtract that amount from the amount on line 7 
(Form 1040) and enter the result on line 1 of the 
worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040 instruc-
tions for lines 66a and 66b.
The IRS Will Figure
the EIC for You
If you want the IRS to figure the amount 
of your EIC, see chapter 30.
How To Figure the
EIC Yourself
To figure the EIC yourself, use the EIC Work-
sheet in the instructions for the form you are us-
ing (Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ). 
If you have a qualifying child, complete Sched-
ule EIC and attach it to your return.
Special Instructions for Form 1040 
Filers
If you file Form 1040, you will need to decide 
whether to use EIC Worksheet A or EIC Work-
sheet B to figure the amount of your EIC. This 
section explains how to use these worksheets 
and how to report the EIC on your return.
EIC Worksheet A.  Use EIC Worksheet A if 
you weren't self-employed at any time in 2017 
and aren't a member of the clergy, a church em-
ployee who files Schedule SE, or a statutory 
employee filing Schedule C or C-EZ.
EIC Worksheet B.  Use EIC Worksheet B if 
you were self-employed at any time in 2017 or 
are a member of the clergy, a church employee 
who files Schedule SE, or a statutory employee 
filing Schedule C or C-EZ. If any of the following 
situations apply to you, read the paragraph and 
then complete EIC Worksheet B.
Net earnings from self-employment $400 or 
more. If your net earnings from self-employ-
ment are $400 or more, be sure to correctly fill 
out Schedule SE (Form 1040) and pay the 
proper amount of self-employment tax. If you 
don't, you may not get all the EIC you are enti-
tled to.
When figuring your net earnings from 
self-employment, you must claim all 
your allowable business expenses.
When to use the optional methods of figur-
ing net earnings.  Using the optional methods 
on Schedule SE to figure your net earnings from 
self-employment may qualify you for the EIC or 
give you a larger credit. If your net earnings 
(without using the optional methods) are less 
than $5,200, see the Instructions for Sched-
ule SE (Form 1040) for details about the op-
tional methods.
More information.  If you and your spouse 
both have self-employment income or either of 
you is a statutory employee, see How To Figure 
the EIC Yourself in Pub. 596.
Examples
The following two comprehensive examples 
(complete with filled-in forms) may be helpful.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Page 241 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 239

1. John and Janet Smith, a married couple 
with one qualifying child and using Form 
1040A.
2. Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with no 
qualifying child and using Form 1040EZ.
Example 1. John and Janet 
Smith (Form 1040A)
John and Janet Smith are married and will file a 
joint return. They have one child, Amy, who is 3 
years old. Amy lived with John and Janet for all 
of 2017. John worked and earned $9,500. Ja-
net worked part of the year and earned $1,500. 
Their earned income and AGI are $11,000. 
John and Janet qualify for the EIC and fill out 
the EIC Worksheet and Schedule EIC. The 
Smiths will attach Schedule EIC to Form 1040A 
when they send their completed return to the 
IRS.
They took the following steps to complete 
Schedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet.
Completing Schedule EIC
The Smiths complete Schedule EIC because 
they have a qualifying child.
Completing the EIC Worksheet
Next, the Smiths will complete the EIC Work-
sheet to figure their EIC.
Line 1.  The Smiths enter $11,000 (their 
earned income).
Line 2. The Smiths go to the Earned Income 
Credit Table in the Form 1040A instructions. 
The Smiths find their income of $11,000 within 
the range of $11,000 to $11,050. They follow 
this line across to the column that describes 
their filing status and number of children and 
find $3,400. They enter $3,400 on line 2.
Line 3.  The Smiths enter their AGI of 
$11,000.
Line 4. The Smiths check the “Yes” box be-
cause lines 1 and 3 are the same ($11,000). 
They skip line 5 and enter the amount from 
line 2 ($3,400) on line 6.
Line 6. The Smiths' EIC is $3,400.
Page 242 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 240 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

SCHEDULE EIC  
(Form 1040A or 1040) 
2017
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Earned Income Credit
Qualifying Child Information
a Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040 only if you have a qualifying child.
a Go to  www.irs.gov/ScheduleEIC for the latest information.
1040A 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040 
EIC 
`
OMB No. 1545-0074
Attachment   
Sequence No. 43
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number 
Before you begin: 
• See the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 42a and 42b, or Form 1040, lines 66a and 66b, to make                    
sure that (a) you can take the EIC, and (b) you have a qualifying child. 
• Be sure the child’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child’s social security card. 
Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your EIC. If the name or SSN on the child’s 
social security card is not correct, call the Social Security Administration at 1-800-772-1213.  
F!
CAUTION
• You can't claim the EIC for a child who didn't live with you for more than half of the year. 
• If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up to 10 years. See the instructions for details. 
• It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply for each qualifying child. 
Qualifying Child Information Child 1 Child 2 Child 3
1   Child’s name 
If you have more than three qualifying 
children, you have to list only three to get 
the maximum credit. 
First name                    Last name First name                    Last name First name                    Last name 
2   Child’s SSN 
The child must have an SSN as defined in 
the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 42a 
and 42b, or Form 1040, lines 66a and 66b,
unless the child was born and died in 
2017. If your child was born and died in 
2017 and did not have an SSN, enter 
“Died” on this line and attach a copy of 
the child’s birth certificate, death 
certificate, or hospital medical records 
showing a live birth. 
3   Child’s year of birth 
Year 
If born after 1998 and the child is 
younger than you (or your spouse, if 
filing jointly), skip lines 4a and 4b; 
go to line 5. 
Year 
If born after 1998 and the child is 
younger than you (or your spouse, if 
filing jointly), skip lines 4a and 4b; 
go to line 5. 
Year 
If born after 1998 and the child is 
younger than you (or your spouse, if 
filing jointly), skip lines 4a and 4b; 
go to line 5. 
4 a Was the child under age 24 at the end of 
2017, a student, and younger than you (or 
your spouse, if filing jointly)? 
Yes.
 Go to  
 line 5. 
No.
Go to line 4b. 
Yes.
 Go to 
 line 5. 
No.
Go to line 4b. 
Yes.
 Go to 
 line 5. 
No.
Go to line 4b. 
b Was the child permanently and totally 
disabled during any part of 2017? Yes.
 Go to 
 line 5.
No.
The child is not a 
qualifying child. 
Yes.
 Go to 
 line 5.
No.
The child is not a 
qualifying child. 
Yes.
 Go to 
 line 5.
No.
The child is not a 
qualifying child. 
5 Child’s relationship to you  
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild, 
niece, nephew, eligible foster child, etc.) 
6   Number of months child lived 
with you in the United States 
during 2017
• If the child lived with you for more than 
half of 2017 but less than 7 months,  
enter “7.” 
• If the child was born or died in 2017 and 
your home was the child’s home for more 
than half the time he or she was alive 
during 2017, enter “12.”
months 
Do not enter more than 12 
months. 
months 
Do not enter more than 12 
months. 
months 
Do not enter more than 12 
months. 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax 
return instructions. 
Cat. No. 13339M Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2017 
John and Janet Smith
Amy Smith
000-00-2223
2 0 1 4
daughter
12
222-00-2222
Page 243 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 241

If line 2 is zero, You can’t take the credit.
Enter “No” to the left of the entry space for line 42a.
Filled-In EIC Worksheet—John and Janet Smith
1040A
Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your earned income from Step 5. 
Look up the amount on line 1 in the EIC Table to /f_ind the credit.
Be sure you use the correct column for your /f_iling status and the
number of children you have. Enter the credit here. 
Enter the amount from Form 1040A, line 22.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Go to line 5.No.
If you have:
Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table to /f_ind 
the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your /f_iling 
status and the number of children you have. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 42a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
•   No qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $8,350
($13,950 if married /f_iling jointly)?
•   1 or more qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $18,350
($23,950 if married /f_iling jointly)?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
Reminder—
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach
Schedule EIC.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see
Form 8862, who must /f_ile, earlier to /f_ind out if you must /f_ile 
Form 8862 to take the credit for 2017.
EIC
1040A
CAUTION
/uni25C0
/uni25C0
$11,000
$3,400
$11,000
$3,400
/uni2713
Page 244 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 242 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Example 2. Kelly Green 
(Form 1040EZ)
Kelly Green is age 30 and a full-time student. 
She lived with her parents in the United States 
for all of 2017. She had a part-time job and 
earned $6,240. She earned $20 interest on a 
savings account. She isn't eligible to be claimed 
as a dependent on her parents' return. Although 
she lived with her parents, she isn't their qualify-
ing child because she does not meet the age 
test. She does not have any children.
Kelly qualifies for the EIC. Kelly will file Form 
1040EZ and complete the EIC Worksheet.
Completing the EIC Worksheet
Kelly figures the amount of her EIC on the EIC 
Worksheet as follows.
Line 1.  She enters $6,240 (her earned in-
come).
Line 2.  Kelly goes to the Earned Income 
Credit Table in the Form 1040EZ instructions. 
She finds her earned income of $6,240 in the 
range of $6,200 to $6,250. Kelly follows this line 
across to the column that describes her filing 
status and finds $476. She enters $476 on 
line 2.
Line 3. Kelly enters $6,260 (her AGI).
Line 4.  Kelly checks the “No” box because 
lines 1 and 3 aren't the same.
Line 5. Kelly checks the “Yes” box because 
the amount on line 3 ($6,260) is less than 
$8,350. She leaves line 5 blank and enters the 
amount from line 2, $476, on line 6.
Line 6. She enters $476 here and on Form 
1040EZ, line 8a. Kelly's EIC is $476.
Filled-in EIC Worksheet—Kelly Green Keep for Your Records
 
1. Enter your earned income from Step 2, earlier ...................................... 1. 6,240
2. Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC Table, later, to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing status (Single or 
Married filing jointly).
Enter the credit here .......................................................................... 2. 476
If line 2 is zero, 
STOP You can't take the credit. Enter “No” in the space to the left of line 8a.
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040EZ, line 4 ........................................ 3. 6,260
4. Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Yes.  Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Go to line 5.
5. Is the amount on line 3 less than $8,350 ($13,950 if married filing jointly)?
Yes.  Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table, later, to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing status 
(Single or Married filing jointly).
Enter the credit here .................................................................. 5.  
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2. Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6. 
6. Earned income credit. Enter this amount on Form 1040EZ, line 8a ............................................. 6. 476
CAUTION
!
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see Form 8862, Who Must File under Definitions and Special Rules, 
later, to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit for 2017.
Page 245 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 243

EIC Eligibility Checklist Keep for Your Records
You may claim the EIC if you answer “Yes” to all the following questions.*
Yes No
1. Is your AGI less than:
$15,010 ($20,600 for married filing jointly) if you don't have a qualifying child,
$39,617 ($45,207 for married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child,
$45,007 ($50,597 for married filing jointly) if you have two qualifying children, or
$48,340 ($53,930 for married filing jointly) if you have more than two qualifying children?
(See Rule 1.)
2. Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN that you got by the due date of your 
2017 return (including extensions)? (See Rule 2.)
3. Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? 
(See Rule 3.)
Caution: If you or your spouse is a nonresident alien, answer “Yes” only if your filing status is married filing 
jointly. (See Rule 4.)
4. Answer “Yes” if you aren't filing Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ. Otherwise, answer “No.”
(See Rule 5.)
5. Is your investment income $3,450 or less? (See Rule 6.)
6. Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than:
$15,010 ($20,600 for married filing jointly) if you don't have a qualifying child,
$39,617 ($45,207 for married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child,
$45,007 ($50,597 for married filing jointly) if you have two qualifying children, or
$48,340 ($53,930 for married filing jointly) if you have more than two qualifying children?
(See Rules 7 and 15.)
7. Answer “Yes” if (a) you aren't a qualifying child of another taxpayer or (b) you are filing a joint return. 
Otherwise, answer “No.” (See Rules 10 and 13.)
STOP: If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10-12. If you don't have 
a qualifying child, or if another person is entitled to treat your child as a qualifying child 
under the tiebreaker rules explained in Rule 9, skip questions 8 and 9 and answer 10-12.*
8. Does your child meet the relationship, age, residency, and joint return tests for a qualifying child?
(See Rule 8.)
9. Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer “Yes” if (a) your qualifying child doesn't meet the tests 
to be a qualifying child of any other person or (b) your qualifying child meets the tests to be a qualifying 
child of another person but you are the person entitled to treat the child as a qualifying child under the 
tiebreaker rules explained in Rule 9. 
10. Were you (or your spouse, if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2017? 
(See Rule 11.)
11. Answer “Yes” if (a) you can't be claimed as a dependent on anyone else's return or (b) you are filing a joint 
return. Otherwise answer “No.” (See Rule 12.)
12. Was your main home (and your spouse's, if filing a joint return) in the United States for more than half the 
year? (See Rule 14.)
* PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the EIC. 
Remember to fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can't use Form 1040EZ. If you 
answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 7 and “No” to question 8, answer questions 10 through 12 to see if you can claim 
the EIC without a qualifying child.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 7, and 10 through 12, you 
can claim the EIC.
If you answered “No” to any question that applies to you: You can't claim the EIC.
Page 246 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 244 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

37.
Premium Tax 
Credit (PTC)
What’s New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions. 
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Qualified small employer health reimburse-
ment arrangement (QSEHRA).  Under a 
QSEHRA, an eligible employer can reimburse 
eligible employees for medical expenses, in-
cluding premiums for Marketplace health insur-
ance. If you were covered under a QSEHRA, 
your employer should have reported the annual 
permitted benefit in box 12 of your Form W-2 
with code FF. See Qualified Small Employer 
Health Reimbursement Arrangement  in Pub. 
974 for more information.
Reminders
Report changes in circumstances when you 
re-enroll in coverage and during the year.  If 
advance payments of the premium tax credit 
(APTC) are being paid in 2018 for an individual 
in your tax family (described later) and you have 
had certain changes in circumstances (see the 
examples below), it is important that you 
promptly report them to the Marketplace where 
you enrolled in coverage. Reporting changes in 
circumstances promptly will allow the Market-
place to adjust your APTC to reflect the pre-
mium tax credit (PTC)  you are estimated to be 
able to take on your tax return. Adjusting your 
APTC when you re-enroll in coverage and dur-
ing the year can help you avoid owing tax when 
you file your tax return. Changes that you 
should report to the Marketplace include the fol-
lowing.
Changes in household income.
Moving to a different address.
Gaining or losing eligibility for other health 
care coverage.
Gaining, losing, or other changes to em-
ployment.
CAUTION
!
Birth or adoption.
Marriage or divorce.
Other changes affecting the composition of 
your tax family.
For more information on how to report a 
change in circumstances to the Marketplace, 
see HealthCare.gov or your State Marketplace 
website.
Health coverage tax credit (HCTC).  The 
HCTC is a tax credit that pays a percentage of 
health insurance premiums for certain eligible 
taxpayers and their qualified family members. 
The HCTC and the PTC are different tax credits 
that have different eligibility rules. If you think 
you may be eligible for the HCTC, see Form 
8885 and its instructions or visit IRS.gov/HCTC 
before completing Form 8962.
Health insurance options.  If you need health 
coverage, visit HealthCare.gov to learn about 
health insurance options that are available for 
you and your family, how to purchase health in-
surance, and how you might qualify to get finan-
cial assistance with the cost of insurance.
Additional information.  For additional infor-
mation about the tax provisions of the Afforda-
ble Care Act (ACA), including the individual 
shared responsibility provisions, the PTC, and 
the employer shared responsibility provisions, 
see IRS.gov/Affordable-Care-Act/Individuals-
and-Families or call the IRS Healthcare Hotline 
for ACA questions (1-800-919-0452).
Introduction
You may be able to take the PTC only for health 
insurance coverage in a qualified health plan 
purchased through a Health Insurance Market-
place (also known as an Exchange). This in-
cludes a qualified health plan purchased on 
HealthCare.gov or through a State Market-
place.
This chapter provides an overview of the fol-
lowing.
What is the PTC.
Who can take the PTC.
Terms you may need to know.
How to take the PTC.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Premium Tax Credit (PTC)
Form (and Instructions)
Health Insurance Marketplace 
Statement
Premium Tax Credit (PTC)
What is the Premium 
Tax Credit (PTC)?
Premium tax credit (PTC).  The PTC is a tax 
credit for certain people who enroll, or whose 
family member enrolls, in a qualified health 
plan. The credit provides financial assistance to 
  974
  1095-A
  8962
pay the premiums for the qualified health plan 
offered through a Marketplace by reducing the 
amount of tax you owe, giving you a refund, or 
increasing your refund amount. You must file 
Form 8962 to compute and take the PTC on 
your tax return.
Advance payment of the premium tax credit 
(APTC). APTC is a payment during the year to 
your insurance provider that pays for part or all 
of the premiums for a qualified health plan cov-
ering you or another individual in your tax fam-
ily. Your APTC eligibility is based on the Mar-
ketplace’s estimate of the PTC you will be able 
to take on your tax return. If APTC was paid for 
you or another individual in your tax family, you 
must file Form 8962 to reconcile (compare) this 
APTC with your PTC. If the APTC is more than 
your PTC, you have excess APTC and you 
must repay the excess, subject to certain limita-
tions. If the APTC is less than the PTC, you can 
get a credit for the difference, which reduces 
your tax payment or increases your refund.
See Alternative calculation for year of mar-
riage next for a special rule that may reduce 
your excess APTC if you got married in 2017.
Note. The Marketplace determined your eli-
gibility for and the amount of your 2017 APTC 
using projections of your income and your num-
ber of personal exemptions when you enrolled 
in a qualified health plan . If this information 
changed during 2017 and you did not promptly 
report it to the Marketplace, the amount of 
APTC paid may be substantially different from 
the amount of PTC you can take on your tax re-
turn. See Report changes in circumstances 
when you re-enroll in coverage and during the 
year, earlier, for changes that can affect the 
amount of your PTC.
Alternative calculation for year of mar-
riage. If you got married during 2017 and 
APTC was paid for an individual in your tax fam-
ily, you may want to use the alternative calcula-
tion for year of marriage, an optional calculation 
that may allow you to repay less excess APTC 
than you would under the general rules. You will 
determine your eligibility using the Instructions 
for Form 8962 and compute the alternative cal-
culation using Pub. 974.
Who Can Take the 
PTC?
You can take the PTC for 2017 if you meet all 
the conditions under (1) and (2) below.
1. For at least 1 month of the year, all of the 
following were true.
a. An individual in your tax family was 
enrolled in a qualified health plan of-
fered through the Marketplace on the 
first day of the month.
b. That individual was not eligible for 
minimum essential coverage (MEC) 
for the month, other than coverage in 
the individual market. An individual is 
considered eligible for MEC for the 
month only if he or she was eligible for 
every day of the month (see Minimum 
essential coverage (MEC), later).
Page 247 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 37 Premium Tax Credit (PTC) Page 245

c. The portion of the enrollment premi-
ums for the month for which you are 
responsible was paid by the due date 
of your tax return (not including ex-
tensions). However, if you became el-
igible for APTC because of a success-
ful eligibility appeal and you 
retroactively enrolled in the plan, then 
the portion of the enrollment premium 
for which you are responsible must be 
paid on or before the 120th day fol-
lowing the date of the appeals deci-
sion.
2. You are an applicable taxpayer for 2017. 
To be an applicable taxpayer, you must 
meet all of the following requirements.
a. Your household income for 2017 is at 
least 100% but no more than 400% of 
the federal poverty line for your family 
size (provided in Tables 1-1, 1-2, and 
1-3, in the Instructions for Form 8962). 
See the Instructions for Form 8962 for 
exceptions when household income is 
below 100% of the federal poverty 
line.
b. No one can claim you as a dependent 
on a tax return for 2017.
c. If you were married at the end of 
2017, generally you must file a joint 
return. However, filing a separate re-
turn from your spouse will not disqual-
ify you from being an applicable tax-
payer if you meet certain 
requirements described under Mar-
ried taxpayers in the Instructions for 
Form 8962.
For more information on taking the PTC and 
the requirements to be an applicable taxpayer, 
see the Instructions for Form 8962.
Terms You May Need to 
Know
Tax family. For purposes of the PTC, your tax 
family consists of the individuals for whom you 
claim a personal exemption on your tax return 
(generally you, your spouse with whom you are 
filing a joint return, and your dependents). Your 
personal exemptions are reported on your Form 
1040 or Form 1040A, line 6d. Your family size 
equals the number of individuals in your tax 
family. If no one, including you, claims a per-
sonal exemption for you and you indicated to 
the Marketplace when you enrolled that you 
would claim your own personal exemption, see 
Pub. 974.
Household income. For purposes of the PTC, 
household income is the modified adjusted 
gross income (modified AGI) of you and your 
spouse (if filing a joint return) plus the modified 
AGI of each individual in your tax family whom 
you claim as a dependent and who is required 
to file a tax return because his or her income 
meets the income tax return filing threshold. 
Household income does not include the modi-
fied AGI for those individuals whom you claim 
as dependents and who are filing a 2017 return 
only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or 
estimated tax. See the Instructions for Form 
8962 to determine your household income.
Modified AGI.  For purposes of the PTC, 
modified AGI is the AGI on your tax return plus 
certain income that is not subject to tax (foreign 
earned income, tax-exempt interest, and the 
portion of social security benefits that is not tax-
able). Use Worksheet 1-1 and Worksheet 1-2 in 
the Form 8962 instructions to determine your 
modified AGI.
Qualified health plan.  For purposes of the 
PTC, a qualified health plan is a health insur-
ance plan or policy purchased through a Mar-
ketplace at the bronze, silver, gold, or platinum 
level. Catastrophic health plans and 
stand-alone dental plans purchased through the 
Marketplace, and all plans purchased through 
the Small Business Health Options Program 
(SHOP), are not qualified health plans for pur-
poses of the PTC. Therefore, they do not qualify 
a taxpayer to take the PTC.
Minimum essential coverage (MEC).  A sep-
arate tax provision requires most individuals to 
have qualifying health coverage, qualify for a 
coverage exemption, or make a payment with 
their tax return. Health coverage that satisfies 
this requirement is called MEC. An individual in 
your tax family who is eligible for MEC (except 
coverage in the individual market) for a month is 
not in your coverage family for that month. 
Therefore, you cannot take the PTC for that in-
dividual’s coverage for the months that individ-
ual is eligible for MEC. In addition to qualified 
health plans and other coverage in the individ-
ual market, MEC includes:
Most coverage through government-spon-
sored programs (including Medicaid cover-
age, Medicare parts A or C, the Children’s 
Health Insurance Program (CHIP), certain 
benefits for veterans and their families, 
TRICARE, and health coverage for Peace 
Corps volunteers);
Most types of employer-sponsored cover-
age; and
Other health coverage the Department of 
Health and Human Services designates as 
MEC.
In most cases you are eligible for MEC if the 
coverage is available to you whether or not you 
enroll in it. However, special rules apply to cer-
tain types of MEC as explained in the Form 
8962 instructions.
While coverage purchased in the individual 
market outside the Marketplace is MEC, eligibil-
ity for this type of coverage does not prevent 
you from being eligible for the PTC for Market-
place coverage. Coverage purchased in the in-
dividual market outside the Marketplace does 
not qualify for the PTC.
For more details on MEC, see Pub. 974. 
You also can check IRS.gov/uac/Individual-
Shared-Responsibility-Provision for future up-
dates about types of coverage that are recog-
nized as MEC.
Enrollment premiums. The enrollment premi-
ums are the total amount of the premiums for 
the month, reduced by any premium amounts 
for that month that were refunded, for one or 
more qualified health plans in which any individ-
ual in your tax family enrolled. Form 1095-A, 
Part III, column A, reports the enrollment premi-
ums.
You generally are not allowed a monthly 
credit amount for the month if any part of the en-
rollment premiums for which you are responsi-
ble that month has not been paid by the due 
date of your tax return (not including exten-
sions). However, if you became eligible for 
APTC because of a successful eligibility appeal 
and you retroactively enrolled in the plan, the 
portion of the enrollment premium for which you 
are responsible must be paid on or before the 
120th day following the date of the appeals de-
cision. Premiums another person pays on your 
behalf are treated as paid by you.
How To Take the PTC
You must file Form 8962 with your income tax 
return if any of the following apply to you.
You are taking the PTC.
APTC was paid for you or another individ-
ual in your tax family.
APTC was paid for an individual (including 
you) for whom you told the Marketplace 
you would claim a personal exemption and 
neither you nor anyone else claims a per-
sonal exemption for that individual. See In-
dividual you enrolled for whom no taxpayer 
will claim a personal exemption under 
Lines 12 through 23—Monthly Calculation 
in the Instructions for Form 8962.
If any of the circumstances above apply to 
you, you must file an income tax return and at-
tach Form 8962 even if you aren't otherwise re-
quired to file. You must file Form 1040 or Form 
1040A. You cannot file Form 1040EZ. For help 
in determining which of these forms to file, see 
chapter 1.
Form 1095-A, Health Insurance Marketplace 
Statement. You will need Form 1095-A to 
complete Form 8962. The Marketplace uses 
Form 1095-A to report certain information to the 
IRS about individuals who enrolled in a qualified 
health plan through the Marketplace. The Mar-
ketplace sends copies to individuals to allow 
them to accurately file a tax return taking the 
PTC and reconciling APTC. For coverage in 
2017, the Marketplace is required to provide or 
send Form 1095-A to the individual(s) identified 
in the Marketplace enrollment application by 
January 31, 2018. If you are expecting to re-
ceive Form 1095-A for a qualified health plan 
and you do not receive it by early February, 
contact the Marketplace.
Under certain circumstances (for example, 
where two spouses enroll in a qualified health 
plan and divorce during the year), the Market-
place will provide Form 1095-A to one taxpayer, 
but another taxpayer also will need the informa-
tion from that form to complete Form 8962. The 
recipient of Form 1095-A should provide a copy 
to other taxpayers as needed.
Allocating policy amounts.  You need to 
allocate policy amounts (enrollment premiums, 
SLCSP premiums, and/or APTC) on a Form 
1095-A between your tax family and another tax 
family if:
1. The policy covered at least one individual 
in your tax family and at least one individ-
ual in another tax family, and
Page 248 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 246 Chapter 37 Premium Tax Credit (PTC)

2. Either:
a. You received a Form 1095-A for the 
policy that does not accurately repre-
sent the members of your tax family 
who were enrolled in the policy 
(meaning that it either lists someone 
who is not in your tax family or does 
not list a member of your tax family 
who was enrolled in the policy), or
b. The other tax family received a Form 
1095-A for the policy that includes a 
member of your tax family.
If both 1 and 2 above apply to you, check 
the “Yes” box on line 9 of Form 8962. For each 
policy to which 1 and 2 above apply, follow the 
instructions in Table 3. Allocation of Policy 
Amounts—Line 9 , in the Form 8962 instruc-
tions, to determine which allocation rule applies 
for that qualified health plan.
A qualified health plan may have covered at 
least one individual in your tax family and one 
individual not in your tax family if:
You got divorced during the year,
You are married but filing a separate return 
from your spouse,
You or an individual in your tax family was 
enrolled in a qualified health plan by some-
one who is not part of your tax family (for 
example, your ex-spouse enrolled a child 
whom you are claiming as a dependent), 
or
You or an individual in your tax family en-
rolled someone not part of your tax family 
in a qualified health plan (for example, you 
enrolled a child whom your ex-spouse is 
claiming as a dependent).
Page 249 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 37 Premium Tax Credit (PTC) Page 247

38.
Other Credits
What's New
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress was considering legis-
lation that would do the following.
1. Provide additional tax relief for those af-
fected by Hurricane Harvey, Irma, or Ma-
ria, and tax relief for those affected by 
other 2017 disasters, such as the Califor-
nia wildfires.
2. Extend certain tax benefits that expired at 
the end of 2016 and that currently can’t be 
claimed on your 2017 tax return.
3. Change certain other tax provisions.
To learn whether this legislation was enacted 
resulting in changes that affect your 2017 tax 
return, go to Recent Developments at IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Adoption credit.  The maximum adoption 
credit is $13,570 for 2017. See Adoption Credit.
Excess withholding of social security and 
railroad retirement tax.  Social security tax 
and tier 1 railroad retirement (RRTA) tax were 
both withheld during 2017 at a rate of 6.2% of 
wages up to $127,200. If you worked for more 
than one employer and had too much social se-
curity or RRTA tax withheld during 2017, you 
may be entitled to a credit for the excess with-
holding. See Credit for Excess Social Security 
Tax or Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld, later.
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property 
credit. The credit for alternative fuel vehicle re-
fueling property has expired for refueling prop-
erty placed in service after 2016. However, 
some persons who received an alternative fuel 
vehicle refueling property credit from a fiscal 
year partnership or fiscal year S corporation 
may be able to claim the credit. See Alternative 
Fuel Vehicle Refueling Property Credit, later.
Alternative motor vehicle credit.  The alter-
native motor vehicle credit expired for vehicles 
purchased after 2016. However, if you pur-
chased the vehicle in 2016, but placed it in 
service during 2017, you may still be able to 
claim the credit for 2017. See Alternative Motor 
Vehicle Credit, later.
Residential energy credits. The nonbusiness 
energy property credit has expired and the resi-
dential energy efficient property credit has ex-
pired for certain costs. See Residential Energy 
Credit, later.
Plug-in electric drive motor vehicle credit. 
The credit for qualified two-wheeled plug-in 
electric vehicles expired for vehicles acquired 
after 2016. However, you may be able to claim 
this credit if you acquired the qualified 
two-wheeled vehicle in 2016 and placed it in 
CAUTION
!
service during 2017. See Plug-in Electric Drive 
Motor Vehicle Credit, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following nonrefund-
able credits.
Adoption credit.
Alternative motor vehicle credit.
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property 
credit.
Credit to holders of tax credit bonds.
Foreign tax credit.
Mortgage interest credit.
Nonrefundable credit for prior year mini-
mum tax.
Plug-in electric drive motor vehicle credit.
Residential energy credit.
Retirement savings contributions credit.
This chapter also discusses the following re-
fundable credits.
Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain.
Health coverage tax credit.
Credit for excess social security tax or rail-
road retirement tax withheld.
Several other credits are discussed in other 
chapters in this publication.
Child and dependent care credit (chap-
ter 32).
Credit for the elderly or the disabled (chap-
ter 33).
Child tax credit (chapter 34).
Education credits (chapter 35).
Earned income credit (chapter 36).
Premium tax credit (chapter 37).
Nonrefundable credits.  The first part of this 
chapter, Nonrefundable Credits , covers ten 
credits that you subtract from your tax. These 
credits may reduce your tax to zero. If these 
credits are more than your tax, the excess isn't 
refunded to you.
Refundable credits.  The second part of this 
chapter, Refundable Credits, covers three cred-
its that are treated as payments and are refund-
able to you. These credits are added to the fed-
eral income tax withheld and any estimated tax 
payments you made. If this total is more than 
your total tax, the excess may be refunded to 
you.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Medical and Dental Expenses
Foreign Tax Credit for
Individuals
Tax Information for Homeowners
Contributions to Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
  502
  514
  530
  590-A
Distributions from Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
Form (and Instructions)
Foreign Tax Credit
Notice to Shareholder of 
Undistributed Long-Term Capital 
Gains
Residential Energy Credit
Mortgage Interest Credit
Credit for Prior Year Minimum 
Tax — Individuals, Estates, and 
Trusts
Recapture of Federal Mortgage 
Subsidy
Qualified Adoption Expenses
Credit for Qualified Retirement 
Savings Contributions
Health Coverage Tax Credit
Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit
Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling 
Property Credit
Credit to Holders of Tax Credit 
Bonds
Qualified Plug-in Electric Drive 
Motor Vehicle Credit
Nonrefundable Credits
The credits discussed in this part of the chapter 
can reduce your tax. However, if the total of 
these credits is more than your tax, the excess 
isn't refunded to you.
Adoption Credit
You may be able to take a tax credit of up to 
$13,570 for qualified expenses paid to adopt an 
eligible child. The credit may be allowed for the 
adoption of a child with special needs even if 
you don't have any qualified expenses.
If your modified adjusted gross income 
(AGI) is more than $203,540, your credit is re-
duced. If your modified AGI is $243,540 or 
more, you can't take the credit.
Qualified adoption expenses.  Qualified 
adoption expenses are reasonable and neces-
sary expenses directly related to, and whose 
principal purpose is for, the legal adoption of an 
eligible child. These expenses include:
Adoption fees,
Court costs,
Attorney fees,
Travel expenses (including amounts spent 
for meals and lodging) while away from 
home, and
Re-adoption expenses to adopt a foreign 
child.
Nonqualified expenses. Qualified adoption 
expenses don't include expenses:
That violate state or federal law;
For carrying out any surrogate parenting 
arrangement;
  590-B
  1116
  2439
  5695
  8396
  8801
  8828
  8839
  8880
  8885
  8910
  8911
  8912
  8936
Page 250 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 248 Chapter 38 Other Credits

For the adoption of your spouse's child;
For which you received funds under any 
federal, state, or local program;
Allowed as a credit or deduction under any 
other federal income tax rule; or
Paid or reimbursed by your employer or 
any other person or organization.
Eligible child. The term “eligible child” means 
any individual:
Under 18 years old, or
Physically or mentally incapable of caring 
for himself or herself.
Child with special needs.  An eligible child 
is a child with special needs if all three of the 
following apply.
1. The child was a citizen or resident of the 
United States (including U.S. posses-
sions) at the time the adoption process be-
gan.
2. A state (including the District of Columbia) 
has determined that the child can't or 
shouldn't be returned to his or her parents' 
home.
3. The state has determined that the child 
won't be adopted unless assistance is pro-
vided to the adoptive parents. Factors 
used by states to make this determination 
include:
a. The child's ethnic background;
b. The child's age;
c. Whether the child is a member of a 
minority or sibling group; and
d. Whether the child has a medical con-
dition or a physical, mental, or emo-
tional handicap.
The state must make a determination that a 
child has special needs before the child is con-
sidered to be a child with special needs. A child 
having a specific factor or condition isn't 
enough to establish that the state has made a 
determination of special needs.
When to take the credit.  Generally, until the 
adoption becomes final, you take the credit in 
the year after your qualified expenses were paid 
or incurred. If the adoption becomes final, you 
take the credit in the year your expenses were 
paid or incurred. See the Instructions for Form 
8839 for more specific information on when to 
take the credit.
Foreign child. If the child isn't a U.S. citizen 
or resident at the time the adoption process be-
gan, you can't take the credit unless the adop-
tion becomes final. You treat all adoption ex-
penses paid or incurred in years before the 
adoption becomes final as paid or incurred in 
the year it becomes final.
How to take the credit. Figure your 2017 non-
refundable credit and any carryforward to 2018 
on Form 8839 and attach it to your Form 1040. 
Include the credit in your total for Form 1040, 
line 54. Check box c and enter “8839” on the 
line next to that box.
More information.  For more information, see 
the Instructions for Form 8839.
Alternative Motor Vehicle 
Credit
An alternative motor vehicle is a vehicle with at 
least four wheels that qualifies as a qualified 
fuel cell vehicle.
The alternative motor vehicle credit expired 
for vehicles purchased after 2016. However, if 
you purchased the vehicle in 2016, but placed it 
in service during 2017, you may still be able to 
claim the credit for 2017.
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress had not enacted legis-
lation on expired provisions. To find out 
if legislation has been enacted, go to Recent 
Developments at IRS.gov/Pub17.
Qualified fuel cell vehicle.  A qualified fuel 
cell vehicle is a new vehicle propelled by power 
derived from one or more cells that convert 
chemical energy directly into electricity by com-
bining oxygen with hydrogen fuel, and that 
meets certain additional requirements.
Amount of credit.  Generally, you can rely on 
the manufacturer's certification to the IRS that a 
specific make, model, and model year vehicle 
qualifies for the credit and the amount of the 
credit for which it qualifies. In the case of a for-
eign manufacturer, you generally can rely on its 
domestic distributor's certification to the IRS.
Ordinarily the amount of the credit is 100% 
of the manufacturer's (or domestic distributor's) 
certification to the IRS of the maximum credit al-
lowable.
How to take the credit. To take the credit, you 
must complete Form 8910 and attach it to your 
Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for 
Form 1040, line 54. Check box c and enter 
“8910” on the line next to that box.
Don't report vehicles purchased after 2016 
on Form 8910 unless the credit is extended.
More information.  For more information on 
the credit, see the Instructions for Form 8910.
Alternative Fuel Vehicle 
Refueling Property Credit
The credit for alternative fuel vehicle refueling 
property has expired for refueling property 
placed in service after 2016.
However, if you are a partner in a fiscal year 
partnership or a shareholder of a fiscal year S 
corporation, you may receive an alternative fuel 
vehicle refueling property credit for 2017. See 
the instructions for your Schedule K-1 for de-
tails on how to claim the credit.
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress had not enacted legis-
lation on expired provisions. To find out 
if legislation has been enacted, go to Recent 
Developments at IRS.gov/Pub17.
More information.  For more information on 
the credit, see the Instructions for Form 8911.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Credit to Holders of Tax 
Credit Bonds
Tax credit bonds are bonds in which the holder 
receives a tax credit in lieu of some or all of the 
interest on the bond.
You may be able to take a credit if you are a 
holder of one of the following bonds.
Clean renewable energy bonds (issued 
before 2010).
New clean renewable energy bonds.
Qualified energy conservation bonds.
Qualified school construction bonds.
Qualified zone academy bonds.
Build America bonds.
In some instances, an issuer may elect to re-
ceive a credit for interest paid on the bond. If 
the issuer makes this election, you can't also 
claim a credit.
Interest income. The amount of any tax credit 
allowed (figured before applying tax liability lim-
its) must be included as interest income on your 
tax return.
How to take the credit.  Complete Form 8912 
and attach it to your Form 1040. Include the 
credit in your total for Form 1040, line 54. Check 
box c and enter “8912” on the line next to that 
box.
More information.  For more information, see 
the Instructions for Form 8912.
Foreign Tax Credit
You generally can choose to take income taxes 
you paid or accrued during the year to a foreign 
country or U.S. possession as a credit against 
your U.S. income tax. Or, you can deduct them 
as an itemized deduction (see chapter 22).
You can't take a credit (or deduction) for for-
eign income taxes paid on income that you ex-
clude from U.S. tax under any of the following.
1. Foreign earned income exclusion.
2. Foreign housing exclusion.
3. Income from Puerto Rico exempt from 
U.S. tax.
4. Possession exclusion.
Limit on the credit.  Unless you can elect not 
to file Form 1116 (see Exception), your foreign 
tax credit can't be more than your U.S. tax liabil-
ity (the total of lines 44 and 46 on Form 1040), 
multiplied by a fraction. The numerator of the 
fraction is your taxable income from sources 
outside the United States. The denominator is 
your total taxable income from U.S. and foreign 
sources. See Pub. 514 for more information.
How to take the credit.  Complete Form 1116 
and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit 
on Form 1040, line 48.
Exception. You don't have to complete 
Form 1116 to take the credit if all of the follow-
ing apply.
1. All of your foreign source gross income 
was “passive category income” (which in-
cludes most interest and dividends) and 
Page 251 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 38 Other Credits Page 249

all of that income and the foreign tax paid 
on it were reported to you on qualified 
payee statements such as Form 1099-INT 
and Form 1099-DIV (or substitute state-
ments).
2. You held the stock or bonds on which the 
dividends and interest were paid for at 
least 16 days and weren't obligated to pay 
these amounts to someone else.
3. You aren't filing Form 4563 or excluding 
income from sources within Puerto Rico.
4. The total of your foreign taxes wasn't more 
than $300 (not more than $600 if married 
filing jointly).
5. All of your foreign taxes were:
a. Legally owed and not eligible for a re-
fund or reduced tax rate under a tax 
treaty, and
b. Paid to countries that are recognized 
by the United States and don't sup-
port terrorism.
More information.  For more information on 
the credit and these requirements, see the In-
structions for Form 1116.
Mortgage Interest Credit
The mortgage interest credit is intended to help 
lower-income individuals own a home. If you 
qualify, you can take the credit each year for 
part of the home mortgage interest you pay.
Who qualifies.  You may be eligible for the 
credit if you were issued a qualified Mortgage 
Credit Certificate (MCC) from your state or local 
government. Generally, an MCC is issued only 
in connection with a new mortgage for the pur-
chase of your main home.
Amount of credit.  Figure your credit on Form 
8396. If your mortgage loan amount is equal to 
(or smaller than) the certified indebtedness 
(loan) amount shown on your MCC, enter on 
Form 8396, line 1, all the interest you paid on 
your mortgage during the year.
If your mortgage loan amount is larger than 
the certified indebtedness amount shown on 
your MCC, you can figure the credit on only part 
of the interest you paid. To find the amount to 
enter on line 1, multiply the total interest you 
paid during the year on your mortgage by the 
following fraction.
Certified indebtedness amount 
on your MCC
Original amount of your 
mortgage
Limit based on credit rate.  If the certificate 
credit rate is more than 20%, the credit you are 
allowed can't be more than $2,000. If two or 
more persons (other than a married couple filing 
a joint return) hold an interest in the home to 
which the MCC relates, this $2,000 limit must 
be divided based on the interest held by each 
person. See Pub. 530 for more information.
Carryforward. Your credit (after applying the 
limit based on the credit rate) is also subject to 
a limit based on your tax that is figured using 
Form 8396. If your allowable credit is reduced 
because of this tax liability limit, you can carry 
forward the unused portion of the credit to the 
next 3 years or until used, whichever comes 
first.
If you are subject to the $2,000 limit be-
cause your certificate credit rate is more than 
20%, you can't carry forward any amount more 
than $2,000 (or your share of the $2,000 if you 
must divide the credit).
How to take the credit.  Figure your 2017 
credit and any carryforward to 2018 on Form 
8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be sure 
to include any credit carryforward from 2014, 
2015, and 2016.
Include the credit in your total for Form 
1040, line 54. Check box c and enter “8396” on 
the line next to that box.
Reduced home mortgage interest deduc-
tion. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), you must reduce your home 
mortgage interest deduction by the amount of 
the mortgage interest credit shown on Form 
8396, line 3. You must do this even if part of 
that amount is to be carried forward to 2018. 
For more information about the home mortgage 
interest deduction, see chapter 23.
Recapture of federal mortgage subsidy.  If 
you received an MCC with your mortgage loan, 
you may have to recapture (pay back) all or part 
of the benefit you received from that program. 
The recapture may be required if you sell or dis-
pose of your home at a gain during the first 9 
years after the date you closed your mortgage 
loan. See the Instructions for Form 8828 and 
chapter 15 for more information.
More information.  For more information on 
the credit, see the Form 8396 instructions.
Nonrefundable Credit for 
Prior Year Minimum Tax
The tax laws give special treatment to some 
kinds of income and allow special deductions 
and credits for some kinds of expenses. If you 
benefit from these laws, you may have to pay at 
least a minimum amount of tax in addition to 
any other tax on these items. This is called the 
alternative minimum tax.
The special treatment of some items of in-
come and expenses only allows you to post-
pone paying tax until a later year. If in prior 
years you paid alternative minimum tax be-
cause of these tax postponement items, you 
may be able to take a credit for prior year mini-
mum tax against your current year's regular tax.
You may be able to take a credit against 
your regular tax if for 2016 you had:
An alternative minimum tax liability and ad-
justments or preferences other than exclu-
sion items,
A minimum tax credit that you are carrying 
forward to 2017, or
An unallowed qualified electric vehicle 
credit.
How to take the credit. Figure your 2017 non-
refundable credit (if any), and any carryforward 
to 2018 on Form 8801, and attach it to your 
Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for 
Form 1040, line 54, and check box b. You can 
carry forward any unused credit for prior year 
minimum tax to later years until it is completely 
used.
More information.  For more information on 
the credit, see the Instructions for Form 8801.
Plug-in Electric Drive 
Motor Vehicle Credit
You may be able to take this credit if you placed 
in service for business or personal use a quali-
fied plug-in electric drive motor vehicle in 2017 
and you meet some other requirements.
The credit for qualified two-wheeled plug-in 
electric vehicles expired for vehicles acquired 
after 2016. However, you may be able to take 
the credit if you acquired the vehicle in 2016 but 
placed it in service for business or personal use 
in 2017. See the Instructions for Form 8936 for 
more information.
At the time this publication went to 
print, Congress had not enacted legis-
lation on expired provisions. To find out 
if legislation has been enacted, go to Recent 
Developments at IRS.gov/Pub17.
Qualified plug-in electric drive motor vehi-
cle. This is a new vehicle with at least four 
wheels that:
Is propelled to a significant extent by an 
electric motor that draws electricity from a 
battery that has a capacity of not less than 
4 kilowatt hours and is capable of being re-
charged from an external source of elec-
tricity, and
Has a gross vehicle weight of less than 
14,000 pounds.
Qualified two-wheeled plug-in electric vehi-
cle. This is a new vehicle with two wheels that:
Is capable of achieving a speed of 45 miles 
per hour or greater,
Is propelled to a significant extent by an 
electric motor that draws electricity from a 
battery that has a capacity of not less than 
2.5 kilowatt hours and is capable of being 
recharged from an external source of elec-
tricity, and
Has a gross vehicle weight of less than 
14,000 pounds.
Certification and other requirements.  Gen-
erally, you can rely on the manufacturer's (or, in 
the case of a foreign manufacturer, its domestic 
distributor's) certification to the IRS that a spe-
cific make, model, and model year vehicle 
qualifies for the credit and, if applicable, the 
amount of the credit for which it qualifies. How-
ever, if the IRS publishes an announcement 
that the certification for any specific make, 
model, and model year vehicle has been with-
drawn, you can't rely on the certification for 
such a vehicle purchased after the date of pub-
lication of the withdrawal announcement.
The following requirements must also be 
met to qualify for the credit.
You are the owner of the vehicle. If the ve-
hicle is leased, only the lessor, and not the 
lessee, is entitled to the credit.
CAUTION
!
Page 252 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 250 Chapter 38 Other Credits

You placed the vehicle in service during 
2017.
The vehicle is manufactured primarily for 
use on public streets, roads, and high-
ways.
The original use of the vehicle began with 
you.
You acquired the vehicle for your use or to 
lease to others, and not for resale.
You use the vehicle primarily in the United 
States.
How to take the credit. To take the credit, you 
must complete Form 8936 and attach it to your 
Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for 
Form 1040, line 54. Check box c and enter 
“8936” on the line next to that box.
Don’t report two-wheeled vehicles acquired 
after 2016 on Form 8936 unless the credit is ex-
tended.
More information.  For more information on 
the credit, see the Instructions for Form 8936.
Residential Energy Credit
You may be able to claim the residential energy 
efficient property credit if you made energy sav-
ing improvements to your home located in the 
United States in 2017.
Note. If you are a member of a condomin-
ium management association for a condomin-
ium you own or a tenant-stockholder in a coop-
erative housing corporation, you are treated as 
having paid your proportionate share of any 
costs of the association or corporation.
The nonbusiness energy property 
credit has expired. At the time this pub-
lication went to print, Congress had not 
enacted legislation on expired provisions. To 
find out if legislation has been enacted, go to 
Recent Developments at IRS.gov/Pub17.
Residential energy efficient property credit. 
You may be able to take a credit of 30% of your 
costs of qualified solar electric property and 
qualified solar water heating property. Include 
any labor costs properly allocable to the onsite 
preparation, assembly, or original installation of 
the residential energy efficient property and for 
piping or wiring to interconnect such property to 
the home.
Basis reduction.  You must reduce the basis 
of your home by the amount of any credit al-
lowed.
How to take the credit.  Complete Form 5695 
and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit 
on Form 1040, line 53.
More information.  For more information on 
the credit, see the Instructions for Form 5695.
CAUTION
!
Retirement Savings 
Contributions Credit 
(Saver's Credit)
You may be able to take this credit if you, or 
your spouse if filing jointly, made:
Contributions (other than rollover contribu-
tions) to a traditional or Roth IRA;
Elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b) 
plan (including designated Roth contribu-
tions) or to a governmental 457, SEP, or 
SIMPLE plan;
Voluntary employee contributions to a 
qualified retirement plan (including the fed-
eral Thrift Savings Plan); or
Contributions to a 501(c)(18)(D) plan.
However, you can't take the credit if either of 
the following applies.
1. The amount on Form 1040, line 38, or 
Form 1040A, line 22, is more than $31,000 
($46,500 if head of household; $62,000 if 
married filing jointly).
2. The person(s) who made the qualified 
contribution or elective deferral: (a) was 
born after January 1, 2000, (b) is claimed 
as a dependent on someone else's 2017 
tax return, or (c) was a student (defined 
next).
Student. You were a student if during any part 
of five calendar months of 2017 you:
Were enrolled as a full-time student at a 
school; or
Took a full-time, on-farm training course 
given by a school or a state, county, or lo-
cal government agency.
School. A school includes a technical, 
trade, or mechanical school. It doesn't include 
an on-the-job training course, correspondence 
school, or school offering courses only through 
the Internet.
How to take the credit.  Figure the credit on 
Form 8880. Enter the credit on your Form 1040, 
line 51, or your Form 1040A, line 34, and attach 
Form 8880 to your return.
More information.  For more information on 
the credit, see the Form 8880 instructions.
Refundable Credits
The credits discussed in this part of the chapter 
are treated as payments of tax. If the total of 
these credits, withheld federal income tax, and 
estimated tax payments is more than your total 
tax, the excess can be refunded to you.
Credit for Tax on 
Undistributed Capital Gain
You must include in your income any amounts 
that regulated investment companies (com-
monly called mutual funds) or real estate invest-
ment trusts (REITs) allocated to you as capital 
gain distributions, even if you didn't actually re-
ceive them. If the mutual fund or REIT paid a tax 
on the capital gain, you are allowed a credit for 
the tax since it is considered paid by you. The 
mutual fund or REIT will send you Form 2439 
showing your share of the undistributed capital 
gains and the tax paid, if any. 
How to take the credit.  To take the credit, at-
tach Copy B of Form 2439 to your Form 1040. 
Include the amount from box 2 of your Form 
2439 in the total for Form 1040, line 73, and 
check box a.
More information.  See Capital Gain Distribu-
tions in chapter 8 for more information on undis-
tributed capital gains.
Health Coverage Tax 
Credit
Relatively few people are eligible for 
the Health Coverage Tax Credit 
(HCTC). See the Instructions for Form 
8885, Health Coverage Tax Credit, to deter-
mine whether you can claim the credit.
You can elect to take the health coverage tax 
credit only if (a) you were an eligible trade ad-
justment assistance (TAA) recipient, alternative 
TAA (ATAA) recipient, reemployment TAA 
(RTAA) recipient, or Pension Benefit Guaranty 
Corporation (PBGC) payee (defined later); or 
you were a qualified family member of one of 
these individuals who passed away or finalized 
a divorce with you, (b) you can't be claimed as a 
dependent on someone else's 2017 tax return, 
and (c) you have met all of the conditions listed 
on line 1 of Form 8885. If you can’t be claimed 
as a dependent on someone else's 2017 tax re-
turn, complete Form 8885, Part I, to see if you 
are eligible to take this credit.
Even if you can’t claim the HCTC on 
your income tax return, you must still 
file Form 8885 to elect the HCTC for 
any months you participated in the advance 
monthly payment program.
TAA recipient.  You were an eligible TAA re-
cipient as of the first day of the month if, for any 
day in that month or the prior month, you:
Received a trade readjustment allowance, 
or
Would have been entitled to receive such 
an allowance except that you had not ex-
hausted all rights to any unemployment in-
surance (except additional compensation 
that is funded by a state and isn’t reim-
bursed from any federal funds) to which 
you were entitled (or would be entitled if 
you applied).
Example. You received a trade readjust-
ment allowance for January 2017. You were an 
eligible TAA recipient as of the first day of Janu-
ary and February.
ATAA recipient.  You were an eligible ATAA 
recipient as of the first day of the month if, for 
that month or the prior month, you received 
benefits under an ATAA program for older 
workers established by the Department of La-
bor.
Example. You received benefits under an 
ATAA program for older workers for October 
2017. The program was established by the 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 253 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 38 Other Credits Page 251

Department of Labor. You were an eligible 
ATAA recipient as of the first day of October 
and November.
RTAA recipient.  You were an eligible RTAA 
recipient as of the first day of the month if, for 
that month or the prior month, you received 
benefits under an RTAA program for older 
workers established by the Department of La-
bor.
PBGC payee.  You were an eligible PBGC 
payee as of the first day of the month, if both of 
the following apply.
1. You were age 55 to 65 and not enrolled in 
Medicare as of the first day of the month.
2. You received a benefit for that month paid 
by the PBGC under title IV of the Em-
ployee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974 (ERISA).
If you received a lump -sum payment from 
the PBGC after August 5, 2002, you meet item 
(2) above for any month that you would have re-
ceived a PBGC benefit if you had not received 
the lump-sum payment.
How to take the credit.  The HCTC is an elec-
tion. If you are eligible for the credit, you must 
elect the HCTC to receive the benefit of the 
HCTC. You make your election by checking the 
box on line 1 of Form 8885 for the first eligible 
coverage month you are electing to take the 
HCTC and all boxes on line 1 for each eligible 
coverage month after the election month. Once 
you elect to take the HCTC for a month in 2017, 
the election to take the HCTC applies to all sub-
sequent eligible coverage months in 2017. The 
election doesn't apply to any month for which 
you aren't eligible to take the HCTC.
For 2017, the election must be made not 
later than the due date (including extensions) of 
your tax return.
More information. For definitions and special 
rules, including those relating to qualified health 
insurance plans, qualifying family members, the 
effect of certain life events, and employer -spon-
sored health insurance plans, see Pub. 502 and 
the Instructions for Form 8885.
Credit for Excess Social 
Security Tax or Railroad 
Retirement Tax Withheld
Most employers must withhold social security 
tax from your wages. If you work for a railroad 
employer, that employer must withhold tier 1 
railroad retirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTA 
tax.
If you worked for two or more employers in 
2017, you may have had too much social secur-
ity tax withheld from your pay. If one or more of 
those employers was a railroad employer, too 
much tier 1 RRTA tax may also have been with-
held at the 6.2% rate. You can claim the excess 
social security or tier 1 RRTA tax as a credit 
against your income tax when you file your re-
turn. For the tier 1 RRTA tax, only use the por-
tion of the tier 1 RRTA tax that was taxed at the 
6.2% rate when figuring if excess tier 1 RRTA 
tax was withheld; don't include any portion of 
the tier 1 RRTA tax that was withheld at the 
Medicare tax rate (1.45%) or the Additional 
Medicare Tax rate (0.9%). The following table 
shows the maximum amount of wages subject 
to tax and the maximum amount of tax that 
should have been withheld for 2017.
Type of tax
Maximum 
wages
subject to tax
Maximum tax
that should
have been
withheld
Social security 
or RRTA tier 1 $127,200 $7,886.40
RRTA tier 2 $ 94,500 $4,630.50
All wages are subject to Medicare tax 
withholding.
Use Form 843, Claim for Refund and 
Request for Abatement, to claim a re-
fund of excess tier 2 RRTA tax. Be sure 
to attach a copy of all of your W-2 forms. Use 
Worksheet 3-3 in Pub. 505, Tax Withholding 
and Estimated Tax, to help you figure the ex-
cess amount.
Employer's error.  If any one employer with-
held too much social security or tier 1 RRTA 
tax, you can't take the excess as a credit 
against your income tax. The employer should 
adjust the tax for you. If the employer doesn't 
adjust the overcollection, you can file a claim for 
refund using Form 843.
Joint return. If you are filing a joint return, you 
can't add the social security or tier 1 RRTA tax 
withheld from your spouse's wages to the 
amount withheld from your wages. Figure the 
withholding separately for you and your spouse 
to determine if either of you has excess with-
holding.
How to figure the credit if you didn't work 
for a railroad.  If you didn't work for a railroad 
during 2017, figure the credit as follows:
1. Add all social security tax 
withheld (but not more than 
$7,886 for each employer). Enter 
the total here ............  
2. Enter any uncollected social 
security tax on tips or group-term 
life insurance included in the total 
on Form 1040, line 62, identified 
by “UT” ...............  
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $7,886 or 
less, stop here. You can't take 
the credit ..............  
4. Social security tax limit ...... 7,886
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3. 
Enter the result here and on Form 
1040, line 71 (or Form 1040A, 
line 46) ............... $ 
CAUTION
!
TIP
Example. You are married and file a joint 
return with your spouse who had no gross in-
come in 2017. During 2017, you worked for the 
Brown Technology Company and earned 
$75,200 in wages. Social security tax of $4,662 
was withheld. You also worked for another em-
ployer in 2017 and earned $55,000 in wages. 
$3,410 of social security tax was withheld from 
these wages. Because you worked for more 
than one employer and your total wages were 
more than $127,200, you can take a credit of 
$186 (($4,662 + $3,410) - $7,886) for the ex-
cess social security tax withheld.
1. Add all social security tax 
withheld (but not more than 
$7,886 for each employer). Enter 
the total here ............ $8,072
2. Enter any uncollected social 
security tax on tips or group-term 
life insurance included in the total 
on Form 1040, line 62, identified 
by “UT” ............... -0- 
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $7,886 or 
less, stop here. You can't take the 
credit ................  8,072
4. Social security tax limit ......  7,886
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3. 
Enter the result here and on Form 
1040, line 71 (or Form 1040A, 
line 46) ............... $186
How to figure the credit if you worked for a 
railroad. If you were a railroad employee at 
any time during 2017, figure the credit as fol-
lows:
1. Add all social security and tier 1 
RRTA tax withheld at the 6.2% 
rate (but not more than $7,886 for 
each employer). Enter the total 
here .................  
2. Enter any uncollected social 
security and tier 1 RRTA tax on 
tips or group-term life insurance 
included in the total on Form 
1040, line 62, identified by 
“UT” .................  
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $7,886 or 
less, stop here. You can't take 
the credit ..............  
4. Social security and tier 1 RRTA 
tax limit ............... 7,886
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3. 
Enter the result here and on Form 
1040, line 71 (or Form 1040A, 
line 46) ................ $ 
How to take the credit.  Enter the credit on 
Form 1040, line 71, or include it in the total for 
Form 1040A, line 46.
More information.  For more information on 
the credit, see Pub. 505.
Page 254 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 252 Chapter 38 Other Credits

Page 255 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017
Tax Table
CAUTION
!
See the instructions for line 44 in the Instructions for Form 1040 to see if 
you must use the Tax Table below to figure your tax.
At 
least
But 
less 
than
Single Married 
/f_iling
jointly*
Married 
/f_iling
sepa-
rately
Head of
a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,318
3,325
3,333
3,340
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
2,851
2,859
2,866
2,874
3,318
3,325
3,333
3,340
3,116
3,124
3,131
3,139
Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their taxable income on Form 
1040, line 43, is $25,300. First, they find the $25,300–25,350 taxable income line. 
Next, they find the column for married filing jointly and read down the column. The 
amount shown where the taxable income line and filing status column meet is 
$2,866. This is the tax amount they should enter on Form 1040, line 44.
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
0 5 0 0 0 0
5 15 1 1 1 1
15 25 2 2 2 2
25 50 4 4 4 4
50 75 6 6 6 6
75 100 9 9 9 9
100 125 11 11 11 11
125 150 14 14 14 14
150 175 16 16 16 16
175 200 19 19 19 19
200 225 21 21 21 21
225 250 24 24 24 24
250 275 26 26 26 26
275 300 29 29 29 29
300 325 31 31 31 31
325 350 34 34 34 34
350 375 36 36 36 36
375 400 39 39 39 39
400 425 41 41 41 41
425 450 44 44 44 44
450 475 46 46 46 46
475 500 49 49 49 49
500 525 51 51 51 51
525 550 54 54 54 54
550 575 56 56 56 56
575 600 59 59 59 59
600 625 61 61 61 61
625 650 64 64 64 64
650 675 66 66 66 66
675 700 69 69 69 69
700 725 71 71 71 71
725 750 74 74 74 74
750 775 76 76 76 76
775 800 79 79 79 79
800 825 81 81 81 81
825 850 84 84 84 84
850 875 86 86 86 86
875 900 89 89 89 89
900 925 91 91 91 91
925 950 94 94 94 94
950 975 96 96 96 96
975 1,000 99 99 99 99
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
1,000
1,000 1,025 101 101 101 101
1,025 1,050 104 104 104 104
1,050 1,075 106 106 106 106
1,075 1,100 109 109 109 109
1,100 1,125 111 111 111 111
1,125 1,150 114 114 114 114
1,150 1,175 116 116 116 116
1,175 1,200 119 119 119 119
1,200 1,225 121 121 121 121
1,225 1,250 124 124 124 124
1,250 1,275 126 126 126 126
1,275 1,300 129 129 129 129
1,300 1,325 131 131 131 131
1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134
1,350 1,375 136 136 136 136
1,375 1,400 139 139 139 139
1,400 1,425 141 141 141 141
1,425 1,450 144 144 144 144
1,450 1,475 146 146 146 146
1,475 1,500 149 149 149 149
1,500 1,525 151 151 151 151
1,525 1,550 154 154 154 154
1,550 1,575 156 156 156 156
1,575 1,600 159 159 159 159
1,600 1,625 161 161 161 161
1,625 1,650 164 164 164 164
1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166
1,675 1,700 169 169 169 169
1,700 1,725 171 171 171 171
1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174
1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176
1,775 1,800 179 179 179 179
1,800 1,825 181 181 181 181
1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184
1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186
1,875 1,900 189 189 189 189
1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191
1,925 1,950 194 194 194 194
1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196
1,975 2,000 199 199 199 199
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
2,000
2,000 2,025 201 201 201 201
2,025 2,050 204 204 204 204
2,050 2,075 206 206 206 206
2,075 2,100 209 209 209 209
2,100 2,125 211 211 211 211
2,125 2,150 214 214 214 214
2,150 2,175 216 216 216 216
2,175 2,200 219 219 219 219
2,200 2,225 221 221 221 221
2,225 2,250 224 224 224 224
2,250 2,275 226 226 226 226
2,275 2,300 229 229 229 229
2,300 2,325 231 231 231 231
2,325 2,350 234 234 234 234
2,350 2,375 236 236 236 236
2,375 2,400 239 239 239 239
2,400 2,425 241 241 241 241
2,425 2,450 244 244 244 244
2,450 2,475 246 246 246 246
2,475 2,500 249 249 249 249
2,500 2,525 251 251 251 251
2,525 2,550 254 254 254 254
2,550 2,575 256 256 256 256
2,575 2,600 259 259 259 259
2,600 2,625 261 261 261 261
2,625 2,650 264 264 264 264
2,650 2,675 266 266 266 266
2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269
2,700 2,725 271 271 271 271
2,725 2,750 274 274 274 274
2,750 2,775 276 276 276 276
2,775 2,800 279 279 279 279
2,800 2,825 281 281 281 281
2,825 2,850 284 284 284 284
2,850 2,875 286 286 286 286
2,875 2,900 289 289 289 289
2,900 2,925 291 291 291 291
2,925 2,950 294 294 294 294
2,950 2,975 296 296 296 296
2,975 3,000 299 299 299 299
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 253 -

Page 256 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
3,000
3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303
3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308
3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313
3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318
3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323
3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328
3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333
3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338
3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343
3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348
3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353
3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358
3,600 3,650 363 363 363 363
3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368
3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373
3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378
3,800 3,850 383 383 383 383
3,850 3,900 388 388 388 388
3,900 3,950 393 393 393 393
3,950 4,000 398 398 398 398
4,000
4,000 4,050 403 403 403 403
4,050 4,100 408 408 408 408
4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413
4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418
4,200 4,250 423 423 423 423
4,250 4,300 428 428 428 428
4,300 4,350 433 433 433 433
4,350 4,400 438 438 438 438
4,400 4,450 443 443 443 443
4,450 4,500 448 448 448 448
4,500 4,550 453 453 453 453
4,550 4,600 458 458 458 458
4,600 4,650 463 463 463 463
4,650 4,700 468 468 468 468
4,700 4,750 473 473 473 473
4,750 4,800 478 478 478 478
4,800 4,850 483 483 483 483
4,850 4,900 488 488 488 488
4,900 4,950 493 493 493 493
4,950 5,000 498 498 498 498
5,000
5,000 5,050 503 503 503 503
5,050 5,100 508 508 508 508
5,100 5,150 513 513 513 513
5,150 5,200 518 518 518 518
5,200 5,250 523 523 523 523
5,250 5,300 528 528 528 528
5,300 5,350 533 533 533 533
5,350 5,400 538 538 538 538
5,400 5,450 543 543 543 543
5,450 5,500 548 548 548 548
5,500 5,550 553 553 553 553
5,550 5,600 558 558 558 558
5,600 5,650 563 563 563 563
5,650 5,700 568 568 568 568
5,700 5,750 573 573 573 573
5,750 5,800 578 578 578 578
5,800 5,850 583 583 583 583
5,850 5,900 588 588 588 588
5,900 5,950 593 593 593 593
5,950 6,000 598 598 598 598
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
6,000
6,000 6,050 603 603 603 603
6,050 6,100 608 608 608 608
6,100 6,150 613 613 613 613
6,150 6,200 618 618 618 618
6,200 6,250 623 623 623 623
6,250 6,300 628 628 628 628
6,300 6,350 633 633 633 633
6,350 6,400 638 638 638 638
6,400 6,450 643 643 643 643
6,450 6,500 648 648 648 648
6,500 6,550 653 653 653 653
6,550 6,600 658 658 658 658
6,600 6,650 663 663 663 663
6,650 6,700 668 668 668 668
6,700 6,750 673 673 673 673
6,750 6,800 678 678 678 678
6,800 6,850 683 683 683 683
6,850 6,900 688 688 688 688
6,900 6,950 693 693 693 693
6,950 7,000 698 698 698 698
7,000
7,000 7,050 703 703 703 703
7,050 7,100 708 708 708 708
7,100 7,150 713 713 713 713
7,150 7,200 718 718 718 718
7,200 7,250 723 723 723 723
7,250 7,300 728 728 728 728
7,300 7,350 733 733 733 733
7,350 7,400 738 738 738 738
7,400 7,450 743 743 743 743
7,450 7,500 748 748 748 748
7,500 7,550 753 753 753 753
7,550 7,600 758 758 758 758
7,600 7,650 763 763 763 763
7,650 7,700 768 768 768 768
7,700 7,750 773 773 773 773
7,750 7,800 778 778 778 778
7,800 7,850 783 783 783 783
7,850 7,900 788 788 788 788
7,900 7,950 793 793 793 793
7,950 8,000 798 798 798 798
8,000
8,000 8,050 803 803 803 803
8,050 8,100 808 808 808 808
8,100 8,150 813 813 813 813
8,150 8,200 818 818 818 818
8,200 8,250 823 823 823 823
8,250 8,300 828 828 828 828
8,300 8,350 833 833 833 833
8,350 8,400 838 838 838 838
8,400 8,450 843 843 843 843
8,450 8,500 848 848 848 848
8,500 8,550 853 853 853 853
8,550 8,600 858 858 858 858
8,600 8,650 863 863 863 863
8,650 8,700 868 868 868 868
8,700 8,750 873 873 873 873
8,750 8,800 878 878 878 878
8,800 8,850 883 883 883 883
8,850 8,900 888 888 888 888
8,900 8,950 893 893 893 893
8,950 9,000 898 898 898 898
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
9,000
9,000 9,050 903 903 903 903
9,050 9,100 908 908 908 908
9,100 9,150 913 913 913 913
9,150 9,200 918 918 918 918
9,200 9,250 923 923 923 923
9,250 9,300 928 928 928 928
9,300 9,350 933 933 933 933
9,350 9,400 940 938 940 938
9,400 9,450 948 943 948 943
9,450 9,500 955 948 955 948
9,500 9,550 963 953 963 953
9,550 9,600 970 958 970 958
9,600 9,650 978 963 978 963
9,650 9,700 985 968 985 968
9,700 9,750 993 973 993 973
9,750 9,800 1,000 978 1,000 978
9,800 9,850 1,008 983 1,008 983
9,850 9,900 1,015 988 1,015 988
9,900 9,950 1,023 993 1,023 993
9,950 10,000 1,030 998 1,030 998
10,000
10,000 10,050 1,038 1,003 1,038 1,003
10,050 10,100 1,045 1,008 1,045 1,008
10,100 10,150 1,053 1,013 1,053 1,013
10,150 10,200 1,060 1,018 1,060 1,018
10,200 10,250 1,068 1,023 1,068 1,023
10,250 10,300 1,075 1,028 1,075 1,028
10,300 10,350 1,083 1,033 1,083 1,033
10,350 10,400 1,090 1,038 1,090 1,038
10,400 10,450 1,098 1,043 1,098 1,043
10,450 10,500 1,105 1,048 1,105 1,048
10,500 10,550 1,113 1,053 1,113 1,053
10,550 10,600 1,120 1,058 1,120 1,058
10,600 10,650 1,128 1,063 1,128 1,063
10,650 10,700 1,135 1,068 1,135 1,068
10,700 10,750 1,143 1,073 1,143 1,073
10,750 10,800 1,150 1,078 1,150 1,078
10,800 10,850 1,158 1,083 1,158 1,083
10,850 10,900 1,165 1,088 1,165 1,088
10,900 10,950 1,173 1,093 1,173 1,093
10,950 11,000 1,180 1,098 1,180 1,098
11,000
11,000 11,050 1,188 1,103 1,188 1,103
11,050 11,100 1,195 1,108 1,195 1,108
11,100 11,150 1,203 1,113 1,203 1,113
11,150 11,200 1,210 1,118 1,210 1,118
11,200 11,250 1,218 1,123 1,218 1,123
11,250 11,300 1,225 1,128 1,225 1,128
11,300 11,350 1,233 1,133 1,233 1,133
11,350 11,400 1,240 1,138 1,240 1,138
11,400 11,450 1,248 1,143 1,248 1,143
11,450 11,500 1,255 1,148 1,255 1,148
11,500 11,550 1,263 1,153 1,263 1,153
11,550 11,600 1,270 1,158 1,270 1,158
11,600 11,650 1,278 1,163 1,278 1,163
11,650 11,700 1,285 1,168 1,285 1,168
11,700 11,750 1,293 1,173 1,293 1,173
11,750 11,800 1,300 1,178 1,300 1,178
11,800 11,850 1,308 1,183 1,308 1,183
11,850 11,900 1,315 1,188 1,315 1,188
11,900 11,950 1,323 1,193 1,323 1,193
11,950 12,000 1,330 1,198 1,330 1,198
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 254 -

Page 257 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
12,000
12,000 12,050 1,338 1,203 1,338 1,203
12,050 12,100 1,345 1,208 1,345 1,208
12,100 12,150 1,353 1,213 1,353 1,213
12,150 12,200 1,360 1,218 1,360 1,218
12,200 12,250 1,368 1,223 1,368 1,223
12,250 12,300 1,375 1,228 1,375 1,228
12,300 12,350 1,383 1,233 1,383 1,233
12,350 12,400 1,390 1,238 1,390 1,238
12,400 12,450 1,398 1,243 1,398 1,243
12,450 12,500 1,405 1,248 1,405 1,248
12,500 12,550 1,413 1,253 1,413 1,253
12,550 12,600 1,420 1,258 1,420 1,258
12,600 12,650 1,428 1,263 1,428 1,263
12,650 12,700 1,435 1,268 1,435 1,268
12,700 12,750 1,443 1,273 1,443 1,273
12,750 12,800 1,450 1,278 1,450 1,278
12,800 12,850 1,458 1,283 1,458 1,283
12,850 12,900 1,465 1,288 1,465 1,288
12,900 12,950 1,473 1,293 1,473 1,293
12,950 13,000 1,480 1,298 1,480 1,298
13,000
13,000 13,050 1,488 1,303 1,488 1,303
13,050 13,100 1,495 1,308 1,495 1,308
13,100 13,150 1,503 1,313 1,503 1,313
13,150 13,200 1,510 1,318 1,510 1,318
13,200 13,250 1,518 1,323 1,518 1,323
13,250 13,300 1,525 1,328 1,525 1,328
13,300 13,350 1,533 1,333 1,533 1,333
13,350 13,400 1,540 1,338 1,540 1,339
13,400 13,450 1,548 1,343 1,548 1,346
13,450 13,500 1,555 1,348 1,555 1,354
13,500 13,550 1,563 1,353 1,563 1,361
13,550 13,600 1,570 1,358 1,570 1,369
13,600 13,650 1,578 1,363 1,578 1,376
13,650 13,700 1,585 1,368 1,585 1,384
13,700 13,750 1,593 1,373 1,593 1,391
13,750 13,800 1,600 1,378 1,600 1,399
13,800 13,850 1,608 1,383 1,608 1,406
13,850 13,900 1,615 1,388 1,615 1,414
13,900 13,950 1,623 1,393 1,623 1,421
13,950 14,000 1,630 1,398 1,630 1,429
14,000
14,000 14,050 1,638 1,403 1,638 1,436
14,050 14,100 1,645 1,408 1,645 1,444
14,100 14,150 1,653 1,413 1,653 1,451
14,150 14,200 1,660 1,418 1,660 1,459
14,200 14,250 1,668 1,423 1,668 1,466
14,250 14,300 1,675 1,428 1,675 1,474
14,300 14,350 1,683 1,433 1,683 1,481
14,350 14,400 1,690 1,438 1,690 1,489
14,400 14,450 1,698 1,443 1,698 1,496
14,450 14,500 1,705 1,448 1,705 1,504
14,500 14,550 1,713 1,453 1,713 1,511
14,550 14,600 1,720 1,458 1,720 1,519
14,600 14,650 1,728 1,463 1,728 1,526
14,650 14,700 1,735 1,468 1,735 1,534
14,700 14,750 1,743 1,473 1,743 1,541
14,750 14,800 1,750 1,478 1,750 1,549
14,800 14,850 1,758 1,483 1,758 1,556
14,850 14,900 1,765 1,488 1,765 1,564
14,900 14,950 1,773 1,493 1,773 1,571
14,950 15,000 1,780 1,498 1,780 1,579
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
15,000
15,000 15,050 1,788 1,503 1,788 1,586
15,050 15,100 1,795 1,508 1,795 1,594
15,100 15,150 1,803 1,513 1,803 1,601
15,150 15,200 1,810 1,518 1,810 1,609
15,200 15,250 1,818 1,523 1,818 1,616
15,250 15,300 1,825 1,528 1,825 1,624
15,300 15,350 1,833 1,533 1,833 1,631
15,350 15,400 1,840 1,538 1,840 1,639
15,400 15,450 1,848 1,543 1,848 1,646
15,450 15,500 1,855 1,548 1,855 1,654
15,500 15,550 1,863 1,553 1,863 1,661
15,550 15,600 1,870 1,558 1,870 1,669
15,600 15,650 1,878 1,563 1,878 1,676
15,650 15,700 1,885 1,568 1,885 1,684
15,700 15,750 1,893 1,573 1,893 1,691
15,750 15,800 1,900 1,578 1,900 1,699
15,800 15,850 1,908 1,583 1,908 1,706
15,850 15,900 1,915 1,588 1,915 1,714
15,900 15,950 1,923 1,593 1,923 1,721
15,950 16,000 1,930 1,598 1,930 1,729
16,000
16,000 16,050 1,938 1,603 1,938 1,736
16,050 16,100 1,945 1,608 1,945 1,744
16,100 16,150 1,953 1,613 1,953 1,751
16,150 16,200 1,960 1,618 1,960 1,759
16,200 16,250 1,968 1,623 1,968 1,766
16,250 16,300 1,975 1,628 1,975 1,774
16,300 16,350 1,983 1,633 1,983 1,781
16,350 16,400 1,990 1,638 1,990 1,789
16,400 16,450 1,998 1,643 1,998 1,796
16,450 16,500 2,005 1,648 2,005 1,804
16,500 16,550 2,013 1,653 2,013 1,811
16,550 16,600 2,020 1,658 2,020 1,819
16,600 16,650 2,028 1,663 2,028 1,826
16,650 16,700 2,035 1,668 2,035 1,834
16,700 16,750 2,043 1,673 2,043 1,841
16,750 16,800 2,050 1,678 2,050 1,849
16,800 16,850 2,058 1,683 2,058 1,856
16,850 16,900 2,065 1,688 2,065 1,864
16,900 16,950 2,073 1,693 2,073 1,871
16,950 17,000 2,080 1,698 2,080 1,879
17,000
17,000 17,050 2,088 1,703 2,088 1,886
17,050 17,100 2,095 1,708 2,095 1,894
17,100 17,150 2,103 1,713 2,103 1,901
17,150 17,200 2,110 1,718 2,110 1,909
17,200 17,250 2,118 1,723 2,118 1,916
17,250 17,300 2,125 1,728 2,125 1,924
17,300 17,350 2,133 1,733 2,133 1,931
17,350 17,400 2,140 1,738 2,140 1,939
17,400 17,450 2,148 1,743 2,148 1,946
17,450 17,500 2,155 1,748 2,155 1,954
17,500 17,550 2,163 1,753 2,163 1,961
17,550 17,600 2,170 1,758 2,170 1,969
17,600 17,650 2,178 1,763 2,178 1,976
17,650 17,700 2,185 1,768 2,185 1,984
17,700 17,750 2,193 1,773 2,193 1,991
17,750 17,800 2,200 1,778 2,200 1,999
17,800 17,850 2,208 1,783 2,208 2,006
17,850 17,900 2,215 1,788 2,215 2,014
17,900 17,950 2,223 1,793 2,223 2,021
17,950 18,000 2,230 1,798 2,230 2,029
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
18,000
18,000 18,050 2,238 1,803 2,238 2,036
18,050 18,100 2,245 1,808 2,245 2,044
18,100 18,150 2,253 1,813 2,253 2,051
18,150 18,200 2,260 1,818 2,260 2,059
18,200 18,250 2,268 1,823 2,268 2,066
18,250 18,300 2,275 1,828 2,275 2,074
18,300 18,350 2,283 1,833 2,283 2,081
18,350 18,400 2,290 1,838 2,290 2,089
18,400 18,450 2,298 1,843 2,298 2,096
18,450 18,500 2,305 1,848 2,305 2,104
18,500 18,550 2,313 1,853 2,313 2,111
18,550 18,600 2,320 1,858 2,320 2,119
18,600 18,650 2,328 1,863 2,328 2,126
18,650 18,700 2,335 1,869 2,335 2,134
18,700 18,750 2,343 1,876 2,343 2,141
18,750 18,800 2,350 1,884 2,350 2,149
18,800 18,850 2,358 1,891 2,358 2,156
18,850 18,900 2,365 1,899 2,365 2,164
18,900 18,950 2,373 1,906 2,373 2,171
18,950 19,000 2,380 1,914 2,380 2,179
19,000
19,000 19,050 2,388 1,921 2,388 2,186
19,050 19,100 2,395 1,929 2,395 2,194
19,100 19,150 2,403 1,936 2,403 2,201
19,150 19,200 2,410 1,944 2,410 2,209
19,200 19,250 2,418 1,951 2,418 2,216
19,250 19,300 2,425 1,959 2,425 2,224
19,300 19,350 2,433 1,966 2,433 2,231
19,350 19,400 2,440 1,974 2,440 2,239
19,400 19,450 2,448 1,981 2,448 2,246
19,450 19,500 2,455 1,989 2,455 2,254
19,500 19,550 2,463 1,996 2,463 2,261
19,550 19,600 2,470 2,004 2,470 2,269
19,600 19,650 2,478 2,011 2,478 2,276
19,650 19,700 2,485 2,019 2,485 2,284
19,700 19,750 2,493 2,026 2,493 2,291
19,750 19,800 2,500 2,034 2,500 2,299
19,800 19,850 2,508 2,041 2,508 2,306
19,850 19,900 2,515 2,049 2,515 2,314
19,900 19,950 2,523 2,056 2,523 2,321
19,950 20,000 2,530 2,064 2,530 2,329
20,000
20,000 20,050 2,538 2,071 2,538 2,336
20,050 20,100 2,545 2,079 2,545 2,344
20,100 20,150 2,553 2,086 2,553 2,351
20,150 20,200 2,560 2,094 2,560 2,359
20,200 20,250 2,568 2,101 2,568 2,366
20,250 20,300 2,575 2,109 2,575 2,374
20,300 20,350 2,583 2,116 2,583 2,381
20,350 20,400 2,590 2,124 2,590 2,389
20,400 20,450 2,598 2,131 2,598 2,396
20,450 20,500 2,605 2,139 2,605 2,404
20,500 20,550 2,613 2,146 2,613 2,411
20,550 20,600 2,620 2,154 2,620 2,419
20,600 20,650 2,628 2,161 2,628 2,426
20,650 20,700 2,635 2,169 2,635 2,434
20,700 20,750 2,643 2,176 2,643 2,441
20,750 20,800 2,650 2,184 2,650 2,449
20,800 20,850 2,658 2,191 2,658 2,456
20,850 20,900 2,665 2,199 2,665 2,464
20,900 20,950 2,673 2,206 2,673 2,471
20,950 21,000 2,680 2,214 2,680 2,479
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 255 -

Page 258 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
21,000
21,000 21,050 2,688 2,221 2,688 2,486
21,050 21,100 2,695 2,229 2,695 2,494
21,100 21,150 2,703 2,236 2,703 2,501
21,150 21,200 2,710 2,244 2,710 2,509
21,200 21,250 2,718 2,251 2,718 2,516
21,250 21,300 2,725 2,259 2,725 2,524
21,300 21,350 2,733 2,266 2,733 2,531
21,350 21,400 2,740 2,274 2,740 2,539
21,400 21,450 2,748 2,281 2,748 2,546
21,450 21,500 2,755 2,289 2,755 2,554
21,500 21,550 2,763 2,296 2,763 2,561
21,550 21,600 2,770 2,304 2,770 2,569
21,600 21,650 2,778 2,311 2,778 2,576
21,650 21,700 2,785 2,319 2,785 2,584
21,700 21,750 2,793 2,326 2,793 2,591
21,750 21,800 2,800 2,334 2,800 2,599
21,800 21,850 2,808 2,341 2,808 2,606
21,850 21,900 2,815 2,349 2,815 2,614
21,900 21,950 2,823 2,356 2,823 2,621
21,950 22,000 2,830 2,364 2,830 2,629
22,000
22,000 22,050 2,838 2,371 2,838 2,636
22,050 22,100 2,845 2,379 2,845 2,644
22,100 22,150 2,853 2,386 2,853 2,651
22,150 22,200 2,860 2,394 2,860 2,659
22,200 22,250 2,868 2,401 2,868 2,666
22,250 22,300 2,875 2,409 2,875 2,674
22,300 22,350 2,883 2,416 2,883 2,681
22,350 22,400 2,890 2,424 2,890 2,689
22,400 22,450 2,898 2,431 2,898 2,696
22,450 22,500 2,905 2,439 2,905 2,704
22,500 22,550 2,913 2,446 2,913 2,711
22,550 22,600 2,920 2,454 2,920 2,719
22,600 22,650 2,928 2,461 2,928 2,726
22,650 22,700 2,935 2,469 2,935 2,734
22,700 22,750 2,943 2,476 2,943 2,741
22,750 22,800 2,950 2,484 2,950 2,749
22,800 22,850 2,958 2,491 2,958 2,756
22,850 22,900 2,965 2,499 2,965 2,764
22,900 22,950 2,973 2,506 2,973 2,771
22,950 23,000 2,980 2,514 2,980 2,779
23,000
23,000 23,050 2,988 2,521 2,988 2,786
23,050 23,100 2,995 2,529 2,995 2,794
23,100 23,150 3,003 2,536 3,003 2,801
23,150 23,200 3,010 2,544 3,010 2,809
23,200 23,250 3,018 2,551 3,018 2,816
23,250 23,300 3,025 2,559 3,025 2,824
23,300 23,350 3,033 2,566 3,033 2,831
23,350 23,400 3,040 2,574 3,040 2,839
23,400 23,450 3,048 2,581 3,048 2,846
23,450 23,500 3,055 2,589 3,055 2,854
23,500 23,550 3,063 2,596 3,063 2,861
23,550 23,600 3,070 2,604 3,070 2,869
23,600 23,650 3,078 2,611 3,078 2,876
23,650 23,700 3,085 2,619 3,085 2,884
23,700 23,750 3,093 2,626 3,093 2,891
23,750 23,800 3,100 2,634 3,100 2,899
23,800 23,850 3,108 2,641 3,108 2,906
23,850 23,900 3,115 2,649 3,115 2,914
23,900 23,950 3,123 2,656 3,123 2,921
23,950 24,000 3,130 2,664 3,130 2,929
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
24,000
24,000 24,050 3,138 2,671 3,138 2,936
24,050 24,100 3,145 2,679 3,145 2,944
24,100 24,150 3,153 2,686 3,153 2,951
24,150 24,200 3,160 2,694 3,160 2,959
24,200 24,250 3,168 2,701 3,168 2,966
24,250 24,300 3,175 2,709 3,175 2,974
24,300 24,350 3,183 2,716 3,183 2,981
24,350 24,400 3,190 2,724 3,190 2,989
24,400 24,450 3,198 2,731 3,198 2,996
24,450 24,500 3,205 2,739 3,205 3,004
24,500 24,550 3,213 2,746 3,213 3,011
24,550 24,600 3,220 2,754 3,220 3,019
24,600 24,650 3,228 2,761 3,228 3,026
24,650 24,700 3,235 2,769 3,235 3,034
24,700 24,750 3,243 2,776 3,243 3,041
24,750 24,800 3,250 2,784 3,250 3,049
24,800 24,850 3,258 2,791 3,258 3,056
24,850 24,900 3,265 2,799 3,265 3,064
24,900 24,950 3,273 2,806 3,273 3,071
24,950 25,000 3,280 2,814 3,280 3,079
25,000
25,000 25,050 3,288 2,821 3,288 3,086
25,050 25,100 3,295 2,829 3,295 3,094
25,100 25,150 3,303 2,836 3,303 3,101
25,150 25,200 3,310 2,844 3,310 3,109
25,200 25,250 3,318 2,851 3,318 3,116
25,250 25,300 3,325 2,859 3,325 3,124
25,300 25,350 3,333 2,866 3,333 3,131
25,350 25,400 3,340 2,874 3,340 3,139
25,400 25,450 3,348 2,881 3,348 3,146
25,450 25,500 3,355 2,889 3,355 3,154
25,500 25,550 3,363 2,896 3,363 3,161
25,550 25,600 3,370 2,904 3,370 3,169
25,600 25,650 3,378 2,911 3,378 3,176
25,650 25,700 3,385 2,919 3,385 3,184
25,700 25,750 3,393 2,926 3,393 3,191
25,750 25,800 3,400 2,934 3,400 3,199
25,800 25,850 3,408 2,941 3,408 3,206
25,850 25,900 3,415 2,949 3,415 3,214
25,900 25,950 3,423 2,956 3,423 3,221
25,950 26,000 3,430 2,964 3,430 3,229
26,000
26,000 26,050 3,438 2,971 3,438 3,236
26,050 26,100 3,445 2,979 3,445 3,244
26,100 26,150 3,453 2,986 3,453 3,251
26,150 26,200 3,460 2,994 3,460 3,259
26,200 26,250 3,468 3,001 3,468 3,266
26,250 26,300 3,475 3,009 3,475 3,274
26,300 26,350 3,483 3,016 3,483 3,281
26,350 26,400 3,490 3,024 3,490 3,289
26,400 26,450 3,498 3,031 3,498 3,296
26,450 26,500 3,505 3,039 3,505 3,304
26,500 26,550 3,513 3,046 3,513 3,311
26,550 26,600 3,520 3,054 3,520 3,319
26,600 26,650 3,528 3,061 3,528 3,326
26,650 26,700 3,535 3,069 3,535 3,334
26,700 26,750 3,543 3,076 3,543 3,341
26,750 26,800 3,550 3,084 3,550 3,349
26,800 26,850 3,558 3,091 3,558 3,356
26,850 26,900 3,565 3,099 3,565 3,364
26,900 26,950 3,573 3,106 3,573 3,371
26,950 27,000 3,580 3,114 3,580 3,379
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
27,000
27,000 27,050 3,588 3,121 3,588 3,386
27,050 27,100 3,595 3,129 3,595 3,394
27,100 27,150 3,603 3,136 3,603 3,401
27,150 27,200 3,610 3,144 3,610 3,409
27,200 27,250 3,618 3,151 3,618 3,416
27,250 27,300 3,625 3,159 3,625 3,424
27,300 27,350 3,633 3,166 3,633 3,431
27,350 27,400 3,640 3,174 3,640 3,439
27,400 27,450 3,648 3,181 3,648 3,446
27,450 27,500 3,655 3,189 3,655 3,454
27,500 27,550 3,663 3,196 3,663 3,461
27,550 27,600 3,670 3,204 3,670 3,469
27,600 27,650 3,678 3,211 3,678 3,476
27,650 27,700 3,685 3,219 3,685 3,484
27,700 27,750 3,693 3,226 3,693 3,491
27,750 27,800 3,700 3,234 3,700 3,499
27,800 27,850 3,708 3,241 3,708 3,506
27,850 27,900 3,715 3,249 3,715 3,514
27,900 27,950 3,723 3,256 3,723 3,521
27,950 28,000 3,730 3,264 3,730 3,529
28,000
28,000 28,050 3,738 3,271 3,738 3,536
28,050 28,100 3,745 3,279 3,745 3,544
28,100 28,150 3,753 3,286 3,753 3,551
28,150 28,200 3,760 3,294 3,760 3,559
28,200 28,250 3,768 3,301 3,768 3,566
28,250 28,300 3,775 3,309 3,775 3,574
28,300 28,350 3,783 3,316 3,783 3,581
28,350 28,400 3,790 3,324 3,790 3,589
28,400 28,450 3,798 3,331 3,798 3,596
28,450 28,500 3,805 3,339 3,805 3,604
28,500 28,550 3,813 3,346 3,813 3,611
28,550 28,600 3,820 3,354 3,820 3,619
28,600 28,650 3,828 3,361 3,828 3,626
28,650 28,700 3,835 3,369 3,835 3,634
28,700 28,750 3,843 3,376 3,843 3,641
28,750 28,800 3,850 3,384 3,850 3,649
28,800 28,850 3,858 3,391 3,858 3,656
28,850 28,900 3,865 3,399 3,865 3,664
28,900 28,950 3,873 3,406 3,873 3,671
28,950 29,000 3,880 3,414 3,880 3,679
29,000
29,000 29,050 3,888 3,421 3,888 3,686
29,050 29,100 3,895 3,429 3,895 3,694
29,100 29,150 3,903 3,436 3,903 3,701
29,150 29,200 3,910 3,444 3,910 3,709
29,200 29,250 3,918 3,451 3,918 3,716
29,250 29,300 3,925 3,459 3,925 3,724
29,300 29,350 3,933 3,466 3,933 3,731
29,350 29,400 3,940 3,474 3,940 3,739
29,400 29,450 3,948 3,481 3,948 3,746
29,450 29,500 3,955 3,489 3,955 3,754
29,500 29,550 3,963 3,496 3,963 3,761
29,550 29,600 3,970 3,504 3,970 3,769
29,600 29,650 3,978 3,511 3,978 3,776
29,650 29,700 3,985 3,519 3,985 3,784
29,700 29,750 3,993 3,526 3,993 3,791
29,750 29,800 4,000 3,534 4,000 3,799
29,800 29,850 4,008 3,541 4,008 3,806
29,850 29,900 4,015 3,549 4,015 3,814
29,900 29,950 4,023 3,556 4,023 3,821
29,950 30,000 4,030 3,564 4,030 3,829
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 256 -

Page 259 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
30,000
30,000 30,050 4,038 3,571 4,038 3,836
30,050 30,100 4,045 3,579 4,045 3,844
30,100 30,150 4,053 3,586 4,053 3,851
30,150 30,200 4,060 3,594 4,060 3,859
30,200 30,250 4,068 3,601 4,068 3,866
30,250 30,300 4,075 3,609 4,075 3,874
30,300 30,350 4,083 3,616 4,083 3,881
30,350 30,400 4,090 3,624 4,090 3,889
30,400 30,450 4,098 3,631 4,098 3,896
30,450 30,500 4,105 3,639 4,105 3,904
30,500 30,550 4,113 3,646 4,113 3,911
30,550 30,600 4,120 3,654 4,120 3,919
30,600 30,650 4,128 3,661 4,128 3,926
30,650 30,700 4,135 3,669 4,135 3,934
30,700 30,750 4,143 3,676 4,143 3,941
30,750 30,800 4,150 3,684 4,150 3,949
30,800 30,850 4,158 3,691 4,158 3,956
30,850 30,900 4,165 3,699 4,165 3,964
30,900 30,950 4,173 3,706 4,173 3,971
30,950 31,000 4,180 3,714 4,180 3,979
31,000
31,000 31,050 4,188 3,721 4,188 3,986
31,050 31,100 4,195 3,729 4,195 3,994
31,100 31,150 4,203 3,736 4,203 4,001
31,150 31,200 4,210 3,744 4,210 4,009
31,200 31,250 4,218 3,751 4,218 4,016
31,250 31,300 4,225 3,759 4,225 4,024
31,300 31,350 4,233 3,766 4,233 4,031
31,350 31,400 4,240 3,774 4,240 4,039
31,400 31,450 4,248 3,781 4,248 4,046
31,450 31,500 4,255 3,789 4,255 4,054
31,500 31,550 4,263 3,796 4,263 4,061
31,550 31,600 4,270 3,804 4,270 4,069
31,600 31,650 4,278 3,811 4,278 4,076
31,650 31,700 4,285 3,819 4,285 4,084
31,700 31,750 4,293 3,826 4,293 4,091
31,750 31,800 4,300 3,834 4,300 4,099
31,800 31,850 4,308 3,841 4,308 4,106
31,850 31,900 4,315 3,849 4,315 4,114
31,900 31,950 4,323 3,856 4,323 4,121
31,950 32,000 4,330 3,864 4,330 4,129
32,000
32,000 32,050 4,338 3,871 4,338 4,136
32,050 32,100 4,345 3,879 4,345 4,144
32,100 32,150 4,353 3,886 4,353 4,151
32,150 32,200 4,360 3,894 4,360 4,159
32,200 32,250 4,368 3,901 4,368 4,166
32,250 32,300 4,375 3,909 4,375 4,174
32,300 32,350 4,383 3,916 4,383 4,181
32,350 32,400 4,390 3,924 4,390 4,189
32,400 32,450 4,398 3,931 4,398 4,196
32,450 32,500 4,405 3,939 4,405 4,204
32,500 32,550 4,413 3,946 4,413 4,211
32,550 32,600 4,420 3,954 4,420 4,219
32,600 32,650 4,428 3,961 4,428 4,226
32,650 32,700 4,435 3,969 4,435 4,234
32,700 32,750 4,443 3,976 4,443 4,241
32,750 32,800 4,450 3,984 4,450 4,249
32,800 32,850 4,458 3,991 4,458 4,256
32,850 32,900 4,465 3,999 4,465 4,264
32,900 32,950 4,473 4,006 4,473 4,271
32,950 33,000 4,480 4,014 4,480 4,279
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
33,000
33,000 33,050 4,488 4,021 4,488 4,286
33,050 33,100 4,495 4,029 4,495 4,294
33,100 33,150 4,503 4,036 4,503 4,301
33,150 33,200 4,510 4,044 4,510 4,309
33,200 33,250 4,518 4,051 4,518 4,316
33,250 33,300 4,525 4,059 4,525 4,324
33,300 33,350 4,533 4,066 4,533 4,331
33,350 33,400 4,540 4,074 4,540 4,339
33,400 33,450 4,548 4,081 4,548 4,346
33,450 33,500 4,555 4,089 4,555 4,354
33,500 33,550 4,563 4,096 4,563 4,361
33,550 33,600 4,570 4,104 4,570 4,369
33,600 33,650 4,578 4,111 4,578 4,376
33,650 33,700 4,585 4,119 4,585 4,384
33,700 33,750 4,593 4,126 4,593 4,391
33,750 33,800 4,600 4,134 4,600 4,399
33,800 33,850 4,608 4,141 4,608 4,406
33,850 33,900 4,615 4,149 4,615 4,414
33,900 33,950 4,623 4,156 4,623 4,421
33,950 34,000 4,630 4,164 4,630 4,429
34,000
34,000 34,050 4,638 4,171 4,638 4,436
34,050 34,100 4,645 4,179 4,645 4,444
34,100 34,150 4,653 4,186 4,653 4,451
34,150 34,200 4,660 4,194 4,660 4,459
34,200 34,250 4,668 4,201 4,668 4,466
34,250 34,300 4,675 4,209 4,675 4,474
34,300 34,350 4,683 4,216 4,683 4,481
34,350 34,400 4,690 4,224 4,690 4,489
34,400 34,450 4,698 4,231 4,698 4,496
34,450 34,500 4,705 4,239 4,705 4,504
34,500 34,550 4,713 4,246 4,713 4,511
34,550 34,600 4,720 4,254 4,720 4,519
34,600 34,650 4,728 4,261 4,728 4,526
34,650 34,700 4,735 4,269 4,735 4,534
34,700 34,750 4,743 4,276 4,743 4,541
34,750 34,800 4,750 4,284 4,750 4,549
34,800 34,850 4,758 4,291 4,758 4,556
34,850 34,900 4,765 4,299 4,765 4,564
34,900 34,950 4,773 4,306 4,773 4,571
34,950 35,000 4,780 4,314 4,780 4,579
35,000
35,000 35,050 4,788 4,321 4,788 4,586
35,050 35,100 4,795 4,329 4,795 4,594
35,100 35,150 4,803 4,336 4,803 4,601
35,150 35,200 4,810 4,344 4,810 4,609
35,200 35,250 4,818 4,351 4,818 4,616
35,250 35,300 4,825 4,359 4,825 4,624
35,300 35,350 4,833 4,366 4,833 4,631
35,350 35,400 4,840 4,374 4,840 4,639
35,400 35,450 4,848 4,381 4,848 4,646
35,450 35,500 4,855 4,389 4,855 4,654
35,500 35,550 4,863 4,396 4,863 4,661
35,550 35,600 4,870 4,404 4,870 4,669
35,600 35,650 4,878 4,411 4,878 4,676
35,650 35,700 4,885 4,419 4,885 4,684
35,700 35,750 4,893 4,426 4,893 4,691
35,750 35,800 4,900 4,434 4,900 4,699
35,800 35,850 4,908 4,441 4,908 4,706
35,850 35,900 4,915 4,449 4,915 4,714
35,900 35,950 4,923 4,456 4,923 4,721
35,950 36,000 4,930 4,464 4,930 4,729
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
36,000
36,000 36,050 4,938 4,471 4,938 4,736
36,050 36,100 4,945 4,479 4,945 4,744
36,100 36,150 4,953 4,486 4,953 4,751
36,150 36,200 4,960 4,494 4,960 4,759
36,200 36,250 4,968 4,501 4,968 4,766
36,250 36,300 4,975 4,509 4,975 4,774
36,300 36,350 4,983 4,516 4,983 4,781
36,350 36,400 4,990 4,524 4,990 4,789
36,400 36,450 4,998 4,531 4,998 4,796
36,450 36,500 5,005 4,539 5,005 4,804
36,500 36,550 5,013 4,546 5,013 4,811
36,550 36,600 5,020 4,554 5,020 4,819
36,600 36,650 5,028 4,561 5,028 4,826
36,650 36,700 5,035 4,569 5,035 4,834
36,700 36,750 5,043 4,576 5,043 4,841
36,750 36,800 5,050 4,584 5,050 4,849
36,800 36,850 5,058 4,591 5,058 4,856
36,850 36,900 5,065 4,599 5,065 4,864
36,900 36,950 5,073 4,606 5,073 4,871
36,950 37,000 5,080 4,614 5,080 4,879
37,000
37,000 37,050 5,088 4,621 5,088 4,886
37,050 37,100 5,095 4,629 5,095 4,894
37,100 37,150 5,103 4,636 5,103 4,901
37,150 37,200 5,110 4,644 5,110 4,909
37,200 37,250 5,118 4,651 5,118 4,916
37,250 37,300 5,125 4,659 5,125 4,924
37,300 37,350 5,133 4,666 5,133 4,931
37,350 37,400 5,140 4,674 5,140 4,939
37,400 37,450 5,148 4,681 5,148 4,946
37,450 37,500 5,155 4,689 5,155 4,954
37,500 37,550 5,163 4,696 5,163 4,961
37,550 37,600 5,170 4,704 5,170 4,969
37,600 37,650 5,178 4,711 5,178 4,976
37,650 37,700 5,185 4,719 5,185 4,984
37,700 37,750 5,193 4,726 5,193 4,991
37,750 37,800 5,200 4,734 5,200 4,999
37,800 37,850 5,208 4,741 5,208 5,006
37,850 37,900 5,215 4,749 5,215 5,014
37,900 37,950 5,223 4,756 5,223 5,021
37,950 38,000 5,233 4,764 5,233 5,029
38,000
38,000 38,050 5,245 4,771 5,245 5,036
38,050 38,100 5,258 4,779 5,258 5,044
38,100 38,150 5,270 4,786 5,270 5,051
38,150 38,200 5,283 4,794 5,283 5,059
38,200 38,250 5,295 4,801 5,295 5,066
38,250 38,300 5,308 4,809 5,308 5,074
38,300 38,350 5,320 4,816 5,320 5,081
38,350 38,400 5,333 4,824 5,333 5,089
38,400 38,450 5,345 4,831 5,345 5,096
38,450 38,500 5,358 4,839 5,358 5,104
38,500 38,550 5,370 4,846 5,370 5,111
38,550 38,600 5,383 4,854 5,383 5,119
38,600 38,650 5,395 4,861 5,395 5,126
38,650 38,700 5,408 4,869 5,408 5,134
38,700 38,750 5,420 4,876 5,420 5,141
38,750 38,800 5,433 4,884 5,433 5,149
38,800 38,850 5,445 4,891 5,445 5,156
38,850 38,900 5,458 4,899 5,458 5,164
38,900 38,950 5,470 4,906 5,470 5,171
38,950 39,000 5,483 4,914 5,483 5,179
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 257 -

Page 260 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
39,000
39,000 39,050 5,495 4,921 5,495 5,186
39,050 39,100 5,508 4,929 5,508 5,194
39,100 39,150 5,520 4,936 5,520 5,201
39,150 39,200 5,533 4,944 5,533 5,209
39,200 39,250 5,545 4,951 5,545 5,216
39,250 39,300 5,558 4,959 5,558 5,224
39,300 39,350 5,570 4,966 5,570 5,231
39,350 39,400 5,583 4,974 5,583 5,239
39,400 39,450 5,595 4,981 5,595 5,246
39,450 39,500 5,608 4,989 5,608 5,254
39,500 39,550 5,620 4,996 5,620 5,261
39,550 39,600 5,633 5,004 5,633 5,269
39,600 39,650 5,645 5,011 5,645 5,276
39,650 39,700 5,658 5,019 5,658 5,284
39,700 39,750 5,670 5,026 5,670 5,291
39,750 39,800 5,683 5,034 5,683 5,299
39,800 39,850 5,695 5,041 5,695 5,306
39,850 39,900 5,708 5,049 5,708 5,314
39,900 39,950 5,720 5,056 5,720 5,321
39,950 40,000 5,733 5,064 5,733 5,329
40,000
40,000 40,050 5,745 5,071 5,745 5,336
40,050 40,100 5,758 5,079 5,758 5,344
40,100 40,150 5,770 5,086 5,770 5,351
40,150 40,200 5,783 5,094 5,783 5,359
40,200 40,250 5,795 5,101 5,795 5,366
40,250 40,300 5,808 5,109 5,808 5,374
40,300 40,350 5,820 5,116 5,820 5,381
40,350 40,400 5,833 5,124 5,833 5,389
40,400 40,450 5,845 5,131 5,845 5,396
40,450 40,500 5,858 5,139 5,858 5,404
40,500 40,550 5,870 5,146 5,870 5,411
40,550 40,600 5,883 5,154 5,883 5,419
40,600 40,650 5,895 5,161 5,895 5,426
40,650 40,700 5,908 5,169 5,908 5,434
40,700 40,750 5,920 5,176 5,920 5,441
40,750 40,800 5,933 5,184 5,933 5,449
40,800 40,850 5,945 5,191 5,945 5,456
40,850 40,900 5,958 5,199 5,958 5,464
40,900 40,950 5,970 5,206 5,970 5,471
40,950 41,000 5,983 5,214 5,983 5,479
41,000
41,000 41,050 5,995 5,221 5,995 5,486
41,050 41,100 6,008 5,229 6,008 5,494
41,100 41,150 6,020 5,236 6,020 5,501
41,150 41,200 6,033 5,244 6,033 5,509
41,200 41,250 6,045 5,251 6,045 5,516
41,250 41,300 6,058 5,259 6,058 5,524
41,300 41,350 6,070 5,266 6,070 5,531
41,350 41,400 6,083 5,274 6,083 5,539
41,400 41,450 6,095 5,281 6,095 5,546
41,450 41,500 6,108 5,289 6,108 5,554
41,500 41,550 6,120 5,296 6,120 5,561
41,550 41,600 6,133 5,304 6,133 5,569
41,600 41,650 6,145 5,311 6,145 5,576
41,650 41,700 6,158 5,319 6,158 5,584
41,700 41,750 6,170 5,326 6,170 5,591
41,750 41,800 6,183 5,334 6,183 5,599
41,800 41,850 6,195 5,341 6,195 5,606
41,850 41,900 6,208 5,349 6,208 5,614
41,900 41,950 6,220 5,356 6,220 5,621
41,950 42,000 6,233 5,364 6,233 5,629
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
42,000
42,000 42,050 6,245 5,371 6,245 5,636
42,050 42,100 6,258 5,379 6,258 5,644
42,100 42,150 6,270 5,386 6,270 5,651
42,150 42,200 6,283 5,394 6,283 5,659
42,200 42,250 6,295 5,401 6,295 5,666
42,250 42,300 6,308 5,409 6,308 5,674
42,300 42,350 6,320 5,416 6,320 5,681
42,350 42,400 6,333 5,424 6,333 5,689
42,400 42,450 6,345 5,431 6,345 5,696
42,450 42,500 6,358 5,439 6,358 5,704
42,500 42,550 6,370 5,446 6,370 5,711
42,550 42,600 6,383 5,454 6,383 5,719
42,600 42,650 6,395 5,461 6,395 5,726
42,650 42,700 6,408 5,469 6,408 5,734
42,700 42,750 6,420 5,476 6,420 5,741
42,750 42,800 6,433 5,484 6,433 5,749
42,800 42,850 6,445 5,491 6,445 5,756
42,850 42,900 6,458 5,499 6,458 5,764
42,900 42,950 6,470 5,506 6,470 5,771
42,950 43,000 6,483 5,514 6,483 5,779
43,000
43,000 43,050 6,495 5,521 6,495 5,786
43,050 43,100 6,508 5,529 6,508 5,794
43,100 43,150 6,520 5,536 6,520 5,801
43,150 43,200 6,533 5,544 6,533 5,809
43,200 43,250 6,545 5,551 6,545 5,816
43,250 43,300 6,558 5,559 6,558 5,824
43,300 43,350 6,570 5,566 6,570 5,831
43,350 43,400 6,583 5,574 6,583 5,839
43,400 43,450 6,595 5,581 6,595 5,846
43,450 43,500 6,608 5,589 6,608 5,854
43,500 43,550 6,620 5,596 6,620 5,861
43,550 43,600 6,633 5,604 6,633 5,869
43,600 43,650 6,645 5,611 6,645 5,876
43,650 43,700 6,658 5,619 6,658 5,884
43,700 43,750 6,670 5,626 6,670 5,891
43,750 43,800 6,683 5,634 6,683 5,899
43,800 43,850 6,695 5,641 6,695 5,906
43,850 43,900 6,708 5,649 6,708 5,914
43,900 43,950 6,720 5,656 6,720 5,921
43,950 44,000 6,733 5,664 6,733 5,929
44,000
44,000 44,050 6,745 5,671 6,745 5,936
44,050 44,100 6,758 5,679 6,758 5,944
44,100 44,150 6,770 5,686 6,770 5,951
44,150 44,200 6,783 5,694 6,783 5,959
44,200 44,250 6,795 5,701 6,795 5,966
44,250 44,300 6,808 5,709 6,808 5,974
44,300 44,350 6,820 5,716 6,820 5,981
44,350 44,400 6,833 5,724 6,833 5,989
44,400 44,450 6,845 5,731 6,845 5,996
44,450 44,500 6,858 5,739 6,858 6,004
44,500 44,550 6,870 5,746 6,870 6,011
44,550 44,600 6,883 5,754 6,883 6,019
44,600 44,650 6,895 5,761 6,895 6,026
44,650 44,700 6,908 5,769 6,908 6,034
44,700 44,750 6,920 5,776 6,920 6,041
44,750 44,800 6,933 5,784 6,933 6,049
44,800 44,850 6,945 5,791 6,945 6,056
44,850 44,900 6,958 5,799 6,958 6,064
44,900 44,950 6,970 5,806 6,970 6,071
44,950 45,000 6,983 5,814 6,983 6,079
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
45,000
45,000 45,050 6,995 5,821 6,995 6,086
45,050 45,100 7,008 5,829 7,008 6,094
45,100 45,150 7,020 5,836 7,020 6,101
45,150 45,200 7,033 5,844 7,033 6,109
45,200 45,250 7,045 5,851 7,045 6,116
45,250 45,300 7,058 5,859 7,058 6,124
45,300 45,350 7,070 5,866 7,070 6,131
45,350 45,400 7,083 5,874 7,083 6,139
45,400 45,450 7,095 5,881 7,095 6,146
45,450 45,500 7,108 5,889 7,108 6,154
45,500 45,550 7,120 5,896 7,120 6,161
45,550 45,600 7,133 5,904 7,133 6,169
45,600 45,650 7,145 5,911 7,145 6,176
45,650 45,700 7,158 5,919 7,158 6,184
45,700 45,750 7,170 5,926 7,170 6,191
45,750 45,800 7,183 5,934 7,183 6,199
45,800 45,850 7,195 5,941 7,195 6,206
45,850 45,900 7,208 5,949 7,208 6,214
45,900 45,950 7,220 5,956 7,220 6,221
45,950 46,000 7,233 5,964 7,233 6,229
46,000
46,000 46,050 7,245 5,971 7,245 6,236
46,050 46,100 7,258 5,979 7,258 6,244
46,100 46,150 7,270 5,986 7,270 6,251
46,150 46,200 7,283 5,994 7,283 6,259
46,200 46,250 7,295 6,001 7,295 6,266
46,250 46,300 7,308 6,009 7,308 6,274
46,300 46,350 7,320 6,016 7,320 6,281
46,350 46,400 7,333 6,024 7,333 6,289
46,400 46,450 7,345 6,031 7,345 6,296
46,450 46,500 7,358 6,039 7,358 6,304
46,500 46,550 7,370 6,046 7,370 6,311
46,550 46,600 7,383 6,054 7,383 6,319
46,600 46,650 7,395 6,061 7,395 6,326
46,650 46,700 7,408 6,069 7,408 6,334
46,700 46,750 7,420 6,076 7,420 6,341
46,750 46,800 7,433 6,084 7,433 6,349
46,800 46,850 7,445 6,091 7,445 6,356
46,850 46,900 7,458 6,099 7,458 6,364
46,900 46,950 7,470 6,106 7,470 6,371
46,950 47,000 7,483 6,114 7,483 6,379
47,000
47,000 47,050 7,495 6,121 7,495 6,386
47,050 47,100 7,508 6,129 7,508 6,394
47,100 47,150 7,520 6,136 7,520 6,401
47,150 47,200 7,533 6,144 7,533 6,409
47,200 47,250 7,545 6,151 7,545 6,416
47,250 47,300 7,558 6,159 7,558 6,424
47,300 47,350 7,570 6,166 7,570 6,431
47,350 47,400 7,583 6,174 7,583 6,439
47,400 47,450 7,595 6,181 7,595 6,446
47,450 47,500 7,608 6,189 7,608 6,454
47,500 47,550 7,620 6,196 7,620 6,461
47,550 47,600 7,633 6,204 7,633 6,469
47,600 47,650 7,645 6,211 7,645 6,476
47,650 47,700 7,658 6,219 7,658 6,484
47,700 47,750 7,670 6,226 7,670 6,491
47,750 47,800 7,683 6,234 7,683 6,499
47,800 47,850 7,695 6,241 7,695 6,506
47,850 47,900 7,708 6,249 7,708 6,514
47,900 47,950 7,720 6,256 7,720 6,521
47,950 48,000 7,733 6,264 7,733 6,529
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 258 -

Page 261 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
48,000
48,000 48,050 7,745 6,271 7,745 6,536
48,050 48,100 7,758 6,279 7,758 6,544
48,100 48,150 7,770 6,286 7,770 6,551
48,150 48,200 7,783 6,294 7,783 6,559
48,200 48,250 7,795 6,301 7,795 6,566
48,250 48,300 7,808 6,309 7,808 6,574
48,300 48,350 7,820 6,316 7,820 6,581
48,350 48,400 7,833 6,324 7,833 6,589
48,400 48,450 7,845 6,331 7,845 6,596
48,450 48,500 7,858 6,339 7,858 6,604
48,500 48,550 7,870 6,346 7,870 6,611
48,550 48,600 7,883 6,354 7,883 6,619
48,600 48,650 7,895 6,361 7,895 6,626
48,650 48,700 7,908 6,369 7,908 6,634
48,700 48,750 7,920 6,376 7,920 6,641
48,750 48,800 7,933 6,384 7,933 6,649
48,800 48,850 7,945 6,391 7,945 6,656
48,850 48,900 7,958 6,399 7,958 6,664
48,900 48,950 7,970 6,406 7,970 6,671
48,950 49,000 7,983 6,414 7,983 6,679
49,000
49,000 49,050 7,995 6,421 7,995 6,686
49,050 49,100 8,008 6,429 8,008 6,694
49,100 49,150 8,020 6,436 8,020 6,701
49,150 49,200 8,033 6,444 8,033 6,709
49,200 49,250 8,045 6,451 8,045 6,716
49,250 49,300 8,058 6,459 8,058 6,724
49,300 49,350 8,070 6,466 8,070 6,731
49,350 49,400 8,083 6,474 8,083 6,739
49,400 49,450 8,095 6,481 8,095 6,746
49,450 49,500 8,108 6,489 8,108 6,754
49,500 49,550 8,120 6,496 8,120 6,761
49,550 49,600 8,133 6,504 8,133 6,769
49,600 49,650 8,145 6,511 8,145 6,776
49,650 49,700 8,158 6,519 8,158 6,784
49,700 49,750 8,170 6,526 8,170 6,791
49,750 49,800 8,183 6,534 8,183 6,799
49,800 49,850 8,195 6,541 8,195 6,806
49,850 49,900 8,208 6,549 8,208 6,814
49,900 49,950 8,220 6,556 8,220 6,821
49,950 50,000 8,233 6,564 8,233 6,829
50,000
50,000 50,050 8,245 6,571 8,245 6,836
50,050 50,100 8,258 6,579 8,258 6,844
50,100 50,150 8,270 6,586 8,270 6,851
50,150 50,200 8,283 6,594 8,283 6,859
50,200 50,250 8,295 6,601 8,295 6,866
50,250 50,300 8,308 6,609 8,308 6,874
50,300 50,350 8,320 6,616 8,320 6,881
50,350 50,400 8,333 6,624 8,333 6,889
50,400 50,450 8,345 6,631 8,345 6,896
50,450 50,500 8,358 6,639 8,358 6,904
50,500 50,550 8,370 6,646 8,370 6,911
50,550 50,600 8,383 6,654 8,383 6,919
50,600 50,650 8,395 6,661 8,395 6,926
50,650 50,700 8,408 6,669 8,408 6,934
50,700 50,750 8,420 6,676 8,420 6,941
50,750 50,800 8,433 6,684 8,433 6,949
50,800 50,850 8,445 6,691 8,445 6,959
50,850 50,900 8,458 6,699 8,458 6,971
50,900 50,950 8,470 6,706 8,470 6,984
50,950 51,000 8,483 6,714 8,483 6,996
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
51,000
51,000 51,050 8,495 6,721 8,495 7,009
51,050 51,100 8,508 6,729 8,508 7,021
51,100 51,150 8,520 6,736 8,520 7,034
51,150 51,200 8,533 6,744 8,533 7,046
51,200 51,250 8,545 6,751 8,545 7,059
51,250 51,300 8,558 6,759 8,558 7,071
51,300 51,350 8,570 6,766 8,570 7,084
51,350 51,400 8,583 6,774 8,583 7,096
51,400 51,450 8,595 6,781 8,595 7,109
51,450 51,500 8,608 6,789 8,608 7,121
51,500 51,550 8,620 6,796 8,620 7,134
51,550 51,600 8,633 6,804 8,633 7,146
51,600 51,650 8,645 6,811 8,645 7,159
51,650 51,700 8,658 6,819 8,658 7,171
51,700 51,750 8,670 6,826 8,670 7,184
51,750 51,800 8,683 6,834 8,683 7,196
51,800 51,850 8,695 6,841 8,695 7,209
51,850 51,900 8,708 6,849 8,708 7,221
51,900 51,950 8,720 6,856 8,720 7,234
51,950 52,000 8,733 6,864 8,733 7,246
52,000
52,000 52,050 8,745 6,871 8,745 7,259
52,050 52,100 8,758 6,879 8,758 7,271
52,100 52,150 8,770 6,886 8,770 7,284
52,150 52,200 8,783 6,894 8,783 7,296
52,200 52,250 8,795 6,901 8,795 7,309
52,250 52,300 8,808 6,909 8,808 7,321
52,300 52,350 8,820 6,916 8,820 7,334
52,350 52,400 8,833 6,924 8,833 7,346
52,400 52,450 8,845 6,931 8,845 7,359
52,450 52,500 8,858 6,939 8,858 7,371
52,500 52,550 8,870 6,946 8,870 7,384
52,550 52,600 8,883 6,954 8,883 7,396
52,600 52,650 8,895 6,961 8,895 7,409
52,650 52,700 8,908 6,969 8,908 7,421
52,700 52,750 8,920 6,976 8,920 7,434
52,750 52,800 8,933 6,984 8,933 7,446
52,800 52,850 8,945 6,991 8,945 7,459
52,850 52,900 8,958 6,999 8,958 7,471
52,900 52,950 8,970 7,006 8,970 7,484
52,950 53,000 8,983 7,014 8,983 7,496
53,000
53,000 53,050 8,995 7,021 8,995 7,509
53,050 53,100 9,008 7,029 9,008 7,521
53,100 53,150 9,020 7,036 9,020 7,534
53,150 53,200 9,033 7,044 9,033 7,546
53,200 53,250 9,045 7,051 9,045 7,559
53,250 53,300 9,058 7,059 9,058 7,571
53,300 53,350 9,070 7,066 9,070 7,584
53,350 53,400 9,083 7,074 9,083 7,596
53,400 53,450 9,095 7,081 9,095 7,609
53,450 53,500 9,108 7,089 9,108 7,621
53,500 53,550 9,120 7,096 9,120 7,634
53,550 53,600 9,133 7,104 9,133 7,646
53,600 53,650 9,145 7,111 9,145 7,659
53,650 53,700 9,158 7,119 9,158 7,671
53,700 53,750 9,170 7,126 9,170 7,684
53,750 53,800 9,183 7,134 9,183 7,696
53,800 53,850 9,195 7,141 9,195 7,709
53,850 53,900 9,208 7,149 9,208 7,721
53,900 53,950 9,220 7,156 9,220 7,734
53,950 54,000 9,233 7,164 9,233 7,746
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
54,000
54,000 54,050 9,245 7,171 9,245 7,759
54,050 54,100 9,258 7,179 9,258 7,771
54,100 54,150 9,270 7,186 9,270 7,784
54,150 54,200 9,283 7,194 9,283 7,796
54,200 54,250 9,295 7,201 9,295 7,809
54,250 54,300 9,308 7,209 9,308 7,821
54,300 54,350 9,320 7,216 9,320 7,834
54,350 54,400 9,333 7,224 9,333 7,846
54,400 54,450 9,345 7,231 9,345 7,859
54,450 54,500 9,358 7,239 9,358 7,871
54,500 54,550 9,370 7,246 9,370 7,884
54,550 54,600 9,383 7,254 9,383 7,896
54,600 54,650 9,395 7,261 9,395 7,909
54,650 54,700 9,408 7,269 9,408 7,921
54,700 54,750 9,420 7,276 9,420 7,934
54,750 54,800 9,433 7,284 9,433 7,946
54,800 54,850 9,445 7,291 9,445 7,959
54,850 54,900 9,458 7,299 9,458 7,971
54,900 54,950 9,470 7,306 9,470 7,984
54,950 55,000 9,483 7,314 9,483 7,996
55,000
55,000 55,050 9,495 7,321 9,495 8,009
55,050 55,100 9,508 7,329 9,508 8,021
55,100 55,150 9,520 7,336 9,520 8,034
55,150 55,200 9,533 7,344 9,533 8,046
55,200 55,250 9,545 7,351 9,545 8,059
55,250 55,300 9,558 7,359 9,558 8,071
55,300 55,350 9,570 7,366 9,570 8,084
55,350 55,400 9,583 7,374 9,583 8,096
55,400 55,450 9,595 7,381 9,595 8,109
55,450 55,500 9,608 7,389 9,608 8,121
55,500 55,550 9,620 7,396 9,620 8,134
55,550 55,600 9,633 7,404 9,633 8,146
55,600 55,650 9,645 7,411 9,645 8,159
55,650 55,700 9,658 7,419 9,658 8,171
55,700 55,750 9,670 7,426 9,670 8,184
55,750 55,800 9,683 7,434 9,683 8,196
55,800 55,850 9,695 7,441 9,695 8,209
55,850 55,900 9,708 7,449 9,708 8,221
55,900 55,950 9,720 7,456 9,720 8,234
55,950 56,000 9,733 7,464 9,733 8,246
56,000
56,000 56,050 9,745 7,471 9,745 8,259
56,050 56,100 9,758 7,479 9,758 8,271
56,100 56,150 9,770 7,486 9,770 8,284
56,150 56,200 9,783 7,494 9,783 8,296
56,200 56,250 9,795 7,501 9,795 8,309
56,250 56,300 9,808 7,509 9,808 8,321
56,300 56,350 9,820 7,516 9,820 8,334
56,350 56,400 9,833 7,524 9,833 8,346
56,400 56,450 9,845 7,531 9,845 8,359
56,450 56,500 9,858 7,539 9,858 8,371
56,500 56,550 9,870 7,546 9,870 8,384
56,550 56,600 9,883 7,554 9,883 8,396
56,600 56,650 9,895 7,561 9,895 8,409
56,650 56,700 9,908 7,569 9,908 8,421
56,700 56,750 9,920 7,576 9,920 8,434
56,750 56,800 9,933 7,584 9,933 8,446
56,800 56,850 9,945 7,591 9,945 8,459
56,850 56,900 9,958 7,599 9,958 8,471
56,900 56,950 9,970 7,606 9,970 8,484
56,950 57,000 9,983 7,614 9,983 8,496
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 259 -

Page 262 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
57,000
57,000 57,050 9,995 7,621 9,995 8,509
57,050 57,100 10,008 7,629 10,008 8,521
57,100 57,150 10,020 7,636 10,020 8,534
57,150 57,200 10,033 7,644 10,033 8,546
57,200 57,250 10,045 7,651 10,045 8,559
57,250 57,300 10,058 7,659 10,058 8,571
57,300 57,350 10,070 7,666 10,070 8,584
57,350 57,400 10,083 7,674 10,083 8,596
57,400 57,450 10,095 7,681 10,095 8,609
57,450 57,500 10,108 7,689 10,108 8,621
57,500 57,550 10,120 7,696 10,120 8,634
57,550 57,600 10,133 7,704 10,133 8,646
57,600 57,650 10,145 7,711 10,145 8,659
57,650 57,700 10,158 7,719 10,158 8,671
57,700 57,750 10,170 7,726 10,170 8,684
57,750 57,800 10,183 7,734 10,183 8,696
57,800 57,850 10,195 7,741 10,195 8,709
57,850 57,900 10,208 7,749 10,208 8,721
57,900 57,950 10,220 7,756 10,220 8,734
57,950 58,000 10,233 7,764 10,233 8,746
58,000
58,000 58,050 10,245 7,771 10,245 8,759
58,050 58,100 10,258 7,779 10,258 8,771
58,100 58,150 10,270 7,786 10,270 8,784
58,150 58,200 10,283 7,794 10,283 8,796
58,200 58,250 10,295 7,801 10,295 8,809
58,250 58,300 10,308 7,809 10,308 8,821
58,300 58,350 10,320 7,816 10,320 8,834
58,350 58,400 10,333 7,824 10,333 8,846
58,400 58,450 10,345 7,831 10,345 8,859
58,450 58,500 10,358 7,839 10,358 8,871
58,500 58,550 10,370 7,846 10,370 8,884
58,550 58,600 10,383 7,854 10,383 8,896
58,600 58,650 10,395 7,861 10,395 8,909
58,650 58,700 10,408 7,869 10,408 8,921
58,700 58,750 10,420 7,876 10,420 8,934
58,750 58,800 10,433 7,884 10,433 8,946
58,800 58,850 10,445 7,891 10,445 8,959
58,850 58,900 10,458 7,899 10,458 8,971
58,900 58,950 10,470 7,906 10,470 8,984
58,950 59,000 10,483 7,914 10,483 8,996
59,000
59,000 59,050 10,495 7,921 10,495 9,009
59,050 59,100 10,508 7,929 10,508 9,021
59,100 59,150 10,520 7,936 10,520 9,034
59,150 59,200 10,533 7,944 10,533 9,046
59,200 59,250 10,545 7,951 10,545 9,059
59,250 59,300 10,558 7,959 10,558 9,071
59,300 59,350 10,570 7,966 10,570 9,084
59,350 59,400 10,583 7,974 10,583 9,096
59,400 59,450 10,595 7,981 10,595 9,109
59,450 59,500 10,608 7,989 10,608 9,121
59,500 59,550 10,620 7,996 10,620 9,134
59,550 59,600 10,633 8,004 10,633 9,146
59,600 59,650 10,645 8,011 10,645 9,159
59,650 59,700 10,658 8,019 10,658 9,171
59,700 59,750 10,670 8,026 10,670 9,184
59,750 59,800 10,683 8,034 10,683 9,196
59,800 59,850 10,695 8,041 10,695 9,209
59,850 59,900 10,708 8,049 10,708 9,221
59,900 59,950 10,720 8,056 10,720 9,234
59,950 60,000 10,733 8,064 10,733 9,246
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
60,000
60,000 60,050 10,745 8,071 10,745 9,259
60,050 60,100 10,758 8,079 10,758 9,271
60,100 60,150 10,770 8,086 10,770 9,284
60,150 60,200 10,783 8,094 10,783 9,296
60,200 60,250 10,795 8,101 10,795 9,309
60,250 60,300 10,808 8,109 10,808 9,321
60,300 60,350 10,820 8,116 10,820 9,334
60,350 60,400 10,833 8,124 10,833 9,346
60,400 60,450 10,845 8,131 10,845 9,359
60,450 60,500 10,858 8,139 10,858 9,371
60,500 60,550 10,870 8,146 10,870 9,384
60,550 60,600 10,883 8,154 10,883 9,396
60,600 60,650 10,895 8,161 10,895 9,409
60,650 60,700 10,908 8,169 10,908 9,421
60,700 60,750 10,920 8,176 10,920 9,434
60,750 60,800 10,933 8,184 10,933 9,446
60,800 60,850 10,945 8,191 10,945 9,459
60,850 60,900 10,958 8,199 10,958 9,471
60,900 60,950 10,970 8,206 10,970 9,484
60,950 61,000 10,983 8,214 10,983 9,496
61,000
61,000 61,050 10,995 8,221 10,995 9,509
61,050 61,100 11,008 8,229 11,008 9,521
61,100 61,150 11,020 8,236 11,020 9,534
61,150 61,200 11,033 8,244 11,033 9,546
61,200 61,250 11,045 8,251 11,045 9,559
61,250 61,300 11,058 8,259 11,058 9,571
61,300 61,350 11,070 8,266 11,070 9,584
61,350 61,400 11,083 8,274 11,083 9,596
61,400 61,450 11,095 8,281 11,095 9,609
61,450 61,500 11,108 8,289 11,108 9,621
61,500 61,550 11,120 8,296 11,120 9,634
61,550 61,600 11,133 8,304 11,133 9,646
61,600 61,650 11,145 8,311 11,145 9,659
61,650 61,700 11,158 8,319 11,158 9,671
61,700 61,750 11,170 8,326 11,170 9,684
61,750 61,800 11,183 8,334 11,183 9,696
61,800 61,850 11,195 8,341 11,195 9,709
61,850 61,900 11,208 8,349 11,208 9,721
61,900 61,950 11,220 8,356 11,220 9,734
61,950 62,000 11,233 8,364 11,233 9,746
62,000
62,000 62,050 11,245 8,371 11,245 9,759
62,050 62,100 11,258 8,379 11,258 9,771
62,100 62,150 11,270 8,386 11,270 9,784
62,150 62,200 11,283 8,394 11,283 9,796
62,200 62,250 11,295 8,401 11,295 9,809
62,250 62,300 11,308 8,409 11,308 9,821
62,300 62,350 11,320 8,416 11,320 9,834
62,350 62,400 11,333 8,424 11,333 9,846
62,400 62,450 11,345 8,431 11,345 9,859
62,450 62,500 11,358 8,439 11,358 9,871
62,500 62,550 11,370 8,446 11,370 9,884
62,550 62,600 11,383 8,454 11,383 9,896
62,600 62,650 11,395 8,461 11,395 9,909
62,650 62,700 11,408 8,469 11,408 9,921
62,700 62,750 11,420 8,476 11,420 9,934
62,750 62,800 11,433 8,484 11,433 9,946
62,800 62,850 11,445 8,491 11,445 9,959
62,850 62,900 11,458 8,499 11,458 9,971
62,900 62,950 11,470 8,506 11,470 9,984
62,950 63,000 11,483 8,514 11,483 9,996
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
63,000
63,000 63,050 11,495 8,521 11,495 10,009
63,050 63,100 11,508 8,529 11,508 10,021
63,100 63,150 11,520 8,536 11,520 10,034
63,150 63,200 11,533 8,544 11,533 10,046
63,200 63,250 11,545 8,551 11,545 10,059
63,250 63,300 11,558 8,559 11,558 10,071
63,300 63,350 11,570 8,566 11,570 10,084
63,350 63,400 11,583 8,574 11,583 10,096
63,400 63,450 11,595 8,581 11,595 10,109
63,450 63,500 11,608 8,589 11,608 10,121
63,500 63,550 11,620 8,596 11,620 10,134
63,550 63,600 11,633 8,604 11,633 10,146
63,600 63,650 11,645 8,611 11,645 10,159
63,650 63,700 11,658 8,619 11,658 10,171
63,700 63,750 11,670 8,626 11,670 10,184
63,750 63,800 11,683 8,634 11,683 10,196
63,800 63,850 11,695 8,641 11,695 10,209
63,850 63,900 11,708 8,649 11,708 10,221
63,900 63,950 11,720 8,656 11,720 10,234
63,950 64,000 11,733 8,664 11,733 10,246
64,000
64,000 64,050 11,745 8,671 11,745 10,259
64,050 64,100 11,758 8,679 11,758 10,271
64,100 64,150 11,770 8,686 11,770 10,284
64,150 64,200 11,783 8,694 11,783 10,296
64,200 64,250 11,795 8,701 11,795 10,309
64,250 64,300 11,808 8,709 11,808 10,321
64,300 64,350 11,820 8,716 11,820 10,334
64,350 64,400 11,833 8,724 11,833 10,346
64,400 64,450 11,845 8,731 11,845 10,359
64,450 64,500 11,858 8,739 11,858 10,371
64,500 64,550 11,870 8,746 11,870 10,384
64,550 64,600 11,883 8,754 11,883 10,396
64,600 64,650 11,895 8,761 11,895 10,409
64,650 64,700 11,908 8,769 11,908 10,421
64,700 64,750 11,920 8,776 11,920 10,434
64,750 64,800 11,933 8,784 11,933 10,446
64,800 64,850 11,945 8,791 11,945 10,459
64,850 64,900 11,958 8,799 11,958 10,471
64,900 64,950 11,970 8,806 11,970 10,484
64,950 65,000 11,983 8,814 11,983 10,496
65,000
65,000 65,050 11,995 8,821 11,995 10,509
65,050 65,100 12,008 8,829 12,008 10,521
65,100 65,150 12,020 8,836 12,020 10,534
65,150 65,200 12,033 8,844 12,033 10,546
65,200 65,250 12,045 8,851 12,045 10,559
65,250 65,300 12,058 8,859 12,058 10,571
65,300 65,350 12,070 8,866 12,070 10,584
65,350 65,400 12,083 8,874 12,083 10,596
65,400 65,450 12,095 8,881 12,095 10,609
65,450 65,500 12,108 8,889 12,108 10,621
65,500 65,550 12,120 8,896 12,120 10,634
65,550 65,600 12,133 8,904 12,133 10,646
65,600 65,650 12,145 8,911 12,145 10,659
65,650 65,700 12,158 8,919 12,158 10,671
65,700 65,750 12,170 8,926 12,170 10,684
65,750 65,800 12,183 8,934 12,183 10,696
65,800 65,850 12,195 8,941 12,195 10,709
65,850 65,900 12,208 8,949 12,208 10,721
65,900 65,950 12,220 8,956 12,220 10,734
65,950 66,000 12,233 8,964 12,233 10,746
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 260 -

Page 263 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
66,000
66,000 66,050 12,245 8,971 12,245 10,759
66,050 66,100 12,258 8,979 12,258 10,771
66,100 66,150 12,270 8,986 12,270 10,784
66,150 66,200 12,283 8,994 12,283 10,796
66,200 66,250 12,295 9,001 12,295 10,809
66,250 66,300 12,308 9,009 12,308 10,821
66,300 66,350 12,320 9,016 12,320 10,834
66,350 66,400 12,333 9,024 12,333 10,846
66,400 66,450 12,345 9,031 12,345 10,859
66,450 66,500 12,358 9,039 12,358 10,871
66,500 66,550 12,370 9,046 12,370 10,884
66,550 66,600 12,383 9,054 12,383 10,896
66,600 66,650 12,395 9,061 12,395 10,909
66,650 66,700 12,408 9,069 12,408 10,921
66,700 66,750 12,420 9,076 12,420 10,934
66,750 66,800 12,433 9,084 12,433 10,946
66,800 66,850 12,445 9,091 12,445 10,959
66,850 66,900 12,458 9,099 12,458 10,971
66,900 66,950 12,470 9,106 12,470 10,984
66,950 67,000 12,483 9,114 12,483 10,996
67,000
67,000 67,050 12,495 9,121 12,495 11,009
67,050 67,100 12,508 9,129 12,508 11,021
67,100 67,150 12,520 9,136 12,520 11,034
67,150 67,200 12,533 9,144 12,533 11,046
67,200 67,250 12,545 9,151 12,545 11,059
67,250 67,300 12,558 9,159 12,558 11,071
67,300 67,350 12,570 9,166 12,570 11,084
67,350 67,400 12,583 9,174 12,583 11,096
67,400 67,450 12,595 9,181 12,595 11,109
67,450 67,500 12,608 9,189 12,608 11,121
67,500 67,550 12,620 9,196 12,620 11,134
67,550 67,600 12,633 9,204 12,633 11,146
67,600 67,650 12,645 9,211 12,645 11,159
67,650 67,700 12,658 9,219 12,658 11,171
67,700 67,750 12,670 9,226 12,670 11,184
67,750 67,800 12,683 9,234 12,683 11,196
67,800 67,850 12,695 9,241 12,695 11,209
67,850 67,900 12,708 9,249 12,708 11,221
67,900 67,950 12,720 9,256 12,720 11,234
67,950 68,000 12,733 9,264 12,733 11,246
68,000
68,000 68,050 12,745 9,271 12,745 11,259
68,050 68,100 12,758 9,279 12,758 11,271
68,100 68,150 12,770 9,286 12,770 11,284
68,150 68,200 12,783 9,294 12,783 11,296
68,200 68,250 12,795 9,301 12,795 11,309
68,250 68,300 12,808 9,309 12,808 11,321
68,300 68,350 12,820 9,316 12,820 11,334
68,350 68,400 12,833 9,324 12,833 11,346
68,400 68,450 12,845 9,331 12,845 11,359
68,450 68,500 12,858 9,339 12,858 11,371
68,500 68,550 12,870 9,346 12,870 11,384
68,550 68,600 12,883 9,354 12,883 11,396
68,600 68,650 12,895 9,361 12,895 11,409
68,650 68,700 12,908 9,369 12,908 11,421
68,700 68,750 12,920 9,376 12,920 11,434
68,750 68,800 12,933 9,384 12,933 11,446
68,800 68,850 12,945 9,391 12,945 11,459
68,850 68,900 12,958 9,399 12,958 11,471
68,900 68,950 12,970 9,406 12,970 11,484
68,950 69,000 12,983 9,414 12,983 11,496
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
69,000
69,000 69,050 12,995 9,421 12,995 11,509
69,050 69,100 13,008 9,429 13,008 11,521
69,100 69,150 13,020 9,436 13,020 11,534
69,150 69,200 13,033 9,444 13,033 11,546
69,200 69,250 13,045 9,451 13,045 11,559
69,250 69,300 13,058 9,459 13,058 11,571
69,300 69,350 13,070 9,466 13,070 11,584
69,350 69,400 13,083 9,474 13,083 11,596
69,400 69,450 13,095 9,481 13,095 11,609
69,450 69,500 13,108 9,489 13,108 11,621
69,500 69,550 13,120 9,496 13,120 11,634
69,550 69,600 13,133 9,504 13,133 11,646
69,600 69,650 13,145 9,511 13,145 11,659
69,650 69,700 13,158 9,519 13,158 11,671
69,700 69,750 13,170 9,526 13,170 11,684
69,750 69,800 13,183 9,534 13,183 11,696
69,800 69,850 13,195 9,541 13,195 11,709
69,850 69,900 13,208 9,549 13,208 11,721
69,900 69,950 13,220 9,556 13,220 11,734
69,950 70,000 13,233 9,564 13,233 11,746
70,000
70,000 70,050 13,245 9,571 13,245 11,759
70,050 70,100 13,258 9,579 13,258 11,771
70,100 70,150 13,270 9,586 13,270 11,784
70,150 70,200 13,283 9,594 13,283 11,796
70,200 70,250 13,295 9,601 13,295 11,809
70,250 70,300 13,308 9,609 13,308 11,821
70,300 70,350 13,320 9,616 13,320 11,834
70,350 70,400 13,333 9,624 13,333 11,846
70,400 70,450 13,345 9,631 13,345 11,859
70,450 70,500 13,358 9,639 13,358 11,871
70,500 70,550 13,370 9,646 13,370 11,884
70,550 70,600 13,383 9,654 13,383 11,896
70,600 70,650 13,395 9,661 13,395 11,909
70,650 70,700 13,408 9,669 13,408 11,921
70,700 70,750 13,420 9,676 13,420 11,934
70,750 70,800 13,433 9,684 13,433 11,946
70,800 70,850 13,445 9,691 13,445 11,959
70,850 70,900 13,458 9,699 13,458 11,971
70,900 70,950 13,470 9,706 13,470 11,984
70,950 71,000 13,483 9,714 13,483 11,996
71,000
71,000 71,050 13,495 9,721 13,495 12,009
71,050 71,100 13,508 9,729 13,508 12,021
71,100 71,150 13,520 9,736 13,520 12,034
71,150 71,200 13,533 9,744 13,533 12,046
71,200 71,250 13,545 9,751 13,545 12,059
71,250 71,300 13,558 9,759 13,558 12,071
71,300 71,350 13,570 9,766 13,570 12,084
71,350 71,400 13,583 9,774 13,583 12,096
71,400 71,450 13,595 9,781 13,595 12,109
71,450 71,500 13,608 9,789 13,608 12,121
71,500 71,550 13,620 9,796 13,620 12,134
71,550 71,600 13,633 9,804 13,633 12,146
71,600 71,650 13,645 9,811 13,645 12,159
71,650 71,700 13,658 9,819 13,658 12,171
71,700 71,750 13,670 9,826 13,670 12,184
71,750 71,800 13,683 9,834 13,683 12,196
71,800 71,850 13,695 9,841 13,695 12,209
71,850 71,900 13,708 9,849 13,708 12,221
71,900 71,950 13,720 9,856 13,720 12,234
71,950 72,000 13,733 9,864 13,733 12,246
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
72,000
72,000 72,050 13,745 9,871 13,745 12,259
72,050 72,100 13,758 9,879 13,758 12,271
72,100 72,150 13,770 9,886 13,770 12,284
72,150 72,200 13,783 9,894 13,783 12,296
72,200 72,250 13,795 9,901 13,795 12,309
72,250 72,300 13,808 9,909 13,808 12,321
72,300 72,350 13,820 9,916 13,820 12,334
72,350 72,400 13,833 9,924 13,833 12,346
72,400 72,450 13,845 9,931 13,845 12,359
72,450 72,500 13,858 9,939 13,858 12,371
72,500 72,550 13,870 9,946 13,870 12,384
72,550 72,600 13,883 9,954 13,883 12,396
72,600 72,650 13,895 9,961 13,895 12,409
72,650 72,700 13,908 9,969 13,908 12,421
72,700 72,750 13,920 9,976 13,920 12,434
72,750 72,800 13,933 9,984 13,933 12,446
72,800 72,850 13,945 9,991 13,945 12,459
72,850 72,900 13,958 9,999 13,958 12,471
72,900 72,950 13,970 10,006 13,970 12,484
72,950 73,000 13,983 10,014 13,983 12,496
73,000
73,000 73,050 13,995 10,021 13,995 12,509
73,050 73,100 14,008 10,029 14,008 12,521
73,100 73,150 14,020 10,036 14,020 12,534
73,150 73,200 14,033 10,044 14,033 12,546
73,200 73,250 14,045 10,051 14,045 12,559
73,250 73,300 14,058 10,059 14,058 12,571
73,300 73,350 14,070 10,066 14,070 12,584
73,350 73,400 14,083 10,074 14,083 12,596
73,400 73,450 14,095 10,081 14,095 12,609
73,450 73,500 14,108 10,089 14,108 12,621
73,500 73,550 14,120 10,096 14,120 12,634
73,550 73,600 14,133 10,104 14,133 12,646
73,600 73,650 14,145 10,111 14,145 12,659
73,650 73,700 14,158 10,119 14,158 12,671
73,700 73,750 14,170 10,126 14,170 12,684
73,750 73,800 14,183 10,134 14,183 12,696
73,800 73,850 14,195 10,141 14,195 12,709
73,850 73,900 14,208 10,149 14,208 12,721
73,900 73,950 14,220 10,156 14,220 12,734
73,950 74,000 14,233 10,164 14,233 12,746
74,000
74,000 74,050 14,245 10,171 14,245 12,759
74,050 74,100 14,258 10,179 14,258 12,771
74,100 74,150 14,270 10,186 14,270 12,784
74,150 74,200 14,283 10,194 14,283 12,796
74,200 74,250 14,295 10,201 14,295 12,809
74,250 74,300 14,308 10,209 14,308 12,821
74,300 74,350 14,320 10,216 14,320 12,834
74,350 74,400 14,333 10,224 14,333 12,846
74,400 74,450 14,345 10,231 14,345 12,859
74,450 74,500 14,358 10,239 14,358 12,871
74,500 74,550 14,370 10,246 14,370 12,884
74,550 74,600 14,383 10,254 14,383 12,896
74,600 74,650 14,395 10,261 14,395 12,909
74,650 74,700 14,408 10,269 14,408 12,921
74,700 74,750 14,420 10,276 14,420 12,934
74,750 74,800 14,433 10,284 14,433 12,946
74,800 74,850 14,445 10,291 14,445 12,959
74,850 74,900 14,458 10,299 14,458 12,971
74,900 74,950 14,470 10,306 14,470 12,984
74,950 75,000 14,483 10,314 14,483 12,996
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 261 -

Page 264 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
75,000
75,000 75,050 14,495 10,321 14,495 13,009
75,050 75,100 14,508 10,329 14,508 13,021
75,100 75,150 14,520 10,336 14,520 13,034
75,150 75,200 14,533 10,344 14,533 13,046
75,200 75,250 14,545 10,351 14,545 13,059
75,250 75,300 14,558 10,359 14,558 13,071
75,300 75,350 14,570 10,366 14,570 13,084
75,350 75,400 14,583 10,374 14,583 13,096
75,400 75,450 14,595 10,381 14,595 13,109
75,450 75,500 14,608 10,389 14,608 13,121
75,500 75,550 14,620 10,396 14,620 13,134
75,550 75,600 14,633 10,404 14,633 13,146
75,600 75,650 14,645 10,411 14,645 13,159
75,650 75,700 14,658 10,419 14,658 13,171
75,700 75,750 14,670 10,426 14,670 13,184
75,750 75,800 14,683 10,434 14,683 13,196
75,800 75,850 14,695 10,441 14,695 13,209
75,850 75,900 14,708 10,449 14,708 13,221
75,900 75,950 14,720 10,459 14,720 13,234
75,950 76,000 14,733 10,471 14,733 13,246
76,000
76,000 76,050 14,745 10,484 14,745 13,259
76,050 76,100 14,758 10,496 14,758 13,271
76,100 76,150 14,770 10,509 14,770 13,284
76,150 76,200 14,783 10,521 14,783 13,296
76,200 76,250 14,795 10,534 14,795 13,309
76,250 76,300 14,808 10,546 14,808 13,321
76,300 76,350 14,820 10,559 14,820 13,334
76,350 76,400 14,833 10,571 14,833 13,346
76,400 76,450 14,845 10,584 14,845 13,359
76,450 76,500 14,858 10,596 14,858 13,371
76,500 76,550 14,870 10,609 14,870 13,384
76,550 76,600 14,883 10,621 14,883 13,396
76,600 76,650 14,895 10,634 14,897 13,409
76,650 76,700 14,908 10,646 14,911 13,421
76,700 76,750 14,920 10,659 14,925 13,434
76,750 76,800 14,933 10,671 14,939 13,446
76,800 76,850 14,945 10,684 14,953 13,459
76,850 76,900 14,958 10,696 14,967 13,471
76,900 76,950 14,970 10,709 14,981 13,484
76,950 77,000 14,983 10,721 14,995 13,496
77,000
77,000 77,050 14,995 10,734 15,009 13,509
77,050 77,100 15,008 10,746 15,023 13,521
77,100 77,150 15,020 10,759 15,037 13,534
77,150 77,200 15,033 10,771 15,051 13,546
77,200 77,250 15,045 10,784 15,065 13,559
77,250 77,300 15,058 10,796 15,079 13,571
77,300 77,350 15,070 10,809 15,093 13,584
77,350 77,400 15,083 10,821 15,107 13,596
77,400 77,450 15,095 10,834 15,121 13,609
77,450 77,500 15,108 10,846 15,135 13,621
77,500 77,550 15,120 10,859 15,149 13,634
77,550 77,600 15,133 10,871 15,163 13,646
77,600 77,650 15,145 10,884 15,177 13,659
77,650 77,700 15,158 10,896 15,191 13,671
77,700 77,750 15,170 10,909 15,205 13,684
77,750 77,800 15,183 10,921 15,219 13,696
77,800 77,850 15,195 10,934 15,233 13,709
77,850 77,900 15,208 10,946 15,247 13,721
77,900 77,950 15,220 10,959 15,261 13,734
77,950 78,000 15,233 10,971 15,275 13,746
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
78,000
78,000 78,050 15,245 10,984 15,289 13,759
78,050 78,100 15,258 10,996 15,303 13,771
78,100 78,150 15,270 11,009 15,317 13,784
78,150 78,200 15,283 11,021 15,331 13,796
78,200 78,250 15,295 11,034 15,345 13,809
78,250 78,300 15,308 11,046 15,359 13,821
78,300 78,350 15,320 11,059 15,373 13,834
78,350 78,400 15,333 11,071 15,387 13,846
78,400 78,450 15,345 11,084 15,401 13,859
78,450 78,500 15,358 11,096 15,415 13,871
78,500 78,550 15,370 11,109 15,429 13,884
78,550 78,600 15,383 11,121 15,443 13,896
78,600 78,650 15,395 11,134 15,457 13,909
78,650 78,700 15,408 11,146 15,471 13,921
78,700 78,750 15,420 11,159 15,485 13,934
78,750 78,800 15,433 11,171 15,499 13,946
78,800 78,850 15,445 11,184 15,513 13,959
78,850 78,900 15,458 11,196 15,527 13,971
78,900 78,950 15,470 11,209 15,541 13,984
78,950 79,000 15,483 11,221 15,555 13,996
79,000
79,000 79,050 15,495 11,234 15,569 14,009
79,050 79,100 15,508 11,246 15,583 14,021
79,100 79,150 15,520 11,259 15,597 14,034
79,150 79,200 15,533 11,271 15,611 14,046
79,200 79,250 15,545 11,284 15,625 14,059
79,250 79,300 15,558 11,296 15,639 14,071
79,300 79,350 15,570 11,309 15,653 14,084
79,350 79,400 15,583 11,321 15,667 14,096
79,400 79,450 15,595 11,334 15,681 14,109
79,450 79,500 15,608 11,346 15,695 14,121
79,500 79,550 15,620 11,359 15,709 14,134
79,550 79,600 15,633 11,371 15,723 14,146
79,600 79,650 15,645 11,384 15,737 14,159
79,650 79,700 15,658 11,396 15,751 14,171
79,700 79,750 15,670 11,409 15,765 14,184
79,750 79,800 15,683 11,421 15,779 14,196
79,800 79,850 15,695 11,434 15,793 14,209
79,850 79,900 15,708 11,446 15,807 14,221
79,900 79,950 15,720 11,459 15,821 14,234
79,950 80,000 15,733 11,471 15,835 14,246
80,000
80,000 80,050 15,745 11,484 15,849 14,259
80,050 80,100 15,758 11,496 15,863 14,271
80,100 80,150 15,770 11,509 15,877 14,284
80,150 80,200 15,783 11,521 15,891 14,296
80,200 80,250 15,795 11,534 15,905 14,309
80,250 80,300 15,808 11,546 15,919 14,321
80,300 80,350 15,820 11,559 15,933 14,334
80,350 80,400 15,833 11,571 15,947 14,346
80,400 80,450 15,845 11,584 15,961 14,359
80,450 80,500 15,858 11,596 15,975 14,371
80,500 80,550 15,870 11,609 15,989 14,384
80,550 80,600 15,883 11,621 16,003 14,396
80,600 80,650 15,895 11,634 16,017 14,409
80,650 80,700 15,908 11,646 16,031 14,421
80,700 80,750 15,920 11,659 16,045 14,434
80,750 80,800 15,933 11,671 16,059 14,446
80,800 80,850 15,945 11,684 16,073 14,459
80,850 80,900 15,958 11,696 16,087 14,471
80,900 80,950 15,970 11,709 16,101 14,484
80,950 81,000 15,983 11,721 16,115 14,496
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
81,000
81,000 81,050 15,995 11,734 16,129 14,509
81,050 81,100 16,008 11,746 16,143 14,521
81,100 81,150 16,020 11,759 16,157 14,534
81,150 81,200 16,033 11,771 16,171 14,546
81,200 81,250 16,045 11,784 16,185 14,559
81,250 81,300 16,058 11,796 16,199 14,571
81,300 81,350 16,070 11,809 16,213 14,584
81,350 81,400 16,083 11,821 16,227 14,596
81,400 81,450 16,095 11,834 16,241 14,609
81,450 81,500 16,108 11,846 16,255 14,621
81,500 81,550 16,120 11,859 16,269 14,634
81,550 81,600 16,133 11,871 16,283 14,646
81,600 81,650 16,145 11,884 16,297 14,659
81,650 81,700 16,158 11,896 16,311 14,671
81,700 81,750 16,170 11,909 16,325 14,684
81,750 81,800 16,183 11,921 16,339 14,696
81,800 81,850 16,195 11,934 16,353 14,709
81,850 81,900 16,208 11,946 16,367 14,721
81,900 81,950 16,220 11,959 16,381 14,734
81,950 82,000 16,233 11,971 16,395 14,746
82,000
82,000 82,050 16,245 11,984 16,409 14,759
82,050 82,100 16,258 11,996 16,423 14,771
82,100 82,150 16,270 12,009 16,437 14,784
82,150 82,200 16,283 12,021 16,451 14,796
82,200 82,250 16,295 12,034 16,465 14,809
82,250 82,300 16,308 12,046 16,479 14,821
82,300 82,350 16,320 12,059 16,493 14,834
82,350 82,400 16,333 12,071 16,507 14,846
82,400 82,450 16,345 12,084 16,521 14,859
82,450 82,500 16,358 12,096 16,535 14,871
82,500 82,550 16,370 12,109 16,549 14,884
82,550 82,600 16,383 12,121 16,563 14,896
82,600 82,650 16,395 12,134 16,577 14,909
82,650 82,700 16,408 12,146 16,591 14,921
82,700 82,750 16,420 12,159 16,605 14,934
82,750 82,800 16,433 12,171 16,619 14,946
82,800 82,850 16,445 12,184 16,633 14,959
82,850 82,900 16,458 12,196 16,647 14,971
82,900 82,950 16,470 12,209 16,661 14,984
82,950 83,000 16,483 12,221 16,675 14,996
83,000
83,000 83,050 16,495 12,234 16,689 15,009
83,050 83,100 16,508 12,246 16,703 15,021
83,100 83,150 16,520 12,259 16,717 15,034
83,150 83,200 16,533 12,271 16,731 15,046
83,200 83,250 16,545 12,284 16,745 15,059
83,250 83,300 16,558 12,296 16,759 15,071
83,300 83,350 16,570 12,309 16,773 15,084
83,350 83,400 16,583 12,321 16,787 15,096
83,400 83,450 16,595 12,334 16,801 15,109
83,450 83,500 16,608 12,346 16,815 15,121
83,500 83,550 16,620 12,359 16,829 15,134
83,550 83,600 16,633 12,371 16,843 15,146
83,600 83,650 16,645 12,384 16,857 15,159
83,650 83,700 16,658 12,396 16,871 15,171
83,700 83,750 16,670 12,409 16,885 15,184
83,750 83,800 16,683 12,421 16,899 15,196
83,800 83,850 16,695 12,434 16,913 15,209
83,850 83,900 16,708 12,446 16,927 15,221
83,900 83,950 16,720 12,459 16,941 15,234
83,950 84,000 16,733 12,471 16,955 15,246
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 262 -

Page 265 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
84,000
84,000 84,050 16,745 12,484 16,969 15,259
84,050 84,100 16,758 12,496 16,983 15,271
84,100 84,150 16,770 12,509 16,997 15,284
84,150 84,200 16,783 12,521 17,011 15,296
84,200 84,250 16,795 12,534 17,025 15,309
84,250 84,300 16,808 12,546 17,039 15,321
84,300 84,350 16,820 12,559 17,053 15,334
84,350 84,400 16,833 12,571 17,067 15,346
84,400 84,450 16,845 12,584 17,081 15,359
84,450 84,500 16,858 12,596 17,095 15,371
84,500 84,550 16,870 12,609 17,109 15,384
84,550 84,600 16,883 12,621 17,123 15,396
84,600 84,650 16,895 12,634 17,137 15,409
84,650 84,700 16,908 12,646 17,151 15,421
84,700 84,750 16,920 12,659 17,165 15,434
84,750 84,800 16,933 12,671 17,179 15,446
84,800 84,850 16,945 12,684 17,193 15,459
84,850 84,900 16,958 12,696 17,207 15,471
84,900 84,950 16,970 12,709 17,221 15,484
84,950 85,000 16,983 12,721 17,235 15,496
85,000
85,000 85,050 16,995 12,734 17,249 15,509
85,050 85,100 17,008 12,746 17,263 15,521
85,100 85,150 17,020 12,759 17,277 15,534
85,150 85,200 17,033 12,771 17,291 15,546
85,200 85,250 17,045 12,784 17,305 15,559
85,250 85,300 17,058 12,796 17,319 15,571
85,300 85,350 17,070 12,809 17,333 15,584
85,350 85,400 17,083 12,821 17,347 15,596
85,400 85,450 17,095 12,834 17,361 15,609
85,450 85,500 17,108 12,846 17,375 15,621
85,500 85,550 17,120 12,859 17,389 15,634
85,550 85,600 17,133 12,871 17,403 15,646
85,600 85,650 17,145 12,884 17,417 15,659
85,650 85,700 17,158 12,896 17,431 15,671
85,700 85,750 17,170 12,909 17,445 15,684
85,750 85,800 17,183 12,921 17,459 15,696
85,800 85,850 17,195 12,934 17,473 15,709
85,850 85,900 17,208 12,946 17,487 15,721
85,900 85,950 17,220 12,959 17,501 15,734
85,950 86,000 17,233 12,971 17,515 15,746
86,000
86,000 86,050 17,245 12,984 17,529 15,759
86,050 86,100 17,258 12,996 17,543 15,771
86,100 86,150 17,270 13,009 17,557 15,784
86,150 86,200 17,283 13,021 17,571 15,796
86,200 86,250 17,295 13,034 17,585 15,809
86,250 86,300 17,308 13,046 17,599 15,821
86,300 86,350 17,320 13,059 17,613 15,834
86,350 86,400 17,333 13,071 17,627 15,846
86,400 86,450 17,345 13,084 17,641 15,859
86,450 86,500 17,358 13,096 17,655 15,871
86,500 86,550 17,370 13,109 17,669 15,884
86,550 86,600 17,383 13,121 17,683 15,896
86,600 86,650 17,395 13,134 17,697 15,909
86,650 86,700 17,408 13,146 17,711 15,921
86,700 86,750 17,420 13,159 17,725 15,934
86,750 86,800 17,433 13,171 17,739 15,946
86,800 86,850 17,445 13,184 17,753 15,959
86,850 86,900 17,458 13,196 17,767 15,971
86,900 86,950 17,470 13,209 17,781 15,984
86,950 87,000 17,483 13,221 17,795 15,996
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
87,000
87,000 87,050 17,495 13,234 17,809 16,009
87,050 87,100 17,508 13,246 17,823 16,021
87,100 87,150 17,520 13,259 17,837 16,034
87,150 87,200 17,533 13,271 17,851 16,046
87,200 87,250 17,545 13,284 17,865 16,059
87,250 87,300 17,558 13,296 17,879 16,071
87,300 87,350 17,570 13,309 17,893 16,084
87,350 87,400 17,583 13,321 17,907 16,096
87,400 87,450 17,595 13,334 17,921 16,109
87,450 87,500 17,608 13,346 17,935 16,121
87,500 87,550 17,620 13,359 17,949 16,134
87,550 87,600 17,633 13,371 17,963 16,146
87,600 87,650 17,645 13,384 17,977 16,159
87,650 87,700 17,658 13,396 17,991 16,171
87,700 87,750 17,670 13,409 18,005 16,184
87,750 87,800 17,683 13,421 18,019 16,196
87,800 87,850 17,695 13,434 18,033 16,209
87,850 87,900 17,708 13,446 18,047 16,221
87,900 87,950 17,720 13,459 18,061 16,234
87,950 88,000 17,733 13,471 18,075 16,246
88,000
88,000 88,050 17,745 13,484 18,089 16,259
88,050 88,100 17,758 13,496 18,103 16,271
88,100 88,150 17,770 13,509 18,117 16,284
88,150 88,200 17,783 13,521 18,131 16,296
88,200 88,250 17,795 13,534 18,145 16,309
88,250 88,300 17,808 13,546 18,159 16,321
88,300 88,350 17,820 13,559 18,173 16,334
88,350 88,400 17,833 13,571 18,187 16,346
88,400 88,450 17,845 13,584 18,201 16,359
88,450 88,500 17,858 13,596 18,215 16,371
88,500 88,550 17,870 13,609 18,229 16,384
88,550 88,600 17,883 13,621 18,243 16,396
88,600 88,650 17,895 13,634 18,257 16,409
88,650 88,700 17,908 13,646 18,271 16,421
88,700 88,750 17,920 13,659 18,285 16,434
88,750 88,800 17,933 13,671 18,299 16,446
88,800 88,850 17,945 13,684 18,313 16,459
88,850 88,900 17,958 13,696 18,327 16,471
88,900 88,950 17,970 13,709 18,341 16,484
88,950 89,000 17,983 13,721 18,355 16,496
89,000
89,000 89,050 17,995 13,734 18,369 16,509
89,050 89,100 18,008 13,746 18,383 16,521
89,100 89,150 18,020 13,759 18,397 16,534
89,150 89,200 18,033 13,771 18,411 16,546
89,200 89,250 18,045 13,784 18,425 16,559
89,250 89,300 18,058 13,796 18,439 16,571
89,300 89,350 18,070 13,809 18,453 16,584
89,350 89,400 18,083 13,821 18,467 16,596
89,400 89,450 18,095 13,834 18,481 16,609
89,450 89,500 18,108 13,846 18,495 16,621
89,500 89,550 18,120 13,859 18,509 16,634
89,550 89,600 18,133 13,871 18,523 16,646
89,600 89,650 18,145 13,884 18,537 16,659
89,650 89,700 18,158 13,896 18,551 16,671
89,700 89,750 18,170 13,909 18,565 16,684
89,750 89,800 18,183 13,921 18,579 16,696
89,800 89,850 18,195 13,934 18,593 16,709
89,850 89,900 18,208 13,946 18,607 16,721
89,900 89,950 18,220 13,959 18,621 16,734
89,950 90,000 18,233 13,971 18,635 16,746
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
90,000
90,000 90,050 18,245 13,984 18,649 16,759
90,050 90,100 18,258 13,996 18,663 16,771
90,100 90,150 18,270 14,009 18,677 16,784
90,150 90,200 18,283 14,021 18,691 16,796
90,200 90,250 18,295 14,034 18,705 16,809
90,250 90,300 18,308 14,046 18,719 16,821
90,300 90,350 18,320 14,059 18,733 16,834
90,350 90,400 18,333 14,071 18,747 16,846
90,400 90,450 18,345 14,084 18,761 16,859
90,450 90,500 18,358 14,096 18,775 16,871
90,500 90,550 18,370 14,109 18,789 16,884
90,550 90,600 18,383 14,121 18,803 16,896
90,600 90,650 18,395 14,134 18,817 16,909
90,650 90,700 18,408 14,146 18,831 16,921
90,700 90,750 18,420 14,159 18,845 16,934
90,750 90,800 18,433 14,171 18,859 16,946
90,800 90,850 18,445 14,184 18,873 16,959
90,850 90,900 18,458 14,196 18,887 16,971
90,900 90,950 18,470 14,209 18,901 16,984
90,950 91,000 18,483 14,221 18,915 16,996
91,000
91,000 91,050 18,495 14,234 18,929 17,009
91,050 91,100 18,508 14,246 18,943 17,021
91,100 91,150 18,520 14,259 18,957 17,034
91,150 91,200 18,533 14,271 18,971 17,046
91,200 91,250 18,545 14,284 18,985 17,059
91,250 91,300 18,558 14,296 18,999 17,071
91,300 91,350 18,570 14,309 19,013 17,084
91,350 91,400 18,583 14,321 19,027 17,096
91,400 91,450 18,595 14,334 19,041 17,109
91,450 91,500 18,608 14,346 19,055 17,121
91,500 91,550 18,620 14,359 19,069 17,134
91,550 91,600 18,633 14,371 19,083 17,146
91,600 91,650 18,645 14,384 19,097 17,159
91,650 91,700 18,658 14,396 19,111 17,171
91,700 91,750 18,670 14,409 19,125 17,184
91,750 91,800 18,683 14,421 19,139 17,196
91,800 91,850 18,695 14,434 19,153 17,209
91,850 91,900 18,708 14,446 19,167 17,221
91,900 91,950 18,721 14,459 19,181 17,234
91,950 92,000 18,735 14,471 19,195 17,246
92,000
92,000 92,050 18,749 14,484 19,209 17,259
92,050 92,100 18,763 14,496 19,223 17,271
92,100 92,150 18,777 14,509 19,237 17,284
92,150 92,200 18,791 14,521 19,251 17,296
92,200 92,250 18,805 14,534 19,265 17,309
92,250 92,300 18,819 14,546 19,279 17,321
92,300 92,350 18,833 14,559 19,293 17,334
92,350 92,400 18,847 14,571 19,307 17,346
92,400 92,450 18,861 14,584 19,321 17,359
92,450 92,500 18,875 14,596 19,335 17,371
92,500 92,550 18,889 14,609 19,349 17,384
92,550 92,600 18,903 14,621 19,363 17,396
92,600 92,650 18,917 14,634 19,377 17,409
92,650 92,700 18,931 14,646 19,391 17,421
92,700 92,750 18,945 14,659 19,405 17,434
92,750 92,800 18,959 14,671 19,419 17,446
92,800 92,850 18,973 14,684 19,433 17,459
92,850 92,900 18,987 14,696 19,447 17,471
92,900 92,950 19,001 14,709 19,461 17,484
92,950 93,000 19,015 14,721 19,475 17,496
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 263 -

Page 266 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Table — Continued
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
93,000
93,000 93,050 19,029 14,734 19,489 17,509
93,050 93,100 19,043 14,746 19,503 17,521
93,100 93,150 19,057 14,759 19,517 17,534
93,150 93,200 19,071 14,771 19,531 17,546
93,200 93,250 19,085 14,784 19,545 17,559
93,250 93,300 19,099 14,796 19,559 17,571
93,300 93,350 19,113 14,809 19,573 17,584
93,350 93,400 19,127 14,821 19,587 17,596
93,400 93,450 19,141 14,834 19,601 17,609
93,450 93,500 19,155 14,846 19,615 17,621
93,500 93,550 19,169 14,859 19,629 17,634
93,550 93,600 19,183 14,871 19,643 17,646
93,600 93,650 19,197 14,884 19,657 17,659
93,650 93,700 19,211 14,896 19,671 17,671
93,700 93,750 19,225 14,909 19,685 17,684
93,750 93,800 19,239 14,921 19,699 17,696
93,800 93,850 19,253 14,934 19,713 17,709
93,850 93,900 19,267 14,946 19,727 17,721
93,900 93,950 19,281 14,959 19,741 17,734
93,950 94,000 19,295 14,971 19,755 17,746
94,000
94,000 94,050 19,309 14,984 19,769 17,759
94,050 94,100 19,323 14,996 19,783 17,771
94,100 94,150 19,337 15,009 19,797 17,784
94,150 94,200 19,351 15,021 19,811 17,796
94,200 94,250 19,365 15,034 19,825 17,809
94,250 94,300 19,379 15,046 19,839 17,821
94,300 94,350 19,393 15,059 19,853 17,834
94,350 94,400 19,407 15,071 19,867 17,846
94,400 94,450 19,421 15,084 19,881 17,859
94,450 94,500 19,435 15,096 19,895 17,871
94,500 94,550 19,449 15,109 19,909 17,884
94,550 94,600 19,463 15,121 19,923 17,896
94,600 94,650 19,477 15,134 19,937 17,909
94,650 94,700 19,491 15,146 19,951 17,921
94,700 94,750 19,505 15,159 19,965 17,934
94,750 94,800 19,519 15,171 19,979 17,946
94,800 94,850 19,533 15,184 19,993 17,959
94,850 94,900 19,547 15,196 20,007 17,971
94,900 94,950 19,561 15,209 20,021 17,984
94,950 95,000 19,575 15,221 20,035 17,996
95,000
95,000 95,050 19,589 15,234 20,049 18,009
95,050 95,100 19,603 15,246 20,063 18,021
95,100 95,150 19,617 15,259 20,077 18,034
95,150 95,200 19,631 15,271 20,091 18,046
95,200 95,250 19,645 15,284 20,105 18,059
95,250 95,300 19,659 15,296 20,119 18,071
95,300 95,350 19,673 15,309 20,133 18,084
95,350 95,400 19,687 15,321 20,147 18,096
95,400 95,450 19,701 15,334 20,161 18,109
95,450 95,500 19,715 15,346 20,175 18,121
95,500 95,550 19,729 15,359 20,189 18,134
95,550 95,600 19,743 15,371 20,203 18,146
95,600 95,650 19,757 15,384 20,217 18,159
95,650 95,700 19,771 15,396 20,231 18,171
95,700 95,750 19,785 15,409 20,245 18,184
95,750 95,800 19,799 15,421 20,259 18,196
95,800 95,850 19,813 15,434 20,273 18,209
95,850 95,900 19,827 15,446 20,287 18,221
95,900 95,950 19,841 15,459 20,301 18,234
95,950 96,000 19,855 15,471 20,315 18,246
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
96,000
96,000 96,050 19,869 15,484 20,329 18,259
96,050 96,100 19,883 15,496 20,343 18,271
96,100 96,150 19,897 15,509 20,357 18,284
96,150 96,200 19,911 15,521 20,371 18,296
96,200 96,250 19,925 15,534 20,385 18,309
96,250 96,300 19,939 15,546 20,399 18,321
96,300 96,350 19,953 15,559 20,413 18,334
96,350 96,400 19,967 15,571 20,427 18,346
96,400 96,450 19,981 15,584 20,441 18,359
96,450 96,500 19,995 15,596 20,455 18,371
96,500 96,550 20,009 15,609 20,469 18,384
96,550 96,600 20,023 15,621 20,483 18,396
96,600 96,650 20,037 15,634 20,497 18,409
96,650 96,700 20,051 15,646 20,511 18,421
96,700 96,750 20,065 15,659 20,525 18,434
96,750 96,800 20,079 15,671 20,539 18,446
96,800 96,850 20,093 15,684 20,553 18,459
96,850 96,900 20,107 15,696 20,567 18,471
96,900 96,950 20,121 15,709 20,581 18,484
96,950 97,000 20,135 15,721 20,595 18,496
97,000
97,000 97,050 20,149 15,734 20,609 18,509
97,050 97,100 20,163 15,746 20,623 18,521
97,100 97,150 20,177 15,759 20,637 18,534
97,150 97,200 20,191 15,771 20,651 18,546
97,200 97,250 20,205 15,784 20,665 18,559
97,250 97,300 20,219 15,796 20,679 18,571
97,300 97,350 20,233 15,809 20,693 18,584
97,350 97,400 20,247 15,821 20,707 18,596
97,400 97,450 20,261 15,834 20,721 18,609
97,450 97,500 20,275 15,846 20,735 18,621
97,500 97,550 20,289 15,859 20,749 18,634
97,550 97,600 20,303 15,871 20,763 18,646
97,600 97,650 20,317 15,884 20,777 18,659
97,650 97,700 20,331 15,896 20,791 18,671
97,700 97,750 20,345 15,909 20,805 18,684
97,750 97,800 20,359 15,921 20,819 18,696
97,800 97,850 20,373 15,934 20,833 18,709
97,850 97,900 20,387 15,946 20,847 18,721
97,900 97,950 20,401 15,959 20,861 18,734
97,950 98,000 20,415 15,971 20,875 18,746
98,000
98,000 98,050 20,429 15,984 20,889 18,759
98,050 98,100 20,443 15,996 20,903 18,771
98,100 98,150 20,457 16,009 20,917 18,784
98,150 98,200 20,471 16,021 20,931 18,796
98,200 98,250 20,485 16,034 20,945 18,809
98,250 98,300 20,499 16,046 20,959 18,821
98,300 98,350 20,513 16,059 20,973 18,834
98,350 98,400 20,527 16,071 20,987 18,846
98,400 98,450 20,541 16,084 21,001 18,859
98,450 98,500 20,555 16,096 21,015 18,871
98,500 98,550 20,569 16,109 21,029 18,884
98,550 98,600 20,583 16,121 21,043 18,896
98,600 98,650 20,597 16,134 21,057 18,909
98,650 98,700 20,611 16,146 21,071 18,921
98,700 98,750 20,625 16,159 21,085 18,934
98,750 98,800 20,639 16,171 21,099 18,946
98,800 98,850 20,653 16,184 21,113 18,959
98,850 98,900 20,667 16,196 21,127 18,971
98,900 98,950 20,681 16,209 21,141 18,984
98,950 99,000 20,695 16,221 21,155 18,996
If line 43
(taxable income)
is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa- 
rately
Head of 
a 
house- 
hold
Your tax is—
99,000
99,000 99,050 20,709 16,234 21,169 19,009
99,050 99,100 20,723 16,246 21,183 19,021
99,100 99,150 20,737 16,259 21,197 19,034
99,150 99,200 20,751 16,271 21,211 19,046
99,200 99,250 20,765 16,284 21,225 19,059
99,250 99,300 20,779 16,296 21,239 19,071
99,300 99,350 20,793 16,309 21,253 19,084
99,350 99,400 20,807 16,321 21,267 19,096
99,400 99,450 20,821 16,334 21,281 19,109
99,450 99,500 20,835 16,346 21,295 19,121
99,500 99,550 20,849 16,359 21,309 19,134
99,550 99,600 20,863 16,371 21,323 19,146
99,600 99,650 20,877 16,384 21,337 19,159
99,650 99,700 20,891 16,396 21,351 19,171
99,700 99,750 20,905 16,409 21,365 19,184
99,750 99,800 20,919 16,421 21,379 19,196
99,800 99,850 20,933 16,434 21,393 19,209
99,850 99,900 20,947 16,446 21,407 19,221
99,900 99,950 20,961 16,459 21,421 19,234
99,950 100,000 20,975 16,471 21,435 19,246
   
$100,000
or over
use the Tax
Computation
Worksheet
   
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
- 264 -

Page 267 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Computation Worksheet—Line 44
CAUTION
!
See the instructions for line 44 in the Instructions for Form 1040 to see if you must use the worksheet below to figure your tax.
Note. If you are required to use this worksheet to figure the tax on an amount from another form or worksheet, such as the Qualified 
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, the Schedule D Tax Worksheet, Schedule J, Form 8615, or the Foreign Earned Income Tax 
Worksheet, enter the amount from that form or worksheet in column (a) of the row that applies to the amount you are looking up. Enter the 
result on the appropriate line of the form or worksheet that you are completing.
Section A—Use if your filing status is Single. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Taxable income.
If line 43 is—
(a) 
Enter the amount from 
line 43
(b) 
Multiplication 
amount
(c) 
Multiply
 (a) by (b)
(d) 
Subtraction amount
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c). 
Enter the result here and 
on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over $191,650  $  × 28% (0.28)  $  $  7,018.25  $
Over $191,650 but not over $416,700  $  × 33% (0.33)  $  $ 16,600.75  $
Over $416,700 but not over $418,400  $  × 35% (0.35)  $  $ 24,934.75  $
Over $418,400  $ × 39.6% (0.396)  $ $ 44,181.15  $
Section B—Use if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er). Complete the row below that applies to you.
Taxable income.
If line 43 is—
(a) 
Enter the amount 
from line 43
(b) 
Multiplication 
amount
(c) 
Multiply
 (a) by (b)
(d) 
Subtraction amount
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c). 
Enter the result here and 
on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over $153,100  $  × 25% (0.25)  $  $  8,522.50  $
Over $153,100 but not over $233,350  $  × 28% (0.28)  $  $ 13,115.50  $
Over $233,350 but not over $416,700  $  × 33% (0.33)  $  $ 24,783.00  $
Over $416,700 but not over $470,700  $  × 35% (0.35)  $  $ 33,117.00  $
Over $470,700  $ × 39.6% (0.396)  $  $ 54,769.20  $
Section C—Use if your filing status is Married filing separately. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Taxable income.
If line 43 is—
(a) 
Enter the amount from 
line 43
(b) 
Multiplication 
amount
(c) 
Multiply
 (a) by (b)
(d) 
Subtraction amount
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c). 
Enter the result here and 
on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over $116,675  $  × 28% (0.28)  $  $  6,557.75  $
Over $116,675 but not over $208,350  $  × 33% (0.33)  $ $ 12,391.50  $
Over $208,350 but not over $235,350  $  × 35% (0.35)  $  $ 16,558.50  $
Over $235,350  $ × 39.6% (0.396)  $  $ 27,384.60  $
Section D—Use if your filing status is Head of household. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Taxable income.
If line 43 is—
(a) 
Enter the amount 
from line 43
(b) 
Multiplication amount
(c) 
Multiply
 (a) by (b)
(d) 
Subtraction amount
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c). 
Enter the result here and 
on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over $131,200  $  × 25% (0.25)  $  $  5,747.50  $
Over $131,200 but not over $212,500  $  × 28% (0.28)  $  $ 9,683.50  $
Over $212,500 but not over $416,700  $  × 33% (0.33)  $  $ 20,308.50  $
Over $416,700 but not over $444,550  $  × 35% (0.35)  $  $ 28,642.50  $
Over $444,550  $ × 39.6% (0.396)  $  $ 49,091.80  $
Publication 17 (2017) Page 265

Page 268 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2017 Tax Rate Schedules
. 
CAUTION
!
The Tax Rate Schedules are shown so you can see the tax rate that applies to all levels of taxable income. Do not use them to figure your 
tax. Instead, see chapter 30.
Schedule Z—If your /f_iling status is Head of household
Schedule X—If your /f_iling status is Single
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Schedule Y-2—If your /f_iling status is Married ﬁling separately
Schedule Y-1—If your /f_iling status is Married ﬁling jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
$0
9,325
37,950
91,900
191,650
$9,325
37,950
91,900
191,650
416,700
$0
9,325
37,950
91,900
191,650
$0
18,650
75,900
153,100
233,350
$0
9,325
37,950
76,550
116,675
$0
13,350
50,800
131,200
212,500
$18,650
75,900
153,100
233,350
416,700
$9,325
37,950
76,550
116,675
208,350
$13,350
50,800
131,200
212,500
416,700
$0
18,650
75,900
153,100
233,350
$0
9,325
37,950
76,550
116,675
$0
13,350
50,800
131,200
212,500
10%
$932.50 + 15%
5,226.25 + 25%
18,713.75 + 28%
46,643.75 + 33%
10%
$1,865.00 + 15%
10,452.50 + 25%
29,752.50 + 28%
52,222.50 + 33%
10%
$932.50 + 15%
5,226.25 + 25%
14,876.25 + 28%
26,111.25 + 33%
10%
$1,335.00 + 15%
6,952.50 + 25%
27,052.50 + 28%
49,816.50 + 33%
416,700 470,700 416,700112,728.00 + 35%
470,700 470,700131,628.00 + 39%
416,700 418,400 416,700
418,400
120,910.25 + 35%
121,505.25 + 39%418,400
208,350
235,350
235,350 208,350
418,400
56,364.00 + 35%
65,814.00 + 39%
416,700
444,550
444,550 416,700
444,550
117,202.50 + 35%
126,950.00 + 39%
Page 266 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 269 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
This section explains your rights as 
a taxpayer and the processes for 
examination, appeal, collection, 
and refunds.
The Taxpayer Bill 
of Rights
1. The Right to Be Informed. 
Taxpayers have the right to know 
what they need to do to comply 
with the tax laws. They are entitled 
to clear explanations of the laws 
and IRS procedures in all tax 
forms, instructions, publications, 
notices, and correspondence. 
They have the right to be informed 
of IRS decisions about their tax ac-
counts and to receive clear explan-
ations of the outcomes.
2. The Right to Quality Service. 
Taxpayers have the right to receive 
prompt, courteous, and professio-
nal assistance in their dealings with 
the IRS, to be spoken to in a way 
they can easily understand, to re-
ceive clear and easily understand-
able communications from the IRS, 
and to speak to a supervisor about 
inadequate service.
3. The Right to Pay No More 
than the Correct Amount of Tax. 
Taxpayers have the right to pay 
only the amount of tax legally due, 
including interest and penalties, 
and to have the IRS apply all tax 
payments properly.
4. The Right to Challenge the 
IRS’s Position and Be Heard. 
Taxpayers have the right to raise 
objections and provide additional 
documentation in response to for-
mal IRS actions or proposed ac-
tions, to expect that the IRS will 
consider their timely objections 
and documentation promptly and 
fairly, and to receive a response if 
the IRS does not agree with their 
position.
5. The Right to Appeal an IRS 
Decision in an Independent Fo-
rum. Taxpayers are entitled to a 
fair and impartial administrative ap-
peal of most IRS decisions, includ-
ing many penalties, and have the 
right to receive a written response 
regarding the Office of Appeals' 
decision. Taxpayers generally 
have the right to take their cases to 
court.
6. The Right to Finality.  Taxpay-
ers have the right to know the max-
imum amount of time they have to 
challenge the IRS’s position as well 
as the maximum amount of time 
the IRS has to audit a particular tax 
year or collect a tax debt. Taxpay-
ers have the right to know when 
the IRS has finished an audit.
7. The Right to Privacy.  Taxpay-
ers have the right to expect that 
any IRS inquiry, examination, or 
enforcement action will comply 
with the law and be no more intru-
sive than necessary, and will re-
spect all due process rights, in-
cluding search and seizure 
protections and will provide, where 
applicable, a collection due proc-
ess hearing.
8. The Right to Confidentiality. 
Taxpayers have the right to expect 
that any information they provide to 
the IRS will not be disclosed unless 
authorized by the taxpayer or by 
law. Taxpayers have the right to 
expect appropriate action will be 
taken against employees, return 
preparers, and others who wrong-
fully use or disclose taxpayer re-
turn information.
9. The Right to Retain Repre-
sentation. Taxpayers have the 
right to retain an authorized repre-
sentative of their choice to repre-
sent them in their dealings with the 
IRS. Taxpayers have the right to 
seek assistance from a Low In-
come Taxpayer Clinic if they can-
not afford representation.
10. The Right to a Fair and Just 
Tax System.  Taxpayers have the 
right to expect the tax system to 
consider facts and circumstances 
that might affect their underlying li-
abilities, ability to pay, or ability to 
provide information timely. Taxpay-
ers have the right to receive assis-
tance from the Taxpayer Advocate 
Service if they are experiencing fi-
nancial difficulty or if the IRS has 
not resolved their tax issues prop-
erly and timely through its normal 
channels.
Examinations 
(Audits)
We accept most taxpayers' returns 
as filed. If we inquire about your re-
turn or select it for examination, it 
does not suggest that you are dis-
honest. The inquiry or examination 
may or may not result in more tax. 
We may close your case without 
change; or, you may receive a re-
fund.
The process of selecting a re-
turn for examination usually begins 
in one of two ways. First, we use 
computer programs to identify re-
turns that may have incorrect 
amounts. These programs may be 
based on information returns, such 
as Forms 1099 and W-2, on stud-
ies of past examinations, or on cer-
tain issues identified by compli-
ance projects. Second, we use 
information from outside sources 
that indicates that a return may 
have incorrect amounts. These 
sources may include newspapers, 
public records, and individuals. If 
we determine that the information 
is accurate and reliable, we may 
use it to select a return for exami-
nation.
Publication 556, Examination of 
Returns, Appeal Rights, and 
Claims for Refund, explains the 
rules and procedures that we fol-
low in examinations. The following 
sections give an overview of how 
we conduct examinations.
By mail. We handle many exami-
nations and inquiries by mail. We 
will send you a letter with either a 
request for more information or a 
reason why we believe a change to 
your return may be needed. You 
can respond by mail or you can re-
quest a personal interview with an 
examiner. If you mail us the re-
quested information or provide an 
explanation, we may or may not 
agree with you, and we will explain 
the reasons for any changes. 
Please do not hesitate to write to 
us about anything you do not un-
derstand.
By interview. If we notify you that 
we will conduct your examination 
through a personal interview, or 
you request such an interview, you 
have the right to ask that the ex-
amination take place at a reasona-
ble time and place that is conven-
ient for both you and the IRS. If our 
examiner proposes any changes to 
your return, he or she will explain 
the reasons for the changes. If you 
do not agree with these changes, 
you can meet with the examiner's 
supervisor.
Repeat examinations.  If we ex-
amined your return for the same 
items in either of the 2 previous 
years and proposed no change to 
your tax liability, please contact us 
as soon as possible so we can see 
if we should discontinue the exami-
nation.
Appeals
If you do not agree with the exam-
iner's proposed changes, you can 
appeal them to the Appeals Office 
of the IRS. Most differences can be 
settled without expensive and 
time-consuming court trials. Your 
appeal rights are explained in de-
tail in both Publication 5, Your Ap-
peal Rights and How To Prepare a 
Protest If You Don't Agree, and 
Publication 556, Examination of 
Returns, Appeal Rights, and 
Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the 
Appeals Office or disagree with its 
findings, you may be able to take 
your case to the U.S. Tax Court, 
U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or 
the U.S. District Court where you 
live. If you take your case to court, 
the IRS will have the burden of 
proving certain facts if you kept ad-
equate records to show your tax li-
ability, cooperated with the IRS, 
and meet certain other conditions. 
If the court agrees with you on 
most issues in your case and finds 
that our position was largely unjus-
tified, you may be able to recover 
some of your administrative and lit-
igation costs. You will not be eligi-
ble to recover these costs unless 
you tried to resolve your case ad-
ministratively, including going 
through the appeals system, and 
you gave us the information neces-
sary to resolve the case.
Collections
Publication 594, The IRS Collec-
tion Process, explains your rights 
and responsibilities regarding pay-
ment of federal taxes. It describes:
What to do when you owe 
taxes. It describes what to do 
if you get a tax bill and what to 
do if you think your bill is 
wrong. It also covers making 
installment payments, delay-
ing collection action, and sub-
mitting an offer in compro-
mise.
IRS collection actions. It cov-
ers liens, releasing a lien, lev-
ies, releasing a levy, seizures 
and sales, and release of 
property.
IRS certification to the State 
Department of a seriously de-
linquent tax debt, which will 
generally result in denial of a 
passport application and may 
lead to revocation of a pass-
port.
Your collection appeal rights 
are explained in detail in Publica-
tion 1660, Collection Appeal 
Rights.
Innocent spouse relief.  Gener-
ally, both you and your spouse are 
each responsible for paying the full 
amount of tax, interest, and 
Publication 17 (2017) Page 267

Page 270 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
penalties due on your joint return. 
However, if you qualify for innocent 
spouse relief, you may be relieved 
of part or all of the joint liability. To 
request relief, you must file Form 
8857, Request for Innocent 
Spouse Relief. For more informa-
tion on innocent spouse relief, see 
Publication 971, Innocent Spouse 
Relief, and Form 8857.
Potential third party contacts. 
Generally, the IRS will deal directly 
with you or your duly authorized 
representative. However, we 
sometimes talk with other persons 
if we need information that you 
have been unable to provide, or to 
verify information we have re-
ceived. If we do contact other per-
sons, such as a neighbor, bank, 
employer, or employees, we will 
generally need to tell them limited 
information, such as your name. 
The law prohibits us from disclos-
ing any more information than is 
necessary to obtain or verify the in-
formation we are seeking. Our 
need to contact other persons may 
continue as long as there is activity 
in your case. If we do contact other 
persons, you have a right to re-
quest a list of those contacted. 
Your request can be made by tele-
phone, in writing, or during a per-
sonal interview.
Refunds
You may file a claim for refund if 
you think you paid too much tax. 
You must generally file the claim 
within 3 years from the date you 
filed your original return or 2 years 
from the date you paid the tax, 
whichever is later. The law gener-
ally provides for interest on your re-
fund if it is not paid within 45 days 
of the date you filed your return or 
claim for refund. Publication 556, 
Examination of Returns, Appeal 
Rights, and Claims for Refund, has 
more information on refunds.
If you were due a refund but 
you did not file a return, you gener-
ally must file your return within 3 
years from the date the return was 
due (including extensions) to get 
that refund.
Taxpayer Advocate 
Service
TAS is an independent organiza-
tion within the IRS that can help 
protect your taxpayer rights. We 
can offer you help if your tax prob-
lem is causing a hardship, or 
you've tried but haven't been able 
to resolve your problem with the 
IRS. If you qualify for our assis-
tance, which is always free, we will 
do everything possible to help you. 
Visit TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov or 
call 1-877-777-4778.
Tax Information
The IRS provides the following 
sources for forms, publications, 
and additional information.
Internet: IRS.gov.
Tax Questions:
IRS.gov/uac/Tax-Law-
Questions and
How To Get Tax Help.
Forms and Publications:
IRS.gov/Forms and
IRS.gov/OrderForms.
Small Business Ombudsman: 
A small business entity can 
participate in the regulatory 
process and comment on en-
forcement actions of the IRS 
by calling 1-888-REG-FAIR.
Treasury Inspector General 
for Tax Administration: You 
can confidentially report mis-
conduct, waste, fraud, or 
abuse by an IRS employee by 
calling 1-800-366-4484. Peo-
ple who are deaf, hard of 
hearing, or have a speech dis-
ability and who have access 
to TTY/TDD equipment can 
call 1-800-877-8339. You can 
remain anonymous.
Page 268 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 271 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax 
issue, need help preparing your tax 
return, or want to download free 
publications, forms, or instructions, 
go to IRS.gov and find resources 
that can help you right away.
Preparing and filing your tax re-
turn. Find free options to prepare 
and file your return on IRS.gov or in 
your local community if you qualify.
The Volunteer Income Tax As-
sistance (VITA) program offers free 
tax help to people who generally 
make $54,000 or less, persons 
with disabilities, and limited-Eng-
lish-speaking taxpayers who need 
help preparing their own tax re-
turns. The Tax Counseling for the 
Elderly (TCE) program offers free 
tax help for all taxpayers, particu-
larly those who are 60 years of age 
and older. TCE volunteers special-
ize in answering questions about 
pensions and retirement-related is-
sues unique to seniors.
You can go to IRS.gov to see 
your options for preparing and fil-
ing your return which include the 
following.
Free File. Go to IRS.gov/
FreeFile. See if you qualify to 
use brand-name software to 
prepare and e-file your federal 
tax return for free.
VITA. Go to IRS.gov/VITA, 
download the free IRS2Go 
app, or call 1-800-906-9887 to 
find the nearest VITA location 
for free tax preparation.
TCE. Go to IRS.gov/TCE, 
download the free IRS2Go 
app, or call 1-888-227-7669 to 
find the nearest TCE location 
for free tax preparation.
Getting answers to your 
tax questions. On 
IRS.gov get answers to 
your tax questions anytime, any-
where.
Go to IRS.gov/Help or 
IRS.gov/LetUsHelp pages for 
a variety of tools that will help 
you get answers to some of 
the most common tax ques-
tions.
Go to IRS.gov/ITA for the In-
teractive Tax Assistant, a tool 
that will ask you questions on 
a number of tax law topics 
and provide answers. You can 
print the entire interview and 
the final response for your re-
cords.
Go to IRS.gov/Pub17 to get 
Pub. 17, Your Federal Income 
Tax for Individuals, which 
features details on tax-saving 
opportunities, 2017 tax 
changes, and thousands of in-
teractive links to help you find 
answers to your questions. 
View it online in HTML, as a 
PDF, or download it to your 
mobile device as an eBook.
You may also be able to ac-
cess tax law information in 
your electronic filing software.
Getting tax forms and publica-
tions. Go to IRS.gov/Forms to 
view, download, or print all of the 
forms and publications you may 
need. You can also download and 
view popular tax publications and 
instructions (including the 1040 in-
structions) on mobile devices as an 
eBook at no charge. Or, you can 
go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to place 
an order and have forms mailed to 
you within 10 business days.
Access your online account (In-
dividual taxpayers only).  Go to 
IRS.gov/Account to securely ac-
cess information about your federal 
tax account.
View the amount you owe, 
pay online or set up an online 
payment agreement.
Access your tax records on-
line.
Review the past 18 months of 
your payment history.
Go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess 
to review the required identity 
authentication process.
Using direct deposit. The fastest 
way to receive a tax refund is to 
combine direct deposit and IRS 
e-file. Direct deposit securely and 
electronically transfers your refund 
directly into your financial account. 
Eight in 10 taxpayers use direct de-
posit to receive their refund. IRS is-
sues more than 90% of refunds in 
less than 21 days.
Delayed refund for returns 
claiming certain credits.  Due to 
changes in the law, the IRS can’t 
issue refunds before mid-February 
2018, for returns that properly 
claimed the earned income credit 
(EIC) or the additional child tax 
credit (ACTC). This applies to the 
entire refund, not just the portion 
associated with these credits.
Getting a transcript or copy of a 
return. The quickest way to get a 
copy of your tax transcript is to go 
to IRS.gov/Transcripts. Click on ei-
ther "Get Transcript Online" or "Get 
Transcript by Mail" to order a copy 
of your transcript. If you prefer, you 
can:
Order your transcript by call-
ing 1-800-908-9946.
Mail Form 4506-T or Form 
4506T-EZ (both available on 
IRS.gov).
Using online tools to help pre-
pare your return.  Go to IRS.gov/
Tools for the following.
The Earned Income Tax 
Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/EIC) 
determines if you’re eligible 
for the EIC.
The Online EIN Application 
(IRS.gov/EIN) helps you get 
an employer identification 
number.
The IRS Withholding 
Calculator (IRS.gov/W4App) 
estimates the amount you 
should have withheld from 
your paycheck for federal in-
come tax purposes.
The First Time Homebuyer 
Credit Account Look-up 
(IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool 
provides information on your 
repayments and account bal-
ance.
The Sales Tax Deduction 
Calculator (IRS.gov/SalesTax) 
figures the amount you can 
claim if you itemize deduc-
tions on Schedule A (Form 
1040), choose not to claim 
state and local income taxes, 
and you didn’t save your re-
ceipts showing the sales tax 
you paid.
Resolving tax-related identity 
theft issues.
The IRS doesn’t initiate con-
tact with taxpayers by email or 
telephone to request personal 
or financial information. This 
includes any type of electronic 
communication, such as text 
messages and social media 
channels.
Go to IRS.gov/IDProtection for 
information and videos.
If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a 
victim of tax-related identity 
theft, visit IRS.gov/ID to learn 
what steps you should take.
Checking on the status of your 
refund. 
Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
Due to changes in the law, the 
IRS can’t issue refunds before 
mid-February 2018, for re-
turns that properly claimed the 
EIC or the ACTC. This applies 
to the entire refund, not just 
the portion associated with 
these credits.
Download the official IRS2Go 
app to your mobile device to 
check your refund status.
Call the automated refund hot-
line at 1-800-829-1954.
Making a tax payment.  The IRS 
uses the latest encryption technol-
ogy to ensure your electronic pay-
ments are safe and secure. You 
can make electronic payments on-
line, by phone, and from a mobile 
device using the IRS2Go app. Pay-
ing electronically is quick, easy, 
and faster than mailing in a check 
or money order. Go to IRS.gov/
Payments to make a payment us-
ing any of the following options.
IRS Direct Pay: Pay your indi-
vidual tax bill or estimated tax 
payment directly from your 
checking or savings account 
at no cost to you.
Debit or credit card: Choose 
an approved payment pro-
cessor to pay online, by 
phone, and by mobile device.
Electronic Funds With-
drawal: Offered only when fil-
ing your federal taxes using 
tax preparation software or 
through a tax professional.
Electronic Federal Tax Pay-
ment System: Best option for 
businesses. Enrollment is re-
quired.
Check or money order: Mail 
your payment to the address 
listed on the notice or instruc-
tions.
Cash: You may be able to pay 
your taxes with cash at a par-
ticipating retail store.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to 
IRS.gov/Payments for more infor-
mation about your options.
Apply for an online payment 
agreement (IRS.gov/OPA) to 
meet your tax obligation in 
monthly installments if you 
can’t pay your taxes in full to-
day. Once you complete the 
online process, you will re-
ceive immediate notification of 
whether your agreement has 
been approved.
Use the Offer in Compromise 
Pre-Qualifier (IRS.gov/OIC) to 
see if you can settle your tax 
debt for less than the full 
amount you owe.
Publication 17 (2017) Page 269

Page 272 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Checking the status of an amen-
ded return. Go to IRS.gov/WMAR 
to track the status of Form 1040X 
amended returns. Please note that 
it can take up to 3 weeks from the 
date you mailed your amended re-
turn for it to show up in our system 
and processing it can take up to 16 
weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or 
letter. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to 
find additional information about 
responding to an IRS notice or let-
ter.
Contacting your local IRS office. 
Keep in mind, many questions can 
be answered on IRS.gov without 
visiting an IRS Tax Assistance 
Center (TAC). Go to IRS.gov/
LetUsHelp for the topics people 
ask about most. If you still need 
help, IRS TACs provide tax help 
when a tax issue can’t be handled 
online or by phone. All TACs now 
provide service by appointment so 
you’ll know in advance that you 
can get the service you need with-
out long wait times. Before you 
visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to 
find the nearest TAC, check hours, 
available services, and appoint-
ment options. Or, on the IRS2Go 
app, under the Stay Connected 
tab, choose the Contact Us option 
and click on “Local Offices.”
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS 
Video portal ( IRSvideos.gov) con-
tains video and audio presenta-
tions for individuals, small busi-
nesses, and tax professionals.
Getting tax information in other 
languages. For taxpayers whose 
native language isn’t English, we 
have the following resources avail-
able. Taxpayers can find informa-
tion on IRS.gov in the following lan-
guages.
Spanish (IRS.gov/Spanish).
Chinese (IRS.gov/Chinese).
Vietnamese (IRS.gov/
Vietnamese).
Korean (IRS.gov/Korean).
Russian (IRS.gov/Russian).
The IRS TACs provide 
over-the-phone interpreter service 
in over 170 languages, and the 
service is available free to taxpay-
ers.
The Taxpayer 
Advocate Service 
Is Here To Help You
What is the Taxpayer 
Advocate Service?
The Taxpayer Advocate Service 
(TAS) is an independent 
organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects tax-
payer rights. Our job is to ensure 
that every taxpayer is treated fairly 
and that you know and understand 
your rights under the Taxpayer Bill 
of Rights.
What Can the Taxpayer 
Advocate Service Do For 
You?
We can help you resolve problems 
that you can’t resolve with the IRS. 
And our service is free. If you qual-
ify for our assistance, you will be 
assigned to one advocate who will 
work with you throughout the proc-
ess and will do everything possible 
to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
Your problem is causing finan-
cial difficulty for you, your fam-
ily, or your business,
You face (or your business is 
facing) an immediate threat of 
adverse action, or
You’ve tried repeatedly to 
contact the IRS but no one 
has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date 
promised.
How Can You Reach Us?
We have offices in every state, the 
District of Columbia, and Puerto 
Rico. Your local advocate’s num-
ber is in your local directory and at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/
Contact-Us. You can also call us at 
1-877-777-4778.
How Can You Learn 
About Your Taxpayer 
Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights de-
scribes 10 basic rights that all tax-
payers have when dealing with the 
IRS. Our Tax Toolkit at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov can 
help you understand what these 
rights mean to you  and how they 
apply. These are your rights. 
Know them. Use them.
How Else Does the 
Taxpayer Advocate 
Service Help Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large-scale 
problems that affect many taxpay-
ers. If you know of one of these 
broad issues, please report it to us 
at IRS.gov/SAMS.
Low Income 
Taxpayer Clinics
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics 
(LITCs) are independent from the 
IRS. LITCs represent individuals 
whose income is below a certain 
level and need to resolve tax prob-
lems with the IRS, such as audits, 
appeals, and tax collection dis-
putes. In addition, clinics can pro-
vide information about taxpayer 
rights and responsibilities in differ-
ent languages for individuals who 
speak English as a second lan-
guage. Services are offered for 
free or a small fee. To find a clinic 
near you, visit 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/
LITCmap or see IRS Publication 
4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic 
List.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
10% tax for early withdrawal from 
IRA or retirement 
plan (See Early withdrawal from 
deferred interest account, 
subheading: Tax on)
10-year tax option 81
401(k) plans:
Tax treatment of contributions 51
403(b) plans:
Rollovers 82, 128, 134
457 plans (See Section 457 deferred 
compensation plans)
529 plans (See Qualified tuition 
programs)
59 1/2 rule 131
60-day rule 127
70 1/2 rule 123
A
Abandonment of home 113
Abortion:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Abroad, citizens traveling or 
working 6, 52, 182
 (See also Foreign employment)
 (See also Citizens outside U.S.)
Absence, temporary 28, 33
Accelerated death benefits 91
Accidental death benefits 49
Accident insurance 49
Cafeteria plans 53
Long-term care 49, 54
Accidents, car 171
Value determination 173
Willful negligence or intentional 
act as cause 172
Accountable plans for employee 
reimbursements 190
Accountants:
Basis to include fees of 100
CPA review courses 196
Accounting methods 11
Accrual method (See Accrual 
method taxpayers)
Cash method (See Cash method 
taxpayers)
Change of:
Depreciation, to deduct 
unclaimed amount 73
Accounting periods 11
Calendar year 9, 11, 49
Change in, standard deduction 
not allowed 141
Fiscal year 11, 43, 45
Fringe benefits 48
Accrual method taxpayers 12
Taxes paid during tax year, 
deduction of 151
Accumulation distribution of 
trusts:
Tax on 207
Accuracy-related penalties 19
Acknowledgment 169
Activities not for profit 95
Address 15
Change of 17
Foreign 15
P.O. box 15
Adjusted basis 101, 102
Decreases to basis 101
Depreciation 101
Easements 102
Energy conservation subsidies 
exclusion 102
Examples (Table 13-1) 101
Gifts 103
Home sale (See Sale of home)
Improvements 101
Increases to basis 101
Local assessments 101
Sales of property 106
Section 179 deduction 101
Adjusted gross income (AGI):
Medical and dental expenses and 
limit of deduction 145
Modified (See Modified adjusted 
gross income (MAGI))
Retirement savings contribution 
credit 22
Adjustments 208
Administrators, 
estate (See Executors and 
administrators)
Adopted child 26, 27, 33, 37
Earned income credit 233
Adoption 248, 249
ATIN 12, 214
Child tax credit 223
Credits:
Married filing separately 22
Taking 249
Employer assistance 49
Exception for adopted child 146
Exemption for child 167
Expenses not deductible:
Foster care prior to, no 
charitable deduction 166
No charitable deduction 
for 167
Foreign child 249
Medical and dental expenses of 
adopted child 146
Taxpayer identification 
number 12, 37
Taxpayer identification number 
(TIN) 214
Advance payment of the premium 
tax credit (APTC) 245
Page 270 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 273 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Age:
Children's 
investments (See Children, 
subheading: Investment 
income of child under age 18)
Form 1040EZ, taxpayer under 65 
may use 6
Gross income and filing 
requirements (Table 1-1) 4
IRAs:
Contribution cutoff at age 
70 1/2 123
Distribution prior to age 
59 1/2 131
Distribution required at age 
70 1/2 129, 131
Pension distributions required at 
age 70 1/2 84
Retirement plan recipients over 
age 75 80
Roth IRAs 132, 134
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 141
Agents 107
 (See also Fiduciaries)
Income paid to 11
Signing return 13
Age test 27
AGI (See Adjusted gross income 
(AGI))
Agricultural workers (See Farmers)
Agriculture (See Farming)
Aircraft:
Charitable gift of, deduction for 
fair market value 168
Airline club dues:
Not entertainment expenses 184
Airplanes, donations of 167
Airport transportation:
Business-related travel 
expense 180
Alaska:
Standard meal allowance 181
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends 95
Child's dividends 161
Income from 6, 7, 68
Investment income not to 
include 160
Alaska Unemployment 
Compensation Fund 151
Alcoholic beverages:
IRA prohibited transactions 
in 130
Alcohol rehabilitation centers:
Deductibility of medical 
expense 148
Aliens 214
Dual-status (See Dual-status 
taxpayers)
Filing required 6
Nonresident (See Nonresident 
aliens)
Resident (See Resident aliens)
Alimony 134–137
Definition of 135
Mortgage payments:
Interest deduction 156
Reporting of income 96
Alternative calculation for year of 
marriage 245
Alternative filing methods:
Electronic (See E-file)
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling 
property credit 249
Alternative minimum tax 
(AMT) 207
Child's tax, figuring of 213
Exempt-interest dividends 68
Filing requirements (Table 1-3) 7
Incentive stock option 7
Nonrefundable credit for prior 
year tax 250
Alternative motor vehicle 
credit 249
Ambulance service personnel:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 92
Amended returns 17
 (See also Form 1040X)
Itemized deduction, change to 
standard deduction 143
Standard deduction, change to 
itemized deductions 143
American citizens abroad 5
 (See also Citizens outside U.S.)
Employment (See Foreign 
employment)
American Indians (See Indians)
American Samoa:
Income from 6
Amortization:
Bond premiums, treatment 
of 162
AMT (See Alternative minimum tax 
(AMT))
Annuities 82
 (See also Rollovers)
Cost computation 78
Decedent's unrecovered 
investment in 13
Early distributions from 83
Deferred annuity 
contracts 83
Estimated tax 78
Exclusion limit 78
General Rule:
Annuity starting before 
November 19, 1996 80
Nonqualified plans and 
qualified plans for 
recipients over 75 
years 80
Purchased annuities 78
Survivor's annuity 84
Guaranteed payments 79
IRAs as 123
Joint return 78
Worksheet 80
Loans from plan 78
Lump-sum distributions 81
Multiple plan benefits 77, 78
Partly taxable payments 78
Purchased annuities 78
Reporting of 78
Retirement annuities 77
Rollovers 82
Sale of:
Gain as ordinary income 78
Simplified method to calculate 
tax-free part of annuity 
payment 79
Survivor's annuity 84
Worksheet for 
computation 79
Survivor annuities 84
Trade of insurance policies and 
annuities 107
Unrecovered investment 203
Withholding 13, 41, 78
Annulled marriages:
Filing status 20
Anthrax incidents (See Terrorist 
attacks)
Antiques (See Collectibles)
Appliances:
Deterioration and damage, not 
casualty loss 172
Appraisal fees 201
Donated property 167
Not deductible as interest 158
Real estate transactions, when 
required by lender 101
Appraisals:
Casualty or theft losses 173, 174
Archer MSAs 98
Contributions 49
Medical expenses paid for 
decedent from 146
Not deductible as medical 
expense 148
Armed Forces 163, 164, 185
 (See also Veterans benefits)
 (See also Veterans' organizations)
 (See also Reservists)
Armed forces:
Combat zone:
Extension to file return 10
Signing return for spouse 21
Dependency allotments 34
Disability pay 52
Disability pensions 53
GI Bill benefits 35
Military 201
Military quarters allotments 34
Naval officers on permanent duty 
aboard ship 178
Permanent duty overseas 178
Real estate taxes when receiving 
housing allowance 153, 156
Rehabilitative program 
payments 52
Reserves 194
Retiree's pay withholding 38
Retirees' pay:
Taxable income 52
Uniforms 201
Wages 52
Artists, performing (See Performing 
artists)
Art works:
As capital assets 108
Capital gains or losses from sale 
or trade of 120
Assessments, local (See Local 
assessments)
Assistance (See Tax help)
Assistance, tax (See Tax help)
Assumption of mortgage 100
Fees not included in basis 101
Athletic events:
Charitable contributions, amount 
deductible 164
ATIN (Adoption taxpayer 
identification number) 12
At-risk rules:
Rental property 73
Attachment of wages 11
Attachments to return 13
Attorneys:
Bar review courses 196
Attorneys' fees 202, 204
Basis to include 100
Social security and railroad 
retirement benefits, 
deductions for 89
Title to property, for preparation, 
filing, etc. 101
Audits:
Travel expense records 188
Auto insurance:
Medical expenses covered by, 
not deductible 148
Automatic extension of time to 
file 10
Form 4868 10
Automatic investment services:
Holding period, determination 
of 110
Awards (See Prizes and awards)
Away-from-home 
travel (See Travel and 
transportation expenses)
B
Babysitting 47
Back pay, award for 48
Emotional distress damages 
under title VII of Civil Rights 
Act of 1964 96
Backup withholding 41, 45, 58
Dividend income 65
Penalties 41
Bad debts:
Bank deposit, loss due to bank's 
insolvency or bankruptcy 172
Reporting on Schedule D 
(Form 1040) 172
Claim for refund 18, 111
Nonbusiness 110
Recovery 92
Reporting of 111
Short-term capital loss 111
When deductible 110
Baggage:
Business-related travel 
expense 180
Balance due 207
Bankruptcy:
Canceled debt not deemed to be 
income 91
Financial institution's bankruptcy 
causing deductible loss 172
Reporting of 176
Banks:
Automatic investment service, 
determination of holding 
period 110
IRAs with 123
Losses on deposits, when 
casualty losses 109, 172
Reporting of 176
Money market accounts 67
Bar associations:
Charitable contributions to 166
Bar employees:
Tips (See Tip income)
Bargain sales:
As charitable contributions 168
Basis of purchase 102
Bar review courses 196
Barter income 90
Definition of bartering 90
Form 1099-B 90
Basis:
Adjusted basis 101
Allocation between business and 
personal use 100
Bad debts 110
Bargain purchases 102
Bonds 104
Cost basis 100
IRAs for nondeductible 
contributions 126, 129
Definition of 100
Gifts 103
Home sales (See Sale of home)
Improvements to real estate 101
Like-kind exchanges 106
Other than cost 102–104, 106
Points not to be included 101
Property received for 
services 102
Real estate 100
Restricted property 102
Stock or stock rights 68
Tax-exempt obligations:
Bonds 104
Transfers between 
spouses 103, 107
Beetles:
Damage or destruction to trees 
and plants, when casualty 
loss 172
Beneficiaries 65, 82, 96
 (See also Estate beneficiaries)
 (See also Trust beneficiaries)
Bequests 96, 97, 211
 (See also Estate beneficiaries)
 (See also Inheritance)
 (See also Gifts)
Bicycle:
Fringe benefit 51
Bingo 164, 167
Birth control pills 148
Birth of child 28
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 24, 25
Social security number to be 
obtained 36
Birth of dependent 33
Blackmail:
Losses due to 172
Blind persons:
Exemption from withholding 40
Guide dogs, deductible as 
medical expense 148
Impairment-related work 
expenses, deduction for 150
Standard deduction for 141
Blood banks:
No charitable deduction for blood 
donations to 164, 167
Blue books to determine fair 
market value 168
Boats:
Charitable gift of, deduction for 
fair market value 168
Donations of 167
Body scan 148
Bona fide business purpose:
Travel expenses 180
Work-related education 195
Bonds:
Adjusted basis for 104
Amortization of premium 162, 
202
As capital assets 108
Convertible bonds 106
Discounted:
Capital gain or loss 109
Issued at discount 63
Market discount bonds 109
Publication 17 (2017) Page 271

Page 274 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bonds (Cont.)
Original issue discount 63
Redemption of 105
Retirement of 82, 105
Sale of 62
Savings 59, 60
Sold at premium, computation of 
adjusted basis 104
State or local government, 
tax-exempt 109
Tax-exempt 63
Bonuses 40, 48, 98
Bookkeeping (See Recordkeeping 
requirements)
Books to determine fair market 
value 173
Borrowed funds 78, 161
 (See also Loans)
Used for charitable contributions, 
deduction for 169
Bottled water 148
Boy Scouts:
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Braille books 148
Breach of contract:
Damages as income 96
Employment 200
Breast pump and supplies 148
Bribes 96, 203
Brokers:
Form 1099-B 105
IRAs with 123
Commissions 123, 124
Receiving dividends, reporting on 
Form 1099-MISC 66
Burglary:
Losses due to 172
Burial expenses (See Funerals)
Business associates 180, 182
 (See also Entertainment expenses)
Business travel to meet 185
Travel expenses of, paying 
for 180
Business expenses 180, 182
 (See also Entertainment expenses)
Job search expenses 98
Meal expenses (See Meal and 
lodging expenses)
Reimbursements 40, 48
Returning excess for business 
expenses 192
Returning excess business 
expenses 40
Travel (See Travel and 
transportation expenses)
Work-related education 197
Business organizations:
Charitable contributions to 166
Business property:
As gift, adjusted basis for 103
Basis for depreciation 104
Property use changed to, 
adjusted basis for 104
Sales or exchanges:
Like-kind exchanges 106
Business tax credits:
Claim for refund 18
Business use of home 200
C
Cafeteria plans 53
Calendar year taxpayers:
Accounting periods 9, 11, 49
Filing due date 9
California Nonoccupational 
Disability Benefit Fund 151
Campaign contributions 96, 164, 
166
Presidential Election Campaign 
Fund 12
Campaign expenses 203
Canada:
Resident of 26, 33
Cancellation of debt 90
Exceptions to treatment as 
income 90
Candidates for public office:
Contributions to, no charitable 
deduction for 164, 166
Capital assets:
Coal and iron ore 94
Definition of 108
Capital expenses 35
Capital gains or losses 108, 111, 
118
Bad debts as short-term capital 
loss 111
Carryover of 119
Worksheet 119
Character of gain 108
Character of loss 108
Child's distributions and 
dividends, reporting of 161
Collectibles 120
Deductions 119
Limit on 119
Distributions 67
Form 1040 or 1040A to be 
used 7, 68
Form 8949 118
Hobbies, sales from 
collections 97
Holding period, determination 
of 110
How to report 118
Installment sales and 118
Lump-sum distributions from 
pensions and annuities 81
Mutual funds paying 67
Net capital gain 108, 119, 120
Included as investment 
income 160
Net long-term capital loss 119
Sale of personal items 98
Sale or trade of property held 
more than 1 year 110, 119
Schedule D 118
Section 1250 gains from sale of 
real property 108, 120
State or local government bonds, 
tax-exempt 109
Tax rates 120
Maximum capital gain rates 
(Table 16-1) 120
Total net gain 119
Total net loss 119
Undistributed gains:
Credit for tax on 67, 251
Car expenses 171
Car pools 96, 185
Carrybacks:
Business tax credit 
carrybacks 18
Carryovers:
Capital loss 119
Worksheet 119
Investment interest 160
Cars 50, 98, 177, 186
 (See also Travel and transportation)
 (See also Standard mileage rates)
Accidents resulting in casualty 
loss 171
Value determination 173
Willful negligence or 
intentional act as 
cause 172
Actual expenses 186, 187
Advertising displays on 185
Allowances from employers 190
As capital assets 108
Blue book to determine fair 
market value 168
Books to determine fair market 
value 173
Business and personal use, 
allocation between 187, 188
Business-related travel 
expenses 180
Car pools 185
Charitable gift of, deduction for 
fair market value 168
Charitable organization service, 
use for 166
Depreciation 187
Donations of 167
Fixed and variable rate 
(FAVR) 191
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill 
out 192
Hauling tools or instruments 185
Interest on loans, not 
deductible 161
Leased vehicles 187
Medical transportation 148
Parking (See Parking fees)
Personal property taxes on, 
deduction of 155
Reporting of 188
Table 26-3 showing forms to 
be used 192
Sale, trade-in, or other 
disposition 187
Section 179 deductions 187
Work-related education, 
transportation for 197
Cash:
Dividends paid as 65
Rebates 96
Sales of property for 106
Cash contributions, records to 
keep 169
Cash method taxpayers 11
Bad debts 110
Points, deduction of 158
Real estate transactions, tax 
allocation 152
Taxes paid during tax year, 
deduction of 151
Worthless securities and 
negotiable promissory 
notes 105
Cash rebates 96
Casualties 117
Casualty insurance:
Premiums not in property 
basis 101
Reimbursements from 96
Casualty losses 171, 201, 202
Adjusted basis in property 101, 
174, 177
Amount of loss 173
Appraisals 173, 174
Bank deposit, loss due to bank's 
insolvency or bankruptcy 172
Costs:
Cleaning up or making 
repairs 173
Photographs and 
appraisals 174
Deductible losses 171
$100 rule 176
When to take 
(Table 25-2) 176
Deduction limits:
For personal property 
(Table 25-1) 175
Definition of casualty 171
Disasters 174, 175
 (See also Disaster relief)
Employer's emergency disaster 
fund 174
Fair market value of 
property 173
Form 4684 to be filed 171
Insurance proceeds, treatment 
of 174
Net operating losses 177
Nondeductible losses 171
Proof of loss 172
Property used partly for business 
and partly for personal 
purposes 175
Reimbursement 174
Reporting of gain or loss 176, 
177
Single casualty on multiple 
properties 175
Cemeteries:
Charitable contributions to 163
Certificate, mortgage credit 250
Certificates of deposit (CDs) 63, 
122
 (See also Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Chambers of commerce:
Charitable contributions to 164, 
166
Entertainment expenses for 
attending meetings 183
Change of address 17
Change of name 12, 45
Chaplains:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 92
Charitable contributions 163–171
Gifts to reduce public debt 15
Charitable distributions, 
qualified 129
Charity benefit events:
Deduction amount for charitable 
contributions 164
Checklists:
Medical and dental expense 
deductions (Table 21-1) 147
Checks:
As charitable contributions 169
Canceled checks as evidence of 
travel expenses 188
Constructive receipt of 11
Check-writing fees 203
Child, qualifying 26
Child:
Foster child 237, 238
Married child 234
Child and dependent care 
credit 7
Due diligence 217
Earned income 214
Full-time student 216
Married filing separately 22
Payments to relatives 217
Child born alive 28
Childcare:
Child care 7
Babysitting 47
Care providers 47
Credit 213
Expenses 35
Nursing care for healthy baby, not 
deductible as medical 
expense 148
Provider:
Taxpayer identification 
number 217
Child custody 28
Children 49, 167
 (See also Adoption)
Additional child tax credit 224
Adoption (See Adopted child)
Babysitters 47
Birth of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 24, 25
Social security number to be 
obtained 36
Care providers 47
Child's tax, figuring of:
Alternative minimum tax 213
Credit for 6, 7
 (See also Child tax credit)
 (See also Child and dependent 
care credit)
Custody of 28
Death of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 24, 25
Dividends of (See this heading: 
Investment income of child 
under age 18)
Earnings of 6
Filing requirements:
As dependents (Table 1-2) 5
Gifts to 58, 211
Inclusion of child's income on 
parent's return (Figure 
31-A) 210
Investment income of 65
Investment income of child under 
age 18:
Dependent filing requirements 
(Table 1-2) 5
Interest and dividends 6
Parents' election to report on 
Form 1040 6, 161
Kidnapped 28, 32
Nontaxable income 211
Property received as gift, income 
from 211
Signing return, parent for 
child 13
Standard deduction for 141, 142
Stillborn 28
Support of (See Child support)
Tax credit (See Child tax credit)
Transporting school children 98
Unearned income of 57
Unearned income of certain 
children 209
Form 8615, use of (Figure 
31-B) 212
Parents' election to report on 
Form 1040 210
Page 272 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 275 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Children (Cont.)
Trust income 212
Unearned income 
defined 211
Child support 96
Alimony, difference 
from 135–137
Child tax credit 6, 7, 26, 223, 224
Limits 22, 224
Married filing separately 22
Chronic illness:
Accelerated payment of life 
insurance 
proceeds (See Accelerated 
death benefits)
Long-term care (See Long-term 
care insurance contracts)
Church employees:
Filing requirements (Table 1-3) 7
Churches, temples, etc.:
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Convention delegates, deduction 
of unreimbursed 
expenses 165
Citizen or resident test 26
Citizens outside U.S.:
Business travel outside U.S.:
Self-employed persons 182
Standard meal 
allowance 181
Earned income exclusion 1
Employment (See Foreign 
employment)
Extension of time to file 10
Filing requirements 5
Withholding from IRA 
distributions 130
Civic associations:
Charitable contributions to 166
Contributions to, no charitable 
deduction for 164
Civil defense organizations:
Charitable contributions to 163
Civil service retirement 
benefits 77
Civil suits 96
 (See also Damages from lawsuits)
Civil tax penalties (See Penalties)
Clergy 6
Contributions that can be spent 
as individual wishes, not 
deductible charitable 
contribution 166
Housing 52
Real estate taxes when 
receiving housing 
allowance 153, 156
Life insurance proceeds when 
chaplain died in line of 
duty 92
Pensions 52
Special income rules 52
Clerical help, deductibility of 201
Clients 180, 182
 (See also Entertainment expenses)
Business travel to meet 185
Travel expenses of, paying 
for 180
Closing costs:
Real property transactions 100
Sale of home 113
Clothing:
Military 201
Moth damage, not casualty 
loss 172
Uniforms:
Charitable organization 
requiring, deduction for 
cost and upkeep of 165
Used clothing, charitable 
deduction for fair market 
value 168
Work 201
Club dues and membership fees:
Entertainment expenses 184
Coal and iron ore 94
Coins (See Collectibles)
Collectibles:
As capital assets 108
Gains or losses from sale or trade 
of 120
IRA investment in 130
College professor:
Research expenses 200
Colleges and universities:
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Athletic events, amount 
deductible 164
Education costs 98
 (See also Qualified tuition 
programs)
Employer-provided 
educational 
assistance 139
 (See also Educational 
assistance)
Combat zone:
Extension to file return 10
Signing return for spouse 21
Commission drivers:
Deduction of expenses 189
Commissions 40
Advance 47
IRAs with brokers 123, 124
Property basis to include when 
buyer pays 101
Sharing of (kickbacks) 98
Unearned, deduction for 
repayment of 48
Commodities:
Derivative financial 
instruments 108
Common law marriage 20
Community property 5, 60
Alimony, difference from 135
IRAs 123
Married filing separately 22
Medical and dental 
expenses 145
Commuting expenses 185, 203
Employer-provided commuter 
vehicle 51
Compensation 47
 (See also Wages and salaries)
Defined for IRA purposes 123
Defined for Roth IRA 
purposes 132
Employee 47
Miscellaneous compensation 47
Nonemployee 97
Unemployment 94
Computation of tax 13
Equal amounts 13
Negative amounts 13
Rounding off dollars 13
Computer 200
Condemnation of property 117, 
171
Disaster areas, 
government-ordered 
demolition of unsafe 
home 171
Period of ownership and use 115
Confidential information:
Privacy Act and paperwork 
reduction information 2
Travel expenses and 188
Constructive receipt of 
income 11, 64
Contributions 15, 96, 163, 164, 
166
 (See also Charitable contributions)
 (See also Campaign contributions)
Nontaxable combat pay 123
Political 204
Reservist repayments 123
Retirement (See specific type of 
plan)
Controlled corporations:
Nontaxable stock purchase 
of 107
Related party transactions 107
Convenience fees 201
Conventions:
Delegates:
Deduction of unreimbursed 
expenses 165
Travel expenses 182
Travel expenses 182
Work-related education, 
deduction of travel expenses 
for overseas 
conventions 198
Conversion (See specific retirement 
or IRA plan)
Convertible stocks and 
bonds 106
Cooperative housing:
Dwelling unit used as home 69
Mortgage interest 
statements 160
Real estate taxes, deduction 
of 152
Taxes that are deductible 
(Table 22-1) 154
Sale or trade of:
Form 1099-S to report 119
Period of ownership and 
use 114
Cooperatives:
Patronage dividends 68
Co-owners:
Dwelling unit used as home by 
co-owner, rental income and 
expense allocation 72
Copyrights 108
Infringement damages 96
Royalties 94
Corporations 92
 (See also S corporations)
Controlled corporations 107
Director fees as self-employment 
income 97
Reorganizations and nontaxable 
trade of stock 106
Corrections (See Errors)
Cosmetics:
Not deductible as medical 
expense 148
Cosmetic surgery:
Not deductible as medical 
expense 148
Cost basis 100
IRAs for nondeductible 
contributions 126, 129
Cost-of-living allowances 48
Country clubs:
Charitable contributions to 166
Dues:
Charitable deduction not 
allowed 164
Entertainment expense 
deduction not 
allowed 184
Coupon bonds 64
Court awards and 
damages (See Damages from 
lawsuits)
Cousin 33
Coverdell ESAs:
Additional tax on 207
CPAs (See Accountants)
Credit cards:
Annual fees, not deductible 161
Benefits, taxability of 
insurance 96
Charitable contributions charged 
to 169
Finance charges, not 
deductible 161
Payment of taxes 2
Credit for child and dependent 
care expenses 208, 209
Credit for prior year minimum tax:
Nonrefundable 250
Credit for the elderly or the 
disabled 209
Credit or debit cards:
Payment of taxes 10
Credit reports:
Costs not included in property 
basis 101
Fees for, not deductible 161
Credits 206, 208, 209
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling 
property credit 249
Alternative motor vehicle 249
American opportunity 22
Build America bonds (See Credit 
to holders of tax credit bonds)
Capital gains, undistributed, 
credit for tax on 67, 251
Child and dependent 
care (See Child and 
dependent care credit)
Child tax (See Child tax credit)
Clean renewable energy 
bonds (See Credit to holders 
of tax credit bonds)
Earned income (See Earned 
income credit)
Elderly or the disabled 220
Excess withholding 252
Foreign tax 249
Health coverage 251
Lifetime learning (See Lifetime 
learning credit)
Mortgage interest 250
Nonrefundable credits 248
Plug-in electric drive motor 
vehicle 250
Premium tax credit 245
Prior year minimum tax 
(AMT) 250
Qualified energy conservation 
bonds (See Credit to holders 
of tax credit bonds)
Qualified school construction 
bonds (See Credit to holders 
of tax credit bonds)
Qualified zone academy 
bonds (See Credit to holders 
of tax credit bonds)
Refundable credits 251
Residential energy 251
Retirement savings 
contribution 251
Credit to holders of tax credit 
bonds 249
Cremation:
Not deductible as medical 
expense 148
Criminal prosecutions:
Travel expenses for federal 
staff 179
Cruises:
Travel expenses when incidental 
business activities 182
Work-related education, 
deduction of expenses 198
Custodial fees 202
Custody of child 28
Customers 180, 182
 (See also Entertainment expenses)
Business travel to meet 185
Travel expenses of, paying 
for 180
D
Daily allowance (See Per diem)
Damages 200
Damages from lawsuits 96
Medical expenses as part of 
settlement 149
Damage to property 171
 (See also Casualty losses)
Disasters 174, 175
 (See also Disaster relief)
Dating your return 13
Daycare centers 7, 47, 216
 (See also Child and dependent care 
credit)
 (See also Child care)
Deadlines (See Due dates)
Death (See Decedents)
Death benefits:
Accelerated 91
Life insurance proceeds (See Life 
insurance)
Public safety officers who died or 
were killed in line of duty, tax 
exclusion 92
Death of child 28
Death of dependent 33
Debt instruments (See Bonds or 
Notes)
Debts 18, 92
 (See also Bad debts)
Canceled (See Cancellation of 
debt)
Nonrecourse 90
Paid by another 11
Payoff of debt included in sales 
transaction 106
Public, gifts to reduce 15
Recourse 90
Refund offset against 9, 14
Deceased 
taxpayers (See Decedents)
Decedents 5
 (See also Executors and 
administrators)
Capital loss of 119
Publication 17 (2017) Page 273

Page 276 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Decedents (Cont.)
Deceased spouse 5
Personal exemption 26
Due dates 10
Earned income credit 238
Filing requirements 5
Funeral expenses 166
Medical and dental 
expenses 146
Savings bonds 61
Spouse's death 21
Standard deduction 141
Transfer of property at death 105
Declaration of rights of taxpayers:
IRS request for information 2
Deductions 22, 25, 92, 110, 111, 
119, 135, 141, 158, 160, 180, 182
 (See also Personal exemption)
 (See also Recovery of amounts 
previously deducted)
 (See also Bad debts)
 (See also Capital losses)
 (See also Points)
 (See also Entertainment expenses)
Alimony, deductible by 
payer 137
Casualty losses (See Capital 
losses)
Changing claim after filing, need 
to amend 17
Charitable contributions 163
Dental expenses (See Medical 
and dental expenses)
Depreciation 101
Educator expenses 140
Estate 201
Fee-basis government 
officials 193
Impairment-related work 
expenses 150, 194
Interest (See Interest payments)
Investment expenses 161
IRA contributions (See Individual 
retirement arrangements 
(IRAs))
Itemizing (See Itemized 
deductions)
Long-term care insurance 
contracts 148
Medical expenses (See Medical 
and dental expenses)
Mortgage 
interest (See Mortgages)
Not itemizing, use of Form 
1040A 7
Pass-through entities 201
Penalties, no deduction 
permitted 161
Performing artists' expenses 194
Prepaid insurance 
premiums 147
Prescription medicines 148
Rental expenses 70
Repayments 93
Section 179 deductions:
Adjustment to basis for 101
Car expenses 187
Self-employed persons:
Health insurance 
premiums 150
Social security and railroad 
retirement benefits 89
Standard deduction 141, 143
Stop-smoking programs 148
Student loan interest 
deduction (See Student 
loans)
Theft loss 202
Transportation 
expenses (See Travel and 
transportation expenses)
Union dues (See Labor unions)
Work-related education 197
Deeds:
Recording fees, basis to 
include 101
Deferred annuity 
contracts (See Annuities)
Deferred compensation:
Limit 51
Nonqualified plans 48
Deferred compensation 
plans (See Retirement plans)
Delinquent taxes:
Real estate transactions, tax 
allocation 152
Delivery services 9
Business-related travel 
expense 180
De minimis benefits 49
Demutualization of life insurance 
companies 107
Dental expenses (See Medical and 
dental expenses)
Dentures:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Dependent care:
Benefits 213, 218
Center 216
Credit for 213
Dependents 6, 7, 146, 223
 (See also Child tax credit)
Birth of 33
Born and died within year 12, 36
Death of 33
Deceased dependent's medical 
and dental expenses 147
Disabled dependent care 
expenses, deduction for 148
Exemption for 26
Filing requirements:
Earned income, unearned 
income, and gross income 
levels (Table 1-2) 5
Married, filing joint return 26, 31
Medical and dental 
expenses 146
Qualifying child 26, 146
Qualifying relative 32, 146
Social security number 12
Adoption taxpayer 
identification number 12, 
37
Alien dependents 36
Standard deduction for 142
Travel expenses for 180
Dependents not allowed to claim 
dependents 26
Dependent taxpayer test 26
Depletion allowance 94
Deposits 217
Losses on 109, 172
Reporting of 176
Loss on 202
Depreciation:
Adjustment to basis for 101
Cars 187
Change of use of property 104
Computer 200
Correcting amount claimed 73
Form 4562:
Rental property 
depreciation 73
Home computer 201
Property used in trade or 
business, as noncapital 
assets 108
Real property:
Gain from disposition of 
property 116
Land, no depreciation of 73
Rental property 70, 73
Designated Roth account 78, 82
Designated Roth Account:
Defined 77
Destroyed records 188
Diaper service 148
Differential wage payments 48
Differential wages:
Wages for reservists:
Military reserves 52
Direct deposit of refunds 14
Directors' fees 97
Disabilities, persons with 214, 
220
 (See also Elderly or the disabled)
Accrued leave payment 53
Armed forces 52
Blind (See Blind persons)
Cafeteria plans 53
Credit for (See Elderly or 
disabled, credit for)
Dependent who is disabled, 
deduction for care 
expenses 148
Guide dogs, deductible as 
medical expense 148
Impairment-related work 
expenses of 150, 194
Work-related education 199
Insurance costs 53
Military and government 
pensions 53
Public assistance benefits 95
Reporting of disability pension 
income 53
Retirement, pensions, and 
profit-sharing plans 53
Signing of return by 
court-appointed 
representative 13
Social security and railroad 
retirement benefits, 
deductions for 89
Special school or home for, 
deductibility of medical 
expense 148
Terrorist attack as cause of injury, 
disability payments excluded 
from taxation 77
Workers' compensation 54
Disability, permanent and total 
disability 220
Disability:
Income 221
Disability benefits:
Earned income credit 232
Disability insurance payments:
Earned income credit 232
Disabled:
Child 28
Dependent 34
Disaster Assistance Act of 1988:
Withholding 41
Disaster relief 54, 95, 175
 (See also Terrorist attacks)
Cash gifts to victims 174
Disaster Relief and Emergency 
Assistance Act:
Grants 95
Unemployment 
assistance 94
Employer's emergency disaster 
fund 174
Government-ordered demolition 
or relocation of home that is 
unsafe due to 171
Grants or payments 95
Replacement of lost or destroyed 
property 175
Discharge of qualified principal 
residence indebtedness 114
Disclosure statement 19
Discount, bonds and notes issued 
at 63
Discounted debt instruments:
Capital gain or loss 109
Discounts:
Employee discounts, effect on 
basis 102
Distributions 82
 (See also Rollovers)
Early (See Early withdrawal from 
deferred interest account)
Liquidating distributions 67
Lump sum (See Lump-sum 
distributions)
Nondividend distributions 67
Qualified charitable 129
Qualified reservist 83
Required minimum 
distributions 84, 127, 129
 (See also Pensions)
 (See also Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Return of capital 67
District of Columbia:
First-time homebuyer credit 113
Dividends 65–69
 (See also Form 1099-DIV)
Alaska Permanent 
Fund (See Alaska Permanent 
Fund dividends)
As stock dividends and stock 
rights 67
Backup withholding 65
Beneficiary of estate or trust 
receiving 65
Buying more stock with 67
Defined 65
Exempt-interest dividends 68
Expenses related to, deduction 
of 69
Fees to collect 201
Foreign income 65
Holding period, determination 
of 110
Insurance dividends 68
Money market funds 67
Nominees receiving on behalf of 
another 66
Nondividend distributions 67
Ordinary dividends 66
Patronage dividends 68
Qualified 66, 69
Real estate investment trusts 
(REITs) paying 67
Redemption treated as 105
Reinvestment plans 67
Reporting of:
As interest 65
Scrip dividends 68
Sold stock 66
Stockholder debts when canceled 
as 90
Veterans' insurance 68
Divorced parents 28, 32
Divorced taxpayers 96
 (See also Alimony)
Child and dependent care 
credit 214
Child custody 28
Definition of divorce instrument 
for purposes of alimony 135
Estimated tax payments 46
Filing status 20, 21
IRAs 124, 128
Medical and dental expenses of 
children of 146
Mortgage interest, payment as 
alimony 156
Personal exemption 26
Real estate taxes, allocation 
of 153
Transfers between 
spouses 103, 107
Use of home after divorce 115
Doctors' bills (See Medical and 
dental expenses)
Documentary evidence:
Recordkeeping 
requirements 188
Domestic help, no exemption 
for 26
Domestic help:
Withholding 38
Domestic relations orders, 
qualified (QDROs):
Rollover of retirement plan 
distribution 82
Donations (See Charitable 
contributions)
Down payment assistance 96
Droughts:
Losses of property due to 172
Drug or alcohol rehabilitation 
centers:
Deductibility of medical 
expense 148
Drugs:
As medical expenses:
Over-the-counter drugs, not 
deductible 148
Prescription medicines, 
deductibility 148
Dry cleaning:
Business-related travel 
expense 180, 181
Dual-status taxpayers 6
Joint returns not available 21
Standard deduction 141
Due dates 9
2017 dates (Table 1-5) 9
Disaster areas, postponed 
deadlines 177
Extension (See Extension of time 
to file)
Nonresident aliens' returns 10
Due diligence:
Child and dependent care 
credit 217
Dues:
Chamber of Commerce 200
Page 274 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 277 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dues (Cont.)
Club 203
Union 200
Dwelling units 71, 72
 (See also Vacation homes)
Cooperative (See Cooperative 
housing)
Defined 71
Renting (See Rental income and 
expenses)
E
Early withdrawal from deferred 
interest account:
Annuities 83
Form 1099-R 
reporting (See Form 1099-R)
Form 5329 reporting (See Form 
5329)
Higher education expenses, 
exception from penalty 122
IRAs:
Early distributions, 
defined 131
Penalties 129, 131
Section 457 deferred 
compensation plans 83
Tax on 82, 83
Earned income 239
Child and dependent care 
credit 214
Defined:
For purposes of standard 
deduction 142
Dependent filing requirements 
(Table 1-2) 5
Employee 232
Self-employed 232
Earned income credit 208, 209, 
230
Disability benefits 232
Disability insurance 
payments 232
Filing claim 6
Foster child 233
Married filing separately 22
Military personnel 234
Social security card 234
Social security number 234
Earthquakes 175
 (See also Disaster relief)
Casualty loss caused by 171
Easements:
Adjustment to basis for 102
Education:
Savings bond program 61
Educational assistance:
Employer-provided 49
Scholarships (See Scholarships 
and fellowships)
Tuition (See Qualified tuition 
programs)
Educational 
institution (See Eligible 
educational institution)
Educational organizations:
As related party in 
transactions 107
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Education credits 7, 224
Academic period 226
Eligible educational 
institution 226
Married filing separately 22
Education expenses:
Employer-provided (See Educatio
nal assistance)
Teacher's out-of-pocket 
expenses 140
Tuition (See Qualified tuition 
programs)
Work-related education, 
deduction of expenses 198
Educator out-of-pocket 
expenses 140
EE series bonds (See U.S. savings 
bonds)
E-file 2, 4, 8
Extensions of time to file 10
On time filing 10
EIC (See Earned income credit)
Elderly or disabled, credit for 7
Married filing separately 22
Elderly persons 77
 (See also Pensions)
Credit for (See Elderly or 
disabled, credit for)
Exemption from withholding 40
Home for the aged 34
Long-term care (See Long-term 
care insurance contracts)
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 95
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 141
Tax Counseling for the Elderly 9
Election precinct officials:
Fees, reporting of 97
Election to include child's income 
on parent's return 210
Inclusion of child's income on 
parent's return (Figure 
31-A) 210
Elective deferrals 77
 (See also Retirement plans)
Limits 51
Elective surgery:
Not deductible as medical 
expense 148
Electronic filing (See E-file)
Electronic payment options 2
Electronic reporting:
Returns (See E-file)
Tip statement from employees to 
employers 56
Eligible educational institution:
Education credits 226
Foreign schools 139
Student loan interest 
deduction 139
Eligible student:
Student loan interest 
deduction 138
Embezzlement:
Losses due to 172
Reporting embezzled funds 97
Emergency Homeowners' Loan 
Program 156
Emergency medical service 
personnel:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 92
Emotional distress damages 96
Employee benefits 48, 49
 (See also Fringe benefits)
Employee business 
expenses 177
Commuting expenses 185
Deductions for 178
Form 2106 for deducting 189
Impairment-related work 
expenses, deduction 
for 150, 194
Meals (See Meal and lodging 
expenses)
Reimbursements 40, 48, 190, 
191
Returning excess 192
Returning excess 40
Travel (See Travel and 
transportation expenses)
Work-related education 194, 198
Employee expenses 200
Home computer 200, 201
Miscellaneous 199
Employees 40, 48, 49
 (See also Fringe benefits)
Awards for service 48
Business 
expenses (See Employee 
business expenses)
Discounts for, effect on 
basis 102
Form W-4 to be filled out when 
starting new job 40
Fringe benefits 40
Jury duty pay 98
Overseas 
employment (See Foreign 
employment)
Employees of the intelligence 
community 115
Employers:
Educational assistance 
from (See Educational 
assistance)
E-file options 9
Form W-4, having new 
employees fill out 40
Overseas 
employment (See Foreign 
employment)
Withholding rules 40
Employment:
Agency fees 96, 200
Résumé expenses 200
Taxes:
FICA withholding 11
 (See also Withholding)
Tip income 7, 56
Employment taxes 38, 44, 45, 
213, 217, 219
 (See also Social security and 
Medicare taxes)
Endowment proceeds 91
Energy assistance 95
Energy conservation:
Measures and modifications 96
Subsidies 96
Exclusion as adjustment to 
basis 102
Utility rebates 98
Entertainers and musicians 201
Entertainment expenses 180, 182
50% limit 183
Figure 26-A summary of 
rules 184
Allocation of costs 183, 188
Business-related gifts vs. 184
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill 
out 192
Meal expenses included 183
Proof of expenses 187
Table 26-2 summary 188
Recordkeeping 
requirements 187
Reporting of 188
Table 26-3 showing forms to 
be used 192
Taking turns paying for meals or 
entertainment 183
Tickets:
Face-value as deductible 
amount 183
Gift vs. entertainment 
deduction 184
Entertainment facilities:
Expenses for use of 184
Equipment 185
 (See also Tools)
Rental for rental property 70
Equitable relief (See Innocent 
spouse relief)
Errors:
Corrected wage and tax 
statement 45
Depreciation, correcting amount 
on Form 1040X 73
Discovery after filing, need to 
amend return 17
Form 1099 showing incorrect 
amount 66
Refunds 17
Escrow:
Taxes placed in, when 
deductible 153
Estate beneficiaries 103
 (See also Inheritance)
Dividends received by 65
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Losses of estate 96
Receiving income from estate 96
Rollover restrictions 82
Estates 96
 (See also Estate beneficiaries)
Income 96
Investment interest 160
Tax:
Survivor's annuity 84
Estate tax:
Deduction 155
Estimated:
Credit for 45
Payment vouchers 44
Estimated tax 38
Amount to pay to avoid 
penalty 43
Avoiding 42
Change in estimated tax 43
Credit for 38, 44
Definition 38
Divorced taxpayers 46
Figuring amount of tax 43
First period, no income subject to 
estimated tax in 43
Fiscal year taxpayers 43
Married taxpayers 42
Name change 45
Not required 42
Overpayment applied to 13
Payments 15, 44
Figuring amount of each 
payment 43
Schedule 43
When to start 43
Who must make 42
Payment vouchers 44
Penalty for underpayment 38, 
43, 46, 210
Pension payments 78
Saturday, Sunday, holiday 
rule 43
Separate returns 46
Social security or railroad 
retirement benefits 86
State and local income taxes, 
deduction of 151
Unemployment 
compensation 91, 94
Estimates:
Travel expenses 187
Excess benefits tax (See Section 
72(m)(5))
Excess reimbursements:
Business expense 
reimbursements 192
Medical expenses 149
Excess reimbursement 
flowchart (Figure 
21-A) 149
Excess withholding credit 252
How to take 252
Joint returns 252
Exchanges 105, 106
 (See also Trade of property)
Like-kind exchanges 102, 106
Partially nontaxable 
exchange 103, 106
Taxable exchange, defined 102
Tax-free:
Definition of 102
Holding period, determination 
of 110
Exchange students:
Expenses paid for, deductible 
when under agreement with 
qualified organization 165
Excise taxes 129
 (See also Penalties)
Basis to include 100
Deductibility (Table 22-1) 154
IRAs for failure to take minimum 
distributions 129
Roth IRAs 133
Exclusions from gross income:
Accelerated death benefits 91
Annuities 78
Canceled debt 91
Capital gains from home 
sale (See Sale of home)
Commuting benefits for 
employees 51
De minimis benefits 49
Disability pensions of federal 
employees and military 53
Educational assistance from 
employer 49
Education Savings Bond 
Program 98
Elective deferrals, limit on 
exclusion 51
Employee awards 48
Energy conservation 
subsidies 96, 99
Foreign earned income 1
Frozen deposit interest 97
Group-term life insurance 50
Publication 17 (2017) Page 275

Page 278 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exclusions from gross income (Cont.)
Long-term care insurance 
contracts 54
Parking fees, 
employer-provided 50
Public safety officers who died or 
were killed in line of duty, 
death benefits 92
Sale of home 98
Scholarships 98
Strike benefits 98
Terrorist attack as cause of injury, 
disability payments 77
Executors and administrators 5
Related party transactions 107
Exempt-interest dividends 58
Alternative minimum tax 68
Dividend reporting 68
Information-reporting 
requirement 68
Exemption from foreign tax credit 
limit 249
Exemptions:
Dependents 26
From withholding 40
Personal (See Personal 
exemption)
Phaseout 22
Securities, 
tax-exempt (See Securities)
State or local government bonds, 
tax-exempt 109
Expatriates 117
Expenses paid by another 96
Extension of time to file 10
Automatic 10
Citizens outside U.S. 10
E-file options 10
Inclusion on return 10
Extortion:
Losses due to 172
Extravagant expenses 183
Eyeglasses:
As medical expense 148
Eye surgery:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
F
Failure to comply with tax 
laws (See Penalties)
Fair market value (FMV):
Casualty loss 173
Definition of 100
Sales of property 106
Stolen property 173
Fair rental price 72
Fair rental value 35
Family 6, 107, 223
 (See also Children)
 (See also Related party 
transactions)
 (See also Child tax credit)
Adoption credit (See Adoption)
Standard meal allowance not 
allowed if related to 
employer 190
Farmers:
Estimated tax 42
Withholding 38
Farming:
Activity not for profit 95
Canceled debt, treatment of 91
Patronage dividends 68
Federal crime investigations or 
prosecutions:
Travel expenses 179
Federal employees:
Accrued leave payment 48
Cost-of-living allowances 48
Disability pensions 53
Based on years of service 54
Exclusion, conditions for 53
Terrorist attack 54
FECA payments 54
Federal Employees' 
Compensation Act (FECA) 
payments 54
Federal government:
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Employees (See Federal 
employees)
Federal income tax:
Interest on, not deductible 161
Not deductible:
Deductibility 
(Table 22-1) 154
Federal judges:
Employer retirement plan 
coverage 124
Fee-basis officials:
Business expenses of 193
Work-related education 
expenses 199
Fees 97, 217
 (See also specific types of 
deductions and income)
Professional license 204
Fellowships (See Scholarships and 
fellowships)
Fertility enhancement procedures:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
FICA withholding 11, 38, 48
 (See also Withholding)
 (See also Social security and 
Medicare taxes)
Fiduciaries 5, 123, 124
 (See also Executors and 
administrators)
 (See also Trustees)
Fees for services 97
Prohibited transactions 130
Related party transactions 107
Figures (See Tables and figures)
Figuring taxes and credits 86, 
139, 206, 252
 (See also Worksheets)
Filing requirements 4–19, 22
 (See also Married filing separately)
Calendar year filers 9
Citizens outside U.S. 5
Dependents 5, 6
Electronic (See E-file)
Extensions 10
Gross income levels 
(Table 1-1) 4
Individual taxpayers 5
Joint filing 21
 (See also Joint returns)
Late filing 
penalties (See Penalties)
Most taxpayers (Table 1-1) 4
Other situations requiring filing 
(Table 1-3) 7
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
When to file 9
Where to file 15
Who must file 4, 6
Filing status 5, 20–25
Annulled marriages 20
Change to, after time of filing 17
Divorced taxpayers 20
Head of household 20, 22
Qualifying person to file 
as 23
Joint returns 21
Married filing a joint return 232
Married filing separately 22, 232
Surviving spouse 20
Unmarried persons 5, 20
 (See also Single taxpayers)
Final return for decedent:
Capital loss deduction on 119
Medical expenses 146
Standard deduction 141
Finance charges:
Credit cards, retail installment 
contracts, etc., not 
deductible 161
Financial institutions 109, 123
 (See also Banks)
Financially disabled persons 18
Fines 10, 18, 19
 (See also Penalties)
Deductibility 203
Firefighters:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 92
Volunteer firefighters:
Charitable contributions 
to 163
IRAs 124
Fires:
Arson, no casualty loss for 172
Casualty loss caused by 171, 
175
First-time homebuyer credit 113
First-year expensing (See Section 
179 deductions)
Fiscal year 11, 43, 45
Fishermen:
Estimated tax 42
Indian fishing rights 97
Fleet operations:
Standard mileage rate not 
allowed 187
Flexible spending account or 
arrangement 147, 148
Floods 175
 (See also Disaster relief)
Casualty loss caused by 171
FMV (See Fair market value)
Food benefits:
Nutrition program for the 
elderly 95
Food stamps 34
Foreclosure 113, 160
Foreign charitable organizations:
Canadian charities contributions 
to 163
Other foreign charities 
contributions to 163
Foreign children:
Adoption credit 249
Foreign employment 6, 52
Employment abroad 52
Pension plan contributions 78
Social security and Medicare 
taxes 52
U.S. citizen 52
Waiver of alien status 52
Foreign governments, employees 
of 52
Foreign income:
Dividends 65
Earned income exclusion 1
Reporting of 1
Foreign income taxes:
Deduction of 152
Form 1116 to claim 
credit 155
Schedule A or Form 1040 
reporting 155
Definition of 151
Foreign nationals (See Resident 
aliens)
Foreign organizations:
Charitable contributions to 164, 
166
Foreign schools 139
Foreign Service 115
Foreign students 26
Expenses paid for, deductible 
when under agreement with 
qualified organization 165
Foreign tax credit 249
How to take 249
Limit on 249
Forgiveness of 
debt (See Cancellation of debt)
Form 7, 85
1040:
1040, Schedule A:
Charitable contributions 15, 
163, 171
Employee business expense 
deduction 193
Federal employees buying 
back sick leave 54
Gifts, deduction of 189
Investment expenses 
deduction 161
Investment interest 
deduction 162
Itemized deduction limit 142
Loss of deposits due to bank's 
insolvency or bankruptcy 
cause 172
Medical and dental 
expenses 150
Outplacement services, 
deduction 48
Travel expenses, deduction 
of 191
Unearned commission, 
deduction for repayment 
of 48
1040, Schedule B:
Dividends 68
1040, Schedule C:
Barter income 90
Child care providers 47
Corporate director fees 97
Forgiveness of debts 90
Foster-care providers 97
Kickbacks 98
Notary fees 97
Oil, gas, or mineral interest 
royalties 94
Rental income and 
expenses 74, 93
Statutory employees 189
Work-related education 
expenses 198
1040, Schedule C-EZ:
Child care providers 47
Corporate director fees 97
Foster-care providers 97
Kickbacks 98
Notary fees 97
Oil, gas, or mineral interest 
royalties 94
Rental income and 
expenses 74, 93
Statutory employees 189
Work-related education 
expenses 198
1040, Schedule D:
Business property sales 106
Capital gains or losses 118
Child's capital gain 
distributions 161
Form 8949 118
Fractional shares, sale of 68
Nonbusiness bad debts, loss 
of deposits due to bank's 
insolvency or 
bankruptcy 172
Sale expenses 119
Undistributed long-term 
capital gains 119
Worthless securities 105
1040, Schedule E:
Income-producing property, 
deduction of interest on 
loan for 162
Rental income and 
expenses 74
Royalties 94
1040, Schedule F:
Self-employed persons 189
Work-related education 
expenses 198
1040, Schedule SE 6, 52
Address 15
Adoption expenses 249
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends 68
Alien taxpayer identification 
numbers 36
Alternative minimum tax, 
nonrefundable credit for 
prior year tax 250
Armed forces' retirement 
pay 52
Attachments to 13
Capital gains 68
Charitable contributions, 
deduction to be 
itemized 163
Child's capital gain 
distributions 161
Clergy pension 52
Deduction for alimony 
paid 137
Disability retirement pay 53
Dividends 68
Educator expenses 140
Excess withholding 
credit 252
FECA benefits 54
Foreign tax credit 249
Health Coverage Tax 
Credit 251
Insurance distributions 68
IRAs 130, 131
Mortgage interest credit 250
Personal exemption 25
Presidential Election 
Campaign Fund 12
Railroad retirement benefits, 
reporting on 86
Page 276 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 279 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (Cont.)
Recapture of alimony 137
Reporting of alimony 
received 137
Reporting taxes on tips not 
reported to employer 56
Reporting uncollected taxes 
on tips 57
Schedule A:, Mortgage 
interest deduction 250
Social security benefits, 
reporting on 86
Student loan interest 
deduction 139
Tip income reporting 56
Undistributed long-term 
capital gains 251
Use of 7, 21, 22
Wages and salary 
reporting 47
Workers' compensation 54
1040A:
Address 15
Adoption expenses 249
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends 68
Alien taxpayer identification 
numbers 36
Armed forces' retirement 
pay 52
Attachments to return 13
Capital gains 68
Clergy pension 52
Disability retirement pay 53
Dividends 68
Educator expenses 140
Excess withholding 
credit 252
FECA benefits 54
Insurance distributions 68
IRA distributions 130
Personal exemption 25
Presidential Election 
Campaign Fund 12
Railroad retirement benefits, 
reporting on 86
Reporting pay 47
Social security benefits, 
reporting on 86
Student loan interest 
deduction 139
Tip income reporting 56
Use of 7, 21, 22
Workers' compensation 54
1040EZ:
Address 15
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends 68
FECA benefits 54
No attachments 13
Personal exemption 25
Presidential Election 
Campaign Fund 12
Reporting pay 47
Tip income reporting 56
Use of 6, 21
Workers' compensation 54
1040NR:
Nonresident alien return 10
1040NR-EZ:
Nonresident alien easy 
return 10
1040X:
Amended individual 
return 17
Annulled marriages 20
Bad debts, claim for 
refund 111
Change of filing status 22
Completing 17
Depreciation| Correcting 
amount of 73
Filing 17
Itemized deduction, change to 
standard deduction 143
Standard deduction, change 
to itemized 
deductions 143
Worthless securities, claim for 
refund 105
1065:
Partnership income 92
1096 119
1098:
More than one borrower (not 
spouse), reporting of 
mortgage interest 
deduction by attaching 
of 161
Mortgage interest overpaid in 
earlier year 158
Mortgage interest 
statement 74, 92, 160
Points reported on 160
Prepaid interest reported 
on 160
Refund of interest reported 
on 160
1098-C:
Contributions of Motor 
Vehicles, Boats, and 
Airplanes 167
1098-E 139
1099:
Taxable income report 11, 47
1099-B:
Barter income 90
Broker to report sales of 
stocks, bonds, or 
commodities 105, 118
1099-C:
Cancellation of debt 90
1099-CAP:
Change in control or capital 
structure 119
1099-DIV:
Dividend income 
statement 51, 65, 68
Return of capital 67
1099-G:
State tax refunds 92
1099-INT 58, 64
1099-MISC:
Brokers receiving 
dividends 66
Nonemployee 
compensation 97
1099-OID 63
1099-R:
Early distributions of pension 
funds 83
IRA distributions 130, 131
Life insurance policy 
surrendered for cash 91
Retirement plan 
distributions 13
1099-S:
Real estate transactions 
proceeds 112, 119
1116:
Foreign tax credit 249
1120S:
S corporation income 92
2106:
Business-related 
expenses 189, 192
Performing artists 194
Travel expenses 191
Work-related education 
expenses 198
2106-EZ:
Business-related 
expenses 192
Performing artists 194
Work-related education 
expenses 198
2119:
Postponement of gain from 
sale of home 114
2439:
Notice to shareholder on 
undistributed long-term 
capital gains 67, 251
2441 219
2555 224, 232
2555-EZ 232
2848:
Power of attorney and 
declaration of 
representative 13, 21
3115 60
3800:
General business credit 18
4029 232
4070:
Reporting tips to 
employer 56
4070A:
Daily record of tips 55
4137:
Social security and Medicare 
taxes on tips not reported 
to employer 56
4361 232
4506 16
4506-T:
Tax return transcript 
request 16
4562:
Depreciation of rental 
property 73
4684:
Bank deposit, loss due to 
bank's insolvency or 
bankruptcy 172
Casualty or theft loss 171, 
177
4797:
Sales of business 
property 106, 117
Small business stock 
losses 110
4868 10, 36
Automatic extension of time to 
file 10, 36
Filing electronic form 10
Filing paper form 10
4952:
Investment interest expense 
deduction 161
Net capital gain, election to 
include as investment 
income 161
4972:
Lump-sum distributions 81
5329:
Early distributions of sheltered 
funds 83
Required minimum 
distributions, failure to 
take 84, 131
56:
Notice Concerning Fiduciary 
Relationship 13
5695:
Residential energy credit 251
6251 208
Alternative minimum tax 213
6252:
Installment sale income 117
8275:
Disclosure statement 19
8275-R:
Regulation disclosure 
statement 19
8283:
Charitable noncash 
contribution of more than 
$500 value 171
8379:
Injured spouse claim 14
8396:
Mortgage interest credit 156, 
250
843:
Claim for refund and request 
for abatement 252
8582:
Passive activity gains or 
losses 74, 118
8606:
IRA contributions, 
Nondeductible 122, 126, 
129
IRA contributions, 
Recharacterization 
of 128
8615 57
Certain children with 
unearned income 211, 
212
8801:
Alternative minimum tax 250
8814 57
Parents' election to report 
child's interest and 
dividends 65, 161
Reduced deductions or 
credits 210
8815 61
8818 62
8822:
Change of address 17
8824:
Like-kind exchanges 106
8828:
Recapture of federal 
mortgage subsidy 118
8839:
Qualified adoption 
expenses 49, 249
8853:
Accelerated death 
benefits 92
Archer MSAs and long-term 
care insurance 
contracts 49
8857:
Innocent spouse relief 21
8862 230
8879:
Authorization for E-file 
provider to use 
self-selected PIN 9
8880:
Credit for Qualified 
Retirement Savings 
Contributions 251
8885:
Health Coverage Tax 
Credit 251
8910:
Alternative motor vehicle 
credit 249
8911:
Alternative fuel vehicle 
refueling property 
credit 249
8912:
Credit to Holders of Tax 
Credit Bonds 249
8936:
Plug-in electric drive motor 
vehicle credit 251
Qualified two-wheeled plug-in 
electric vehicle 251
8949:
Sales and other dispositions 
of capital assets 118
9465:
Installment agreement 
request 15
982:
Reduction of tax attributes 
due to discharge of 
indebtedness (and section 
1082 basis 
adjustment) 114
Form 8919:
Uncollected social security 
and Medicare tax on 
wages 47
Requiring Form 1040 to be used 
when filing 7
RRB-1042S:
Railroad retirement benefits 
for nonresident aliens 85
RRB-1099:
Railroad retirement 
benefits 85
Schedule 8812:
Child tax credit 224
SS-5:
Social security number 
request 12, 36
SSA-1042S:
Social security benefits for 
nonresident aliens 85
SSA-1099:
Social security benefits 85
W-10 217
W-2:
Box 12 with code L 178, 
191, 193
Election precinct officials' 
fees 97
Employer-reported income 
statement 11, 13, 47, 48, 
51
Employer retirement plan 
participation 
indicated 124
Fringe benefits 49
Reimbursements reported as 
part of income 178, 189, 
190, 192
Publication 17 (2017) Page 277

Page 280 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (Cont.)
Statutory employees 189
Uncollected taxes 56
W-2G:
Gambling winnings 
withholding statement 97
W-4P:
Rollover distributions, election 
not to have tax 
withheld 78
W-4V:
Voluntary withholding 
request 94
W-7:
Individual taxpayer 
identification number 
request 36
W-7A:
Adoption taxpayer 
identification number 
request 12, 37
W-9:
TIN of home seller and 
purchaser 161
Form: 1098: Mortgage insurance 
premiums on 160
Form(s) 1099 45
Form 1040, Schedule A 155
Form 1040, Schedule D:
Form 8949 118
Reporting capital gains and 
losses 118
Form 1040:
Estimated tax payments 45
Foreign income taxes, deduction 
of 155
Gambling winnings 41
Overpayment offset against next 
year's tax 44
Schedule A:
State and local income taxes, 
deduction of 155
State benefit funds, 
mandatory contributions 
to 151
Taxes, deduction of 155
Schedule C:
Real estate or personal 
property taxes on property 
used in business, 
deduction of 155
Schedule D:
Capital gains or losses 118
Form 8949 118
Schedule E:
Real estate or personal 
property taxes on rental 
property, deduction 
of 155
Schedule F:
Real estate or personal 
property taxes on property 
used in business, 
deduction of 155
Self-employment tax, deduction 
of 155
Form 1040A:
Estimated tax payments 45
Overpayment offset against next 
year's tax 44
Form 1040-ES:
Estimated tax 43, 44
Form 1095-A 246
Form 1098:
Mortgage interest 156
Form 1099-MISC:
Withheld state and local 
taxes 151
Form 1099-R:
Withheld state and local taxes 
shown on 151
Form 1099-S:
Real estate transactions 
proceeds 153
Form 1116:
Foreign tax credit 155
Form 8332:
Release of exemption to 
noncustodial parent 29
Form W-2:
Employer-reported income 
statement 45
Filing with return 45
Separate form from each 
employer 45
Withheld state and local 
taxes 151
Form W-2c:
Corrected wage and tax 
statement 45
Form W-2G:
Gambling winnings withholding 
statement 41, 45
Withheld state and local taxes 
shown on 151
Form W-4:
Employee withholding allowance 
certificate 38, 40, 42
Form W-4S:
Sick pay withholding request 41
Form W-4V 41
Unemployment compensation, 
voluntary withholding 
request 41
Foster care:
Adoption as motive for, no 
charitable deduction 166
Care providers' payments 97
Charitable deduction for nonprofit 
care 165
Child tax credit 223
Difficulty-of-care payments 97
Emergency foster care, 
maintaining space in home 
for 97
Expenses unreimbursed and not 
deductible as charitable 
contributions 165
Foster care payments and 
expenses 29, 34
Foster child 27, 29, 33, 34, 237, 
238
Earned income credit 233
Foster Grandparent Program 53
Found property 97
Fractional shares:
Payment for 68
Fraternal societies:
Charitable contributions to 163
Dues, no charitable 
deduction 164, 167
Fraud:
Losses due to 172
Penalties 19, 40
Reporting anonymously to IRS 2
Freight:
Basis to include 100
Fringe benefits:
Accident and health 
insurance 49
Accounting period 48
Adoption, employer 
assistance 49
Archer MSA contributions 49
De minimis benefits 49
Education assistance 49
Form W-2 49
Group-term life insurance 
premiums 49
Holiday gifts 49
Retirement planning services 50
Taxable income 48
Transportation 50
Withholding 40
Frozen deposits:
Interest on 97
IRA rollover period 
extension 127
Full-time student:
Child and dependent care 
credit 216
Fund-raising events:
Charitable contributions, amount 
deductible 164
Rental of dwelling unit used as a 
home 72
Funeral expenses 35
Funerals:
Clergy, payment for 52
Expenses:
Contributions to cover, not 
deductible as charitable 
donations 166
Not deductible 148
Future interests:
Definition of 168
Tangible personal property, 
charitable deduction for 168
G
Gains and losses 7, 22, 118
 (See also Capital gains)
 (See also Losses)
 (See also Capital gains or losses)
Casualty 171
 (See also Casualty losses)
Claim for refund for loss 18
Collectibles 120
Financial institution's bankruptcy 
causing deductible loss 172
Reporting of 176
Gambling (See Gambling 
winnings and losses)
Hobby losses 97
Ordinary gain and loss 108
Bank deposit, loss due to 
bank's insolvency or 
bankruptcy 172
Ordinary loss 108
Passive activity 22, 74, 118
 (See also Passive activity)
Related party sale or trade of 
depreciable property 107
Short-term 108, 119
Priority in deducting 119
Sale or trade of property held 
1 year or less 110
Theft 171, 172
 (See also Theft losses)
Total net gain 119
Gambling winnings and 
losses 97, 202
Withholding 41, 45
Garbage pickup:
Deductibility (Table 22-1) 154
Garnishment and attachment 11
Gas royalties 94
Gems:
As capital assets 108
IRA prohibited transactions 
in 130
General business credit 206
General Rule (See Annuities)
GI Bill benefits 35
Gifts:
$25 limit on business-related 
expenses 184
$4 or less for business-related 
expenses 184
Adjusted basis for 103
Business-related expenses 184, 
185
Children, income from property 
given to 211
Disaster victims receiving cash 
gifts 174
Holding period, determination 
of 110
Holiday gifts 49
Incidental costs of 
business-related 
expenses 184
Not taxed 97
Proof of expenses (Table 26-2 
summary) 188
Recordkeeping 
requirements 187
Reporting of expenses 189
Table 26-3 showing forms to 
be used 192
Schedule A (Form 1040) for 
deduction 189
To reduce the public debt 15
Gift taxes:
Not deductible 155
Girl Scouts:
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Glasses:
As medical expense 148
Gold and silver:
As capital assets 108
Capital gains or losses from sale 
or trade of 120
IRA investments in 130
Golden parachute payments:
Tax on 207
Golf clubs (See Country clubs)
Goodwill Industries (See Charitable 
contributions)
Government employees:
Federal (See Federal employees)
State (See State or local 
governments)
Graduate school 139
 (See also Educational assistance)
Grants (See Scholarships and 
fellowships)
Grants, disaster relief 95
Gratuities (See Tip income)
Gross income:
Adjustments other than on Form 
1040A, Form 1040 to be 
used 7
Age, higher filing threshold after 
65 5
Defined:
Filing requirements 
(Table 1-1) 4
Dependent filing requirements 
(Table 1-2) 5
Rental income 69
Gross income test 33
Group-term life insurance:
Accidental death benefits 49
Definition 49
Exclusion from income:
Limitation on 49
Permanent benefits 49
Taxable cost, calculation of 50
Uncollected social security/
Medicare taxes:
Reporting of (Table 1-3) 7
Uncollected tax 207
Guam:
Income from 6
Guide dogs:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
H
H.R. 10 plans 78
HAMP:
Home affordable modification:
Pay-for-performance 95
Handicapped 
persons (See Disabilities, 
persons with)
Hardest Hit Fund Program 156
Hawaii:
Standard meal allowance 181
Head of household 20, 22
Health:
Flexible spending 
arrangement 49
Health insurance 49
 (See also Accident insurance)
Reimbursement arrangement 49
Savings account 49
Health coverage tax credit 6
Health insurance:
Auto insurance policy covering, 
not deductible as medical 
expense 148
Premiums:
Deductible as medical 
expense 148
Self-employed persons, 
deductible expenses 150
Reimbursement 149
Health insurance premiums 35
Health savings account 148
Health Spa 203
Hearing aids:
As medical expense 148
Hedging transactions 108
Help (See Tax help)
Higher education (See Colleges 
and universities)
High income taxpayers:
Estimated tax 42
High-low rate method to compute 
per diem 191
Hobbies 201
Activity not for profit 95
Losses 97
Holding period, repossessed 110
Holding period:
Determination of 110
Holiday, deadline falling on 43
Holiday gifts 49
Page 278 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 281 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Home 71, 72, 155, 156, 158, 171
 (See also Vacation homes)
 (See also Mortgages)
 (See also Refinancing)
 (See also Casualty losses)
Abandonment of 113
Acquisition debt 156
Aged, home for 34
As capital asset 108
Basis (See Sale of home)
Business use of 200
Closing costs 113
Cost of keeping up 23
Worksheet 23
Damage to 171
 (See also Casualty losses)
Foreclosure 113
Improvements:
For medical care, 
deductibility 148
Loans for 158
Jointly owned:
Mortgage payments as 
alimony 135
Separate residences in and 
alimony payments 136
Taxes and insurance 
premiums as alimony 135
Main home, defined 112
Office 200
Points 101
Possession before final 
settlement, rent not deductible 
as interest 156
Repossession 113
Security system 203
Settlement fees 113
Tax home, determination for 
travel-related business 
expenses 178
Tenants in common, taxes and 
insurance premiums as 
alimony 135
Home equity loans:
Car purchased by 187
Interest deduction 155, 156
Proceeds invested in tax-exempt 
securities, interest not 
deductible 156
Home improvement loans 158
Home office:
Capital gains exclusion 115
Travel to another work 
location 185
Homeowners' associations:
Charges:
Deductibility 
(Table 22-1) 154
Charitable contributions to 164, 
166
Homeworkers:
Deduction of expenses 189
Hope credit:
Married filing separately 22
Hospitals:
Charitable contributions to 
nonprofits 163, 164
Meals and lodging provided for 
patients, deductibility 148
Payments for services for specific 
patient, not deductible as 
charitable contributions 166
Services fees, deductibility of 
medical expense 148
Host or hostess 91
Hotels:
Club dues:
Not entertainment 
expenses 184
Not considered dwelling units 71
Household employees 219
Household furnishings:
Antiques (See Collectibles)
As capital assets 108
Household items, charitable 
deduction for 167
Household members 20
 (See also Head of household)
Alimony payments, spouses 
cannot be members of same 
household 136
Household services 216, 217
Household workers (See Domestic 
help)
Household workers, no exemption 
for 26
Housing 23, 71, 72
 (See also Home)
 (See also Vacation homes)
Alimony payments made to 
cover 135
Clergy 52
Cooperative (See Cooperative 
housing)
Rental property (See Rental 
income and expenses)
Hurricanes 175
 (See also Disaster relief)
Casualty loss due to 171
I
Icons, use of 2
Identification number, qualifying 
person 214
Identity theft 1, 20, 269
Illegal activities:
Reporting of 97
Impairment (See Disabilities, 
persons with)
Impairment-related work 
expenses 199
Improvements:
Real estate, adjustments to basis 
for 101
Rental property (See Rental 
income and expenses)
Incidental expenses:
Business-related gifts 184
Travel-related 181
Income 47, 89, 96
 (See also Wages and salaries)
 (See also Alimony)
Bartering 90
Canceled debts 90
Constructive receipt of 11, 64
Excess reimbursement of medical 
expenses 149
Gross 33
Illegal activities 98
Interest 57
Jury duty pay 98
Life insurance proceeds 91
Nonemployee compensation 97
Paid to agent 11
Paid to third party 11
Partnership 92
Prepaid 12
Recovery 92
Rental (See Rental income and 
expenses)
Royalties 94
S corporation 92
Taxable income in excess of 
$100,000 7
Taxable income less than 
$100,000 6, 7
Tax exempt 34
Tips (See Tip income)
Underreported 17
Unearned income 211
Income aid payment 200
Income from nonqualified 
deferred compensation plans:
Additional tax on 207
Income-producing expenses 201
Income-producing property:
Deduction of interest on loan 
for 162
Income taxes:
Federal (See Federal income tax)
Foreign (See Foreign income 
taxes)
State or local (See State or local 
income taxes)
Indefinite absence from job:
Work-related education 
during 195
Independent contractors:
Homeworkers, deduction of 
expenses 189
Indians:
Fishing rights 97
Taxes collected by tribal 
governments, deduction 
of 151
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs) 7, 82, 
122, 127, 131
 (See also Rollovers)
 (See also Roth IRAs)
Administrative fees 123, 124, 
202
Age 59 1/2 for distribution 131
Exception to rule 131
Age 70 1/2:
Contributions cut off at 123
Distributions required 
at 129, 131
Compensation, defined 123
Contribution limits 123
Age 50 or older, 123
Under age 50, 123
Contributions 6, 22
Designating year for which 
contribution is made 123
Excess 130
Filing before contribution is 
made 123
Nondeductible 126
Not required annually 123
Roth IRA contribution for 
same year 133
Time of 123
Withdrawal before filing due 
date 129
Cost basis 126, 129
Deduction for 7, 124
Participant covered by 
employer retirement plan 
(Table 17-1) 125
Participant not covered by 
employer retirement plan 
(Table 17-2) 125
Phaseout 125
Definition of 122
Distributions:
At age 59 1/2 131
Required minimum 
distributions (See this 
heading: Required 
distributions)
Divorced taxpayers 128
Early distributions (See Early 
withdrawal from deferred 
interest account)
Employer retirement plan 
participants 124
Establishing account 122
Time of 123
Where to open account 123
Excess contributions 130
Figuring modified AGI 
(Worksheet 17-1) 126
Forms to use:
Form 1099-R for reporting 
distributions 130
Form 8606 for nondeductible 
contributions 122
Inherited IRAs 97, 126, 127
Required distributions 129
Interest on, treatment of 122
Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal 
IRAs 123–125
Married couples (See this 
heading: Kay Bailey 
Hutchison Spousal IRAs)
Modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI):
Computation of 125
Effect on deduction if covered 
by employer retirement 
plan (Table 17-1) 125
Effect on deduction if not 
covered by employer 
retirement plan 
(Table 17-2) 125
Worksheet 17-1 126
Nondeductible contributions 126
Early withdrawal 131
Tax on earnings on 126
Ordinary income, distributions 
as 129
Penalties:
Early distributions (See Early 
withdrawal from deferred 
interest account)
Excess contributions 130
Form 8606 not filed for 
nondeductible 
contributions 122, 126
Overstatement of 
nondeductible 
contributions 126
Prohibited transactions 130
Required distributions, failure 
to take 129, 131
Prohibited transactions 130
Recharacterization of 
contribution 128
Reporting of:
Distributions 130
Recharacterization of 
contributions 128
Required distributions 127, 129
Excess accumulations 131
Retirement savings contribution 
credit 22, 251
Self-employed persons 123
Taxability:
Distributions 129
Time of taxation 122
Transfers permitted 127
To Roth IRAs 127, 128
Trustee administrative fees 202
Trustee-to-trustee transfers 127
IRA to Roth IRA 134
Types of 123
Withdrawals:
Early (See Early withdrawal 
from deferred interest 
account)
Required (See this heading: 
Required distributions)
Withholding 13, 41, 130
Individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN) 12, 36, 223
Individual taxpayers (See Single 
taxpayers)
Information returns 11, 13, 47, 48, 
51
 (See also Form W-2)
 (See also Form 1099)
Partnerships to provide 92
Inheritance 96, 103
 (See also Estate beneficiaries)
Adjusted basis for 103
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Not taxed 97
Inheritance tax:
Deductibility of 155
Deduction 155
Injured spouse 14
Claim for refund 14
Inmate 214
Innocent spouse relief:
Form 8857 21
Joint returns 21
Insider stock compensation from 
expatriated corporation:
Tax on 207
Insolvency:
Canceled debt not deemed to be 
income 91
Financial institution's insolvency 
causing deductible loss 109
Reporting of 176
Installment agreements 15
Installment sales 105
Capital gains and 118
Home sale 117
Insulin:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Insurance:
Accident (See Accident 
insurance)
Alimony deduction for, when 
home owned as tenants in 
common 135
Casualty or theft loss, 
reimbursement to adjust 
loss 174
Distributions from, reporting 
of 68
Dividends:
Interest on 68
Life 41, 49
 (See also Life insurance)
 (See also Group-term life 
insurance)
Publication 17 (2017) Page 279

Page 282 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Insurance (Cont.)
Living expenses paid by, possible 
income from 174
Reimbursements:
From casualty insurance 96
State insurer delinquency 
proceedings preventing 
minimum pension 
distributions 84
Trade of policies and 
annuities 107
Insurance agents:
Deduction of expenses 189
Insurance companies:
State delinquency proceedings, 
IRA distributions not made 
due to 131
Insurance premiums:
Alimony when spouse owns life 
insurance policy 135
Casualty insurance 101
Health insurance:
Deductible as medical 
expense 148
Self-employed persons, 
deductible 150
Liability 200
Life 35, 203
Life insurance:
Alimony 135
Medical 35
Paid in advance 59
Public safety officers 77
Rental expenses, deduction of 
premiums paid in 
advance 70
Insurance proceeds:
Dividends, interest on 59
Installment payments 62
Life 62
Interest:
Fees to collect 201
Frozen deposits 59
Usurious 59
Interest income 57
Children:
Gifts to children 211
Dividends as 65
Form 1099-INT 11
Frozen deposits, from 97
Property purchase financed 
without adequate stated 
interest, treatment of 106
Recovery of income, on 92
Reporting on Forms 1040, 1040A, 
or 1040EZ:
Form 1040EZ filing 
threshold 6
Savings bonds 98
Securities, Form 1040 to be 
used 7
Tax refunds, from 17
Interest payments 74, 92, 155–162
 (See also Mortgages)
Allocation of interest according to 
use of loan 161
Canceled debt including 90
Car loans 187
Deductions:
Forms to use 
(Table 23-1) 162
Not allowed 161
Reporting of 161
Investment interest 160
Limit on deduction 160
Personal interest not 
deductible 161
Reporting of deductions 161
Student loan interest 
deduction 138
Student loans deduction 6, 7, 
22, 161
Unstated interest 100, 106
Interference with business 
operations:
Damages as income 96
Internal Revenue Service (IRS):
Fraud or misconduct of 
employee, reporting 
anonymously 2
Mission of 2
International 
employment (See Foreign 
employment)
International organizations, 
employees of 52
Internet:
Electronic filing over (See E-file)
Inventory, retail 108
Investment income:
Children 65
Investment property:
Rental property (See Rental 
income and expenses)
Investments:
Classes as travel expenses 182
Expenses 161
Fees 202
Property:
As capital asset 108
Definition 160
Like-kind exchanges 106
Seminars 203
Involuntary conversion 171
 (See also Condemnation of property)
Basis for depreciation 102
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Itemized deductions:
Changing from standard to 
itemized deduction (or vice 
versa) 143
Choosing to itemize 142
Form 1040 to be used 7, 92
Limit on 204
Married filing separately 22, 143
One spouse has 
itemized 141
Recovery 92
Standard deduction to be 
compared with 142
State tax, for 143
ITIN (See Individual taxpayer 
identification number (ITIN))
Itinerant workers:
Deduction of expenses 189
Tax home, determination of 178
ITINs (See Individual taxpayer 
identification number (ITIN))
J
Jewelry:
As capital assets 108
Job 177
 (See also headings starting with 
"Employee" or "Employer")
Search:
Expenses 200
Job search:
Deduction of expenses for 
Interviews 98
Joint accounts 58
Dividends, reporting of 65
Joint return of parents:
Unearned income of certain 
children 209
Joint returns:
Accounting period 21
After separate return 22
Carryover of capital loss 120
Deceased spouse 21
Dependents on 33
Divorced taxpayers 21
Estimated tax 42
Excess social security/railroad 
retirement tax withholding 
credit 252
Extension for citizens outside 
U.S. 10
Filing status 21
Form 1040EZ, use of 6
Fraud penalty 19
Guardian of spouse, signing 
as 21
Injured spouse 14
Innocent spouse 21
Nonresident or dual-status alien 
spouse 21
Pensions or annuities 78
Worksheet 80
Personal exemption 25
Responsibility for 21
Separate return after joint 22
Signing 13, 21
Social security and railroad 
retirement benefits 89
State and local income taxes, 
deduction of 151
Joint return test 26, 31
Judges, federal:
Employer retirement plan 
coverage 124
Jury duty pay 98
K
Keogh plans 77, 78
 (See also Retirement plans)
Kickbacks 98
Kiddie tax (See Children, 
subheading: Unearned income 
of)
Kidnapped children 234
Losses due to ransom 172
Qualifying child 28
Qualifying relative 32
L
Labor unions 41
Contributions to, no charitable 
deduction for 164
Dues and fees 98, 166
Sick pay withholding under union 
agreements 41
Strike and lockout benefits 98
Trips from union hall to place of 
work 185
Unemployment compensation 
payments from 94
Land 100
 (See also Real estate)
Depreciation not allowed for 73
Landlords (See Rental income and 
expenses)
Landscaping:
Cost of, when casualty or theft 
loss involved 172, 173
Larceny:
Losses due to 172
Late filing 2
Penalties 10, 18, 19
Late payment:
Penalties on tax payments 19
Public utility charges, not 
deductible 161
Laundry:
Business-related travel 
expense 180, 181
Lavish or extravagant 
expenses 183
Law enforcement officers:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 92
Lead-based paint removal:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Leased property:
Casualty or theft loss 173
Leased vehicles:
Car expenses 187
Leases (See Rental income and 
expenses)
Legal expenses 202, 204
Liability insurance:
Reimbursements from 96
License fees:
Deductibility of 155
Nondeductibility of 203
Life-care fees:
Paid to retirement home and 
designated for medical care, 
deductibility 148
Life insurance 7, 49, 91
 (See also Group-term life insurance)
 (See also Accelerated death 
benefits)
Alimony, premiums when spouse 
owns policy 135
Demutualization of 
companies 107
Form 1099-R for surrender of 
policy for cash 91
Premiums:
Not deductible 148
Proceeds 62
As income 91
Public safety officers who died or 
were killed in line of duty, tax 
exclusion 92
Surrender of policy for cash 91
Withholding 41
Life insurance premiums 35
Lifetime learning credit:
Married filing separately 22
Like-kind exchanges 106
Basis for depreciation 103
Qualifications 102
Sale of home 117
Limit on itemized deductions 204
Limits:
Miscellaneous deductions 199
Rental losses 73
Line of credit for home:
Interest 155
Liquidating distributions 67
Living expenses:
Insurance paying, possible 
income from 174
Loans 6, 18, 138, 161
 (See also Student loans)
 (See also Debts)
Fees for, not deductible 161
Home improvement loans 158
Home 
mortgages (See Mortgages)
Origination fees (See Points)
Retirement plans, from 78
Lobbying:
Contributions for, not charitable 
deductions 164, 166
Lobbying expenses 203
Local assessments:
Adjusted basis for 101
Deductibility of 153
Rental property, deductions 
for 70
Local government employees:
Section 457 plans for 
employees (See Section 457 
deferred compensation plans)
Local income taxes, itemized 
deductions 143
Local law violated 33
Lockout benefits 98
Lodges (See Social clubs)
Lodging 35
Long-term care insurance 
contracts 54
Chronically ill individual 54, 91
Deductibility of medical 
expense 148
Exclusion, limit of 54
Qualified services defined 54
Long-term debt instruments 109
Long-term gains and 
losses (See Capital gains or 
losses)
Losses 18, 22, 74
 (See also Gains and losses)
 (See also Passive activity)
Capital 22
Casualty 171, 201, 202
 (See also Casualty losses)
Gambling (See Gambling 
winnings and losses)
Records of 173
Theft 171, 172, 201, 202
 (See also Theft losses)
Lost property 204
When deemed casualty loss 172
Lotteries and raffles 97
 (See also Gambling winnings and 
losses)
No charitable deduction for 
tickets 164, 167
Lump-sum distributions 81
10-year tax option 81
Capital gain treatment 81
Cost calculation 81
Election of 81
Form 4972 81
Net unrealized appreciation 
(NUA) 81
Rollovers of 81
Taxable and tax-free parts 81
Luxury travel:
Travel expenses when incidental 
business activities 182
Work-related education, 
deduction of expenses 198
Page 280 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 283 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
M
M&IE (Meals and incidental 
expenses) 180, 181, 187, 191
 (See also Meal and lodging 
expenses)
 (See also Incidental expenses)
Machinery 185
 (See also Tools)
Rental for rental property 70
MAGI (See Modified adjusted gross 
income (MAGI))
Mailing returns (See Tax returns)
Maintenance of rental 
property (See Rental income 
and expenses)
Mandatory retirement age 221
Market discount bonds 109
Married child 234
Married dependents, filing joint 
return 26, 31
Married filing a joint return 232
Married filing separately 22, 232
Carryover of capital loss 120
Community property states 22
Credits, treatment of 22
Deductions:
Changing method from or to 
itemized deductions 143
Treatment of 22
Earned income credit 22
How to file 22
Itemized deductions 22, 143
One spouse has itemized so 
other must as well 141
Joint state and local income taxes 
filed, but separate federal 
returns 151
Medical and dental 
expenses 145
Rollovers 22
Social security and railroad 
retirement benefits 86
State and local income 
taxes 151
Student loan interest deduction 
and 139
Tenants by the entirety, allocation 
of real estate taxes 153
Married taxpayers 6, 21–23, 65, 78
 (See also Joint returns)
 (See also Married filing separately)
 (See also Tenants by the entirety)
 (See also Spouse)
Age 65 or older spouse:
Standard deduction 142
Blind spouse:
Standard deduction 142
Child and dependent care 
credit 217
Deceased spouse 4, 5, 20, 21
 (See also Surviving spouse)
Definition of spouse for purposes 
of alimony 135
Dual-status alien spouse 21
Educator expenses 140
Estimated tax 42, 43
Filing status 4, 5, 20
Form 1040EZ, use of 6
IRAs 123, 124
Spouse covered by employer 
plan 124, 125
Living apart 21
Medical and dental 
expenses 145
Deceased spouse's 
expenses 147
Nonresident alien spouse 12, 21
Performing artists 194
Roth IRAs 132
Signatures when spouse unable 
to sign 13
Social security or railroad 
retirement benefits, 
taxability 85
Transfer of home to spouse 113
Transfers between 
spouses 103, 107
Travel expenses for spouse 180
Mass transit passes, 
employer-provided 51
Maternity clothes:
Not deductible as medical 
expense 148
MCC (Mortgage credit 
certificate) 250
Meal and lodging expenses 180
50% deduction for 
business-related meals 180, 
181, 183
Figure 26-A summary of 
rules 184
Work-related education 198
Business-related entertainment 
including 180, 183
Business-related travel expense 
including 180
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill 
out 192, 193
Lodging 180, 181
Proof of expenses 187
Table 26-2 summary 188
Recordkeeping 
requirements 180, 187
Reporting of 188
Table 26-3 showing forms to 
be used 192
Restaurant receipts 188
Standard meal allowance 180, 
181, 191
Amount of 181
Areas outside continental 
U.S. 181
Prorating on partial days of 
travel 191
Taking turns paying for meals or 
entertainment 183
Transportation workers 181
Deduction limits 183
Medicaid waiver payments 239
Medical and dental 
expenses 145–150
Adjusted gross income and limit 
of deduction 145
Adopted child 146
Alimony payments made to 
cover 135
Contributions to cover, not 
deductible as charitable 
donations 166
Damages including 149
Decedent's expenses 146
Deduction 145
Checklist for deductible 
expenses 
(Table 21-1) 147
Dependent's expenses 146
Determination of date paid 145
Doctor 145
Form 1040, Schedule A, for 
reporting 150
Future expenses, settlement 
including 149
Health insurance 
premiums (See Health 
insurance)
Included expenses:
Individuals covered 145
Meals and lodging related to 
receiving medical care 147, 
181
Medical care, defined 145
Physician 145
Purpose of expenses 145
Reimbursements, treatment 
of 55, 148
Work-related 218
Medical devices:
Deductibility of 148
Medical insurance (See Accident 
insurance)
Medical insurance premiums 35
Medical research organizations:
Charitable contributions to 163
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs) 49, 98
 (See also Archer MSAs)
Medical Savings Accounts 
(MSAs):
Additional tax on 207
Medicare Advantage MSA 98
Medical expenses paid for 
decedent from 146
Medicare 7, 48, 52
 (See also Social security and 
Medicare taxes)
Benefits 95
Medicare A, when deductible as 
medical expense 147
Medicare Advantage 
MSA (See Medical savings 
accounts (MSAs))
Medicare B, when deductible as 
medical expense 147
Medicare D, when deductible as 
medical expense 147
Medicare tax 207
Medicare taxes, not support 35
Medications:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Member of household or 
relationship test 33
Membership fees (See specific type 
of organization)
Members of the uniformed 
services or Foreign 
Service 115
Mentally incompetent persons 7, 
53, 77
 (See also Disabilities, persons with)
 (See also Elderly or disabled, credit 
for)
Signing of return by 
court-appointed 
representative 13
Metals, precious (See Gold and 
silver)
Mexico:
Resident of 26, 33
Mileage deduction for 
work-related education 194
Mileage rates (See Standard 
medical mileage rates)
Military (See Armed forces)
Military personnel:
Earned income credit 234
Mineral royalties 94
Minimum essential coverage 246
Ministers (See Clergy)
Miscellaneous deductions 199
Federal employees buying back 
sick leave 54
Outplacement agency fees 48
Missing children:
Photographs of, included in IRS 
publications 2
Mistakes (See Errors)
Modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) 137
 (See also Deductions)
Child tax credit limits 224
IRAs, computation for:
Effect on deduction if covered 
by employer retirement 
plan (Table 17-1) 125, 
126
Effect on deduction if not 
covered by employer 
retirement plan 
(Table 17-2) 125
Worksheet 17-1 126
Roth IRAs, computation for:
Phaseout (Table 17-3) 131
Worksheet 17-2 131
Money market certificates 58
Money market funds 67
Mortgage:
Relief 90
Mortgage credit certificate 
(MCC) 250
Mortgage insurance premiums:
Basis in property not to 
include 101
Mortgage interest:
Home mortgage interest 156
Mortgage interest credit 250
Carryforward 250
Form 8396 156
How to take 250
Recapture 250
Reduced deduction 250
Mortgages 158, 161
 (See also Points)
Alimony, payments as 135
Assistance payments 95
Assistance payments (under sec. 
235 of National Housing 
Act) 156
Assumption of 100
Fees not included in 
basis 101
Credit certificate (MCC) from 
state or local 
government 156
Discounted mortgage loan 90
Ending early, treatment of 
points 160
Federally subsidized mortgage:
Recapture of tax paid on 
home purchased 
with 250
Interest:
Definition 155
Form 1098 (interest 
statement) 74, 160
Refund of 92
Interest credit (See Mortgage 
interest credit)
Interest deduction:
Sale of home 156
Schedule A (Form 1040) to 
deduct 161
Late payment charges, deduction 
of 156
Lender's charges for 
services 158
More than one borrower (not 
spouse), reporting of interest 
deduction 161
Prepayment:
Allocation of deduction 156
Penalty for, deduction of 156
Points 158
Reported on Form 1098 160
Proceeds used for business or 
investment, deduction of 162
Refinancing 158
Refund of interest:
Reported on Form 1098 160
Treatment of 156
Reverse 156
Seller-financed 117
Mosques (See Churches, temples, 
etc.)
Motels (See Hotels)
Moth damage:
Not casualty losses 172
Motor vehicles, donations of 167
MSAs (See Medical savings 
accounts (MSAs))
Multiple support agreement 35
Municipal bonds 63
Museums:
Charitable contributions to 163
Musicians and entertainers 201
Mutual funds 202
Adjusted basis of shares 104
Allocated expenses 202
Capital gains 67
Dividends from 67
Exempt-interest dividends 68
Nonpublicly offered 202
Publicly offered 202
Undistributed capital gains 119
Credit for tax on 251
N
Name change 12, 45
National Housing Act:
Mortgage assistance 95, 156
National of the United States 26
Native Americans (See Indians)
Negligence penalties 19
Net investment income 160
Net operating losses:
Casualty or theft losses 177
Refund of carryback 18
New Jersey Nonoccupational 
Disability Benefit Fund 151
New Jersey Unemployment 
Compensation Fund 151
New job, trade, or business:
Employment agency fees 200
Job search expenses 200
Travel expenses 200
Work-related education 
expenses 196
Publication 17 (2017) Page 281

Page 284 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
New York Nonoccupational 
Disability Benefit Fund 151
Nightclubs:
Cover charges, 50% limit on 
deduction 183
Nobel Prize 98
Nominees 58, 63
Dividends that belong to 
someone else 66
Nonaccountable plans for 
employee 
reimbursements 190, 192
Noncapital assets 108
Nonemployee compensation 97
Nonrefundable credits 248
Nonresident alien 214, 232
Nonresident aliens 6
Due dates 10
Estimated tax 42
Form 1040EZ, use of 6
Individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN) 12
Spouse 12
Joint returns not available 21
Separated 23
Transfers between spouses 
when one spouse is 
nonresident alien 107
Standard deduction 141
Taxpayer identification 
number 37
Waiver of alien status 52
Nontaxable trades (See Tax-free 
exchanges)
Northern Mariana Islands:
Income from 6
Notary fees 97
Not deductible as interest 158
Notes:
As obligations of individuals 109
Discounted 48, 63
Received for services 48
Not-for-profit activities 95
Nursery schools (See Child and 
dependent care credit)
Nursing care:
Employment taxes for worker 
providing medical care, 
deductibility of 148
For healthy baby, not deductible 
as medical expense 148
Wages for, deductibility as 
medical expense 148
Nursing homes:
Insurance for care 
in (See Long-term care 
insurance contracts)
Meals and lodging, deductible as 
medical expense 147
Nursing services 148
Nutritional supplements:
Not deductible as medical 
expense 148
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 95
O
OASDI 95
Occupational taxes 200
Deduction of:
Taxes that are deductible 
(Table 22-1) 154
Office, use of home as 200
Office rent, deductibility of 201
Offset against debts 9, 14
Oil, gas, and minerals:
Future production sold 94
Royalties from:
Schedule C or C-EZ 94
Sale of property interest 94
Older taxpayers:
Credit for the elderly 220
Options 51, 67
Charitable contributions, date 
of 169
Ordinary 
dividends (See Dividends)
Ordinary gain 108
Ordinary gain and loss (See Gains 
and losses)
Organ donors:
Deductibility of medical 
expense 148
Original issue discount (OID) 63
Adjusted basis and 104
Discounted debt 
instruments 109
Origination fees (See Points)
Other taxes 206
Out of work 221
Outplacement services 48
Deduction of agency fees 48
Overpayment of tax 13
 (See also Tax refunds)
Overseas work (See Foreign 
employment)
Over-the-counter drugs:
Not deductible as medical 
expense 148
Overtime pay 40
Oxygen equipment and oxygen:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
P
Paper vs. electronic 
return (See E-file)
Paperwork Reduction Act of 
1980 2
Parental 
responsibility (See Children)
Parents, divorced or 
separated 28, 237
Divorced parents 237
Parents who never married 29
Parking fees:
Business-related travel 187
Commuting expense 185
Employer-provided fringe benefit:
Exclusion from income 50
Medical-related travel 148
Sports arena, business-related 
entertainment subject to 50% 
limit 183
Parks and recreation facilities:
Charitable contributions to 163
Parochial school tuition:
No charitable deduction 167
Partners and partnerships 201
Capital gains or losses from 119
Income 92
Investment interest 160
Related party transactions 107, 
108
Passive activity 105
Losses 22, 161
Exception for real estate 
professionals 74
Investment interest and 160
Rental property 74
Reporting of gains or losses 118
Pass-through entities 201
Patents:
Infringement damages 96
Royalties 94
Patronage dividends 68
Payment of estimated tax 44
By check or money order 44
Credit an overpayment 44
Payment of tax 2, 9, 14, 15, 18, 44
By credit or debit card 10
Delivery services 9
Estimated tax 15
Installment 
agreements (See Installment 
agreements)
Late payment penalties 19
Payments 207–209
Disaster relief 95
Payroll deductions 155, 169, 170
Payroll taxes 48
 (See also Social security and 
Medicare taxes)
Peace Corps allowances 53
Penalties 43, 46
Accuracy-related 19
Alimony deduction, failure to 
provide social security 
number (SSN) or individual 
taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN) of recipient 137
Backup withholding 41
Civil penalties 18
Criminal 19
Deductibility 161, 203
Defenses 19
Estimated tax (See this heading: 
Underpayment of estimated 
tax)
Failure to include social security 
number 12, 19
Failure to pay tax 19
Failure to provide social security 
number (SSN) or individual 
taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN):
Alimony deduction 137
Failure to provide social security 
number or TIN:
Home seller and 
purchaser 161
To dividend payers 65
Form 8606 not filed for 
nondeductible IRA 
contributions 122, 126
Fraud 19
Frivolous tax submission 19
Interest on 15
IRAs:
Early distributions 131
Excess contributions 130
Form 8606 not filed for 
nondeductible 
contributions 122, 126
Overstatement of 
nondeductible 
contributions 126
Required distributions, failure 
to take 129
Late filing 10, 18, 19
Exception 19
Late payment 19
Negligence 19
Reportable transaction 
understatements 19
Roth IRAs:
Conversion contributions 
withdrawn in 5-year 
period 134
Excess contributions 133
Substantial understatement of 
income tax 19
Tax evasion 19
Tips, failure to report 56
Underpayment of estimated 
tax 38, 43, 46, 210
Willful failure to file 19
Withholding 40, 41
Pennsylvania Unemployment 
Compensation Fund 151
Pensions 38, 77–85
 (See also Annuities)
 (See also Railroad retirement 
benefits)
 (See also Rollovers)
457 plans (See Section 457 
deferred compensation plans)
Clergy 52
Contributions:
Retirement savings 
contribution credit 22, 
251
Taxation of 51
Cost computation 78
Decedent's unrecovered 
investment in 13
Definition of 83, 84
Disability pensions 53
Early distributions:
Exceptions to tax on 83
Qualified retirement plans, 
exceptions for 83
Tax on 82, 83
Elective deferral limitation 51
Employer plans:
Benefits from previous 
employer's plan 124
Rollover to IRA 128, 134
Situations in which no 
coverage 124
Estimated tax 78
Excess accumulation, tax on 83, 
84
Foreign employment 
contributions 78
General Rule for nonqualified 
plans and qualified plans for 
recipients over 75 years 80
Inherited pensions 97
Joint returns 78
Loans from plan 78
Lump-sum distributions 81
 (See also Lump-sum 
distributions)
Military (See Armed Forces)
Multiple pension plan 
benefits 77, 78
Partly taxable payments 78
Reporting of 78
Required distributions:
At age 70 1/2 84
Excise tax for failure to take 
minimum distributions 84
Form 5329 for failure to 
receive required 
minimum, 84
State insurer delinquency 
proceedings preventing 
minimum distributions 84
State and local government 
employees (See Section 457 
deferred compensation plans)
Unrecovered investment in 203
Withholding 13, 41, 78, 82
Pentagon attacks (See Terrorist 
attacks)
Per capita taxes:
Deductibility of 155
Per diem:
Allowance or 
reimbursement 190, 191
Charitable organization service, 
for 166
Federal rate 191
High-low rate method to 
compute 191
Performing artists:
Business expenses 194
Work-related education 
expenses 199
Permanent and total 
disability 220
Personal exemption 22, 25–37
Joint return 25
Spouse's exemption 25
Personal injury suits:
Damages from 96
Personal interest:
Not deductible 161
Personal property 175
 (See also Casualty losses)
As capital assets 108
Rental income from 93
Taxes (See Personal property 
taxes)
Theft of (See Theft losses)
Personal property taxes:
Car taxes 187
Deduction of 154
Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form 
1040) 155
Taxes (See Personal property 
taxes)
Personal 
representatives (See Fiduciarie
s)
Persons with 
disabilities (See Disabilities, 
persons with)
Photographs:
Casualty or theft loss claims 174
Physical examination 148
Physician's statement:
Generally 221
Veterans 221
Physician certification 220
Place for filing 15
Plants and trees:
Cost of, when casualty or theft 
loss involved 172, 173
Plastic surgery:
Not deductible as medical 
expense when cosmetic 148
Plug-in electric drive motor 
vehicle credit:
Qualified two-wheeled plug-in 
electric vehicle 250
Page 282 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 285 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Points 158
Basis in property not to 
include 101
Definition 158
Excess points 160
Form 1098 reporting 160
Limits on deduction 160
Main home purchase, special 
treatment of 101
Mortgage ending early 160
Paid by seller 158
Refinancing 158
Schedule A (Form 1040) to 
deduct 161
Second home 158
Settlement statement shows as 
charged for mortgage 158
Political campaign 
expenses 203, 204
Political 
contributions (See Campaign 
contributions)
Political conventions:
Travel expenses 182
Ponzi-type investment 
schemes 172
Post office employees:
Rural mail carriers 186
Postponed tax deadlines:
Disaster areas 177
Postponement of gain:
Sale of home:
Adjusted basis 102
Power of attorney 13, 21
Preferred stock:
Redeemable at a premium 68
Pregnancy test kit 148
Premature distributions (See Early 
withdrawal from deferred interest 
account)
Premium tax credit 245
Figure credit 246
Prepaid:
Insurance 59
Preparer's fee:
Deductible amount 201
Preparers of tax returns 13
Prepayment:
Insurance premiums:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 147
Mortgage 
interest (See Mortgages)
Rent paid in advance 69
Prescription medicines:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Presidential Election Campaign 
Fund 12
Presidentially declared 
disasters (See Disaster relief)
Price reduced after purchase 91
Principal residence (See Home)
Prisoner 214
Privacy Act and paperwork 
reduction information 2
Private delivery services 9
Private schools:
Charitable deduction for 
tuition 167
Prizes and awards 48, 98
 (See also Bonuses)
Exclusion from income 48
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar 
prizes 98
Scholarship prizes 98
Probationary work periods:
Travel expenses during 179
Professional license fees 204
Professional Reputation 204
Professionals:
Entertainment expenses for 
attending association 
meetings 183
Profit-sharing plans:
Lump sums (See Lump-sum 
distributions)
Withholding 13, 41
Promissory notes:
Charitable contributions, date 
of 169
Proof of business expense 187
Table 26-2 summary 188
Proof of loss 172
Property 100, 110
 (See also Real estate)
 (See also Real Estate)
Found 97
Stolen 98
Prostheses:
Deductibility of medical 
expense 148
Protective clothing 201
Psychiatric care:
Specially equipped medical 
centers, deductibility of 
expense 148
Public assistance benefits 95
Publication 1244:
Daily record of tips (Form 
4070A) 55
Reporting tips to employer 56
Publication 584:
Casualty and theft losses, 
workbook for 171
Publications (See Tax help)
Public debt:
Gifts to reduce 15
Public parks and recreation 
facilities:
Charitable contributions to 163
Public safety officers insurance 
premiums 77
Public transportation passes, 
employer-provided 51
Public utilities (See Utilities)
Puerto Rico:
Residents of 5
Pulitzer Prize 98
Punitive damages:
As income 96
Q
Qualified dividends 66, 69
Qualified domestic relations 
orders (QDROs):
Rollover of retirement plan 
distribution 82
Qualified education expenses:
Work-related education, business 
deduction 197
Qualified health plan 246
Qualified individuals:
Under age 65 and retired on 
permanent and total 
disability 220
Qualified joint venture 74
Qualified plans 77, 82, 127
 (See also Retirement plans)
 (See also Rollovers)
Qualified student 
loan (See Student loan interest 
deduction)
Qualified tuition programs 98
Additional tax on 207
Qualified two-wheeled plug-in 
electric vehicle (See Plug-in 
electric drive motor vehicle credit)
Qualifying child 26
Age test 233
Joint return test 233, 234
Of another person 237
Relationship test 233
Residency test 233
Qualifying person:
Child and dependent care 
credit 214
Qualifying relative 32
R
Raffles 97
No charitable deduction for 
tickets 164, 167
Railroad retirement benefits 78, 
85–89, 98
Deductions related to 89
Employer retirement plans 
different from 124
Equivalent tier 1 (social security 
equivalent benefit 
(SSEB)) 85, 98
Estimated tax 86
Form RRB-1042S for nonresident 
aliens 85
Form RRB-1099 85
Income 7
Joint returns 89
Lump-sum election 87
Married filing separately 22, 86
Repayment of benefits 86
Reporting of 86
Taxability of 85, 86
Withholding 41
Not tax deductible 155
Withholding for 86
Railroad Unemployment 
Insurance Act 54
Real estate 71, 72, 110, 155
 (See also Vacation homes)
 (See also Mortgages)
As noncapital assets 108
Basis 100
Canceled business debt, 
treatment of 91
Casualty loss 175
Closing costs 100
Definition of 100
Division of real estate taxes 152
Fair market value (FMV) 100
Form 1099-S to report sale 
proceeds 119, 153
Holding period, determination 
of 110
Itemized charges for services not 
deductible 154
Points 158
Progressive deterioration, not 
casualty loss 172
Real estate-related items not 
deductible 153
Rental (See Rental income and 
expenses)
Settlement fees 100
Transfer taxes 154
Real estate investment trusts 
(REITs):
Dividends from 67
Undistributed capital gains:
Credit for tax on 67, 251
Real estate taxes:
Alimony deduction for, when 
home owned as tenants in 
common 135
Assessments (See Local 
assessments)
Basis of property and 100
When not reimbursed by 
property seller 101
Cooperative 
housing (See Cooperative 
housing)
deduction of 152
Deduction of:
List of deductible taxes 
(Table 22-1) 154
Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form 
1040) 155
Refund, treatment of 153
Rebates (See Refunds)
Recapture:
Alimony 137
Reporting on Form 1040 137
Taxes 207
Recharacterization:
IRA contributions 128
Recording fees:
Basis to include 100
Recordkeeping:
Gambling 203
Sale of home 113
Savings bonds used for 
education 62
Recordkeeping requirements 15
Basic records 16
Business travel expenses 179, 
187
Copies of returns 16
Destroyed records 188
Documentary evidence 188
Electronic records 16
Electronic records of tips 55
Gambling 97
Incomplete records 188
Meal expenses:
Actual cost 180
Standard meal 
allowance 180
Period of retention 16, 188
Proof of payments 16
Tip income 55
Travel expenses 179, 187
Why keep records 16
Work-related education 
expenses 199
Records of loss 173
Records to keep 169
Recovery of amounts previously 
deducted 92
Itemized deductions 92
Mortgage interest refund 92
Over multiple years 92
Stolen property, adjustment of 
theft loss 173
Tax refunds 92
Red Cross:
Blood donations not 
deductible 164, 167
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Redeemable ground rents:
Deduction as mortgage 
interest 156
Redemption of bonds 105
State and local bonds, before 
maturity 109
Redemption of stock 105
Refinancing:
Fees for, not part of property 
basis 101
Points 158
Refundable credits 251
Refunds 207
Mortgage interest, treatment 
of 156
State tax 92
Taxes (See Tax refunds)
Regulated investment companies:
Undistributed capital gains:
Credit for tax on 251
Rehabilitative program 
payments 52
Reimbursement 92, 189–191, 193
 (See also Recovery of amounts 
previously deducted)
 (See also Per diem)
Accountable plans, definition 
of 190
Allocation of 193
Casualty losses 174
Employee business 
expenses 48
Gain from casualty or theft 
loss 173
Health insurance, reimbursement 
in later year 149
Medical and dental 
expenses 148
Excess reimbursement 
flowchart (Figure 
21-A) 149
Mileage (See Standard mileage 
rates)
Personal expenses 189
Received after deducting 
loss 175
Returning excess for business 
expenses 192
Tax year of inclusion for 
insurance 
reimbursement 174
Theft losses 174
Travel advances 192
Types of 174
Unclaimed 198
Work-related education 
expenses 198
Reinvestment plans:
Dividends used for 67
Related party transactions 107
Indirect transactions 108
Like-kind exchanges 106, 107
Multiple property sales or 
trades 108
Relationship test 27, 33
Relative, qualifying 32
Relief fund contributions 204
Relief funds 175
 (See also Disaster relief)
Religious organizations 6, 52, 
163–165
 (See also Clergy)
 (See also Churches, temples, etc.)
Publication 17 (2017) Page 283

Page 286 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Religious organizations (Cont.)
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Written statement not 
needed 165
Remainder interest, sale of 117
Rental income:
Uncollected rent 70
Rental income and 
expenses 69–77
Advance rent 69
Canceling lease, payments 
for 69
Capitalized costs 70
Change of property to rental 
use 71, 104
Deductions 70
Losses that exceed passive 
income 74
Depreciation 70, 73
Dwelling unit used as a home:
Days used for repairs and 
maintenance 72
Donation of use of 
property 72
Main home determination 72
Rented for fewer than 15 70
Dwelling unit used as home:
Capital gains exclusion 115
Determining if used as 
home 72
Division of expenses 71
Figuring days of personal 
use 72
Rented for fewer than 15 
days 73
Shared equity financing 
agreement 72
Equipment rental for rental 
property 70
Expenses paid by tenant 69
Fair rental price 72
Home possession before final 
settlement, rent not deductible 
as interest 156
Improvements 70
Defined 70
Increase due to higher real estate 
taxes:
Deductibility 
(Table 22-1) 154
Insurance premiums paid in 
advance 70
Local assessments 70
Losses from rental real estate 
activities 22, 74
Not-rented-for-profit property 71
Part interest 70
Part of property rented 71
Personal property rental 93
Personal use of property 
including vacation home:
Allocation of expenses 70
Pre-rental expenses 70
Property or services received 
instead of money 69
Purchaser's payment of rent, not 
included in property 
basis 101
Repairs 70
Reporting of 74
Sale of rental property 70
Schedule E for reporting of 74
Security deposits 70
Self-employment tax, when 
applicable 74
Tax return preparation 70
Time to report 69
Travel expenses associated with 
management and 
maintenance 70
Vacant rental property 70
Reorganizations, corporate:
Nontaxable trade of stock 106
Repairs:
Basis, effect on 101
Cost of, when casualty or theft 
loss involved 173
Rental expenses 70
Repayments 93
Amount previously included in 
income 203
Railroad retirement benefits 86
Social security benefits 86, 93
Unemployment 
compensation 94
Reporting:
Rollovers 128
Repossession of home 113
Required minimum 
distributions 84, 127, 129
 (See also Pensions)
 (See also Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Rescue squad members:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 92
Research expenses:
College professor 200
Reservists:
Deduction for transportation 
expense 185
IRAs 124
Repayments 123
Residency:
Home outside U.S. (See Citizens 
outside U.S.)
Main home, defined 112
Residency test 28
Resident aliens:
Earned income credit 232
Estimated tax 42
IRA distributions, withholding 
from 130
Social security number (SSN) 12
Spouse treated as 23
Residential energy credit 251
Resorts:
Travel expenses when incidental 
business activities 182
Restaurant employees:
Tips (See Tip income)
Retail installment contracts:
Finance charges, not 
deductible 161
Retail inventory 108
Retention of 
records (See Recordkeeping 
requirements)
Retired Senior Volunteer 
Program 53
Retirees 77
 (See also Retirement plans)
Armed forces:
Taxable income 52
Retirement of bonds 105, 109
Rollover of amount redeemed 82
Retirement planning services 50
Retirement plans 22, 38, 77, 78, 
82, 85
 (See also Roth IRAs)
 (See also Annuities)
 (See also Railroad retirement 
benefits)
 (See also Rollovers)
457 plans (See Section 457 
deferred compensation plans)
Clergy 52
Contributions:
Credit for (See Retirement 
savings contribution 
credit)
Taxation of 51
Cost computation 78
Decedent's unrecovered 
investment in 13
Definition of 83, 84
Disability pensions 53
Early distributions:
Exceptions to tax on 83
Tax on 82, 83
Elective deferral limitation 51
Employer plans:
Benefits from previous 
employer's plan 124
Rollover to IRA 128, 134
Situations in which no 
coverage 124
Estimated tax 78
Excess accumulation, tax 
on 82–84
Foreign employment 
contributions 78
General Rule for nonqualified and 
qualified plans for recipients 
over 75 years 80
Inherited pensions 97
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Joint return 78
Keogh plans 78
Loans from plan 78
Lump-sum distributions 81
Military (See Armed Forces)
Multiple pension plan 
benefits 77, 78
Partly taxable payments 78
Reporting of 78
Required distributions:
At age 70 1/2 84
Excise tax for failure to take 
minimum distributions 84
Form 5329 for failure to 
receive required minimum 
retirement plan 
distributions 84
State insurer delinquency 
proceedings preventing 
minimum distributions 84
Section 457 plans (See Section 
457 deferred compensation 
plans)
State and local government 
employees (See Section 457 
deferred compensation plans)
Withholding 13, 41, 78, 82
Retirement savings contribution 
credit 251
Adjusted gross income limit 22
Returns, tax (See Tax returns)
Revenue stamps:
Basis to include 100
Reverse Mortgages 156
Revolving charge accounts:
Finance charges, not 
deductible 161
Rewards 98
Rhode Island Temporary 
Disability Benefit Fund 152
Robbery:
Losses due to 172
Rollovers 82, 127
Beneficiaries, restrictions 82
Definition of 127
Designated Roth account 82
Direct rollovers 82
Eligible distributions 82
Excess due to incorrect rollover 
information 131
From 403 plan to IRA 127
From employer's plan to 
IRA 127, 128
From IRA to IRA 127
From IRA to Roth IRA 134
From Roth IRA to Roth IRA 134
From section 457 plan to 
IRA 127
From SIMPLE IRA to Roth 
IRA 134
Gain from publicly traded 
securities 111
Inherited IRAs 127
Lump-sum distributions 81
Married filing separately 22
Nonspouse beneficiary 82
Nontaxable amounts 82
Partial rollovers 127
Qualified domestic relations 
orders for distribution of 
retirement plan funds 82
Reporting:
From employer's plan to 
IRA 128
IRA to IRA 127
Retirement bond redemption 82
Roth IRAs 82
SIMPLE Retirement Accounts 82
Surviving spouse 82
Taxability 127, 131
Time limits (60-day rule) 127
Treatment of 127
Waiting period between 127
Withholding tax 82
Roth IRAs 131–134
 (See also Rollovers)
Age:
Distributions after age 
59 1/2 134
No limit for contributions 132
No required distribution 
age 134
Compensation, defined 132
Contribution limits 133
Age 50 or older, 133
Under age 50, 133
Contributions:
No deduction for 132
Roth IRA only 133
Time to make 133
To traditional IRA for same 
year 133
Conversion 134
Definition of 132
Distributions:
Qualified distributions 134
Effect of modified AGI on 
contributions 
(Table 17-3) 131
Establishing account 132
Excess contributions 133
IRA transfer to 127, 128
Modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI):
Computation (Worksheet 
17-2) 131
Phaseout (Table 17-3) 131
Penalties:
Conversion contributions 
withdrawn in 5-year 
period 134
Excess contributions 133
Recharacterizations 128
Spousal contributions 132
Taxability 134
Withdrawals:
Excess contributions 133
Not taxable 134
Rounding off dollars 13
Royalties 94
Rural mail carriers 186
S
Safe deposit box 202
Salaries (See Wages and salaries)
Sale of home 74, 98, 111–118
 (See also Real estate)
Abandonment 113
Adjusted basis 112, 113
Amount realized 112
Basis 113
Capital gains exclusion 114
Division of real estate taxes 152
Employer, payment by 112
Federal subsidy, recapture 
of 117
Foreclosure or repossession 113
Form 1099-S 112
Gain or loss, figuring of 112
Interest deduction for 
mortgage 156
Interest paid to seller, reporting 
of 161
Jointly owned home 112
Land 112
Main home, defined 112
More than one home 112
Option to buy 112
Period of ownership and use 114
Points paid by seller 158
Postponed gain from 102
Recordkeeping 113
Reporting of gain 117
Seller-financed mortgage 117
Selling price 112
Settlement fees or closing 
costs 113
Trading homes 113
Transfer to spouse 113, 115
Undeducted points 111
Sale of property 104–111
Adjusted basis 106
Amount realized 106
Basis other than cost 106
Business property that has 
undergone change of 
use 104
Cash payment 106
Debt payoff included in 106
Definition of 105
Fair market value (FMV) 106
Figuring gain or loss 106
Form 1099-B 105
Like-kind exchanges 106
Page 284 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 287 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sale of property (Cont.)
Personal items 98
Redemption of stock 105
Rental property that has 
undergone change of 
use 104
Transfers between spouses 107
Sales and exchanges:
Bonds 62
Sales tax:
Basis to include 100
Car purchase 187
Sales to related persons, 
exception 117
Salvation Army (See Charitable 
contributions)
Saturday, deadline falling on 43
Savings:
Bonds 59, 65
Bonds used for education 61
Certificate 58, 63
Schedule 15, 47, 48, 52, 54
 (See also Form 1040)
Form 1040, A-F, R, SE (See Form 
1040)
K-1:
K-1, Form 1041 58
Beneficiaries receiving 
income from estate or 
trust 65
Partnership income 92
S corporation income 92
Schedule 8812 224
Schedules A–F, R, SE (Form 
1040) (See Form 1040)
Scholarships 31, 34, 35
Scholarships and fellowships 6, 7
Earned income including 142
Exclusion from gross income 98
Teaching or research 
fellowships 98
S corporations 201
Capital gains or losses from 119
Related party transactions 107
Shareholders 92
Investment interest 160
Scrip dividends 68
Second homes (See Vacation 
homes)
Second mortgages:
Interest 155
Section 1202 exclusion:
Capital gains or losses 
under 120
Section 1244 stock:
Losses on 110
Section 1250 gains:
Sale of real property subject 
to 120
Section 179 deductions:
Adjustment to basis for 101
Car expenses 187
Section 457 deferred 
compensation plans 77
Early distributions from 83
Required distributions 84
Rollovers:
To IRAs 128, 134
Section 72(m)(5) 207
Securities 65, 118
 (See also Dividends)
 (See also Capital gains)
Adjusted basis for 104
As capital assets 108
Bought at various times, how to 
indicate 119
Claim for refund 18
Constructive ownership of stock, 
determination of 108
Convertible stocks and 
bonds 106
Fractional shares 68
Holding period, determination 
of 110
Joint owners, reporting of 
dividends 65
Nontaxable trades 106
Options 51, 67
Preferred stock, redeemable at a 
premium 68
Redemption of stock 105
Reinvestment plan, dividends 
used for 67
Rollover of gain from publicly 
traded securities 111
Sale expenses, how to adjust 
for 119
Short-term gains and losses 119
Stock appreciation rights 48
Stock rights:
As capital assets 108
Dividends as 67
Holding period, determination 
of 110
Worthless 105
Surrender of stock 105
Tax-exempt:
Home equity loan proceeds 
invested in 156
Interest incurred to produce 
income from 160
Interest to purchase or carry, 
not deductible 161
Tenants by the entirety owning, 
reporting of dividends 65
Tenants in common owning, 
reporting of dividends 65
Worthless securities 105
Security deposits:
Rental property, for 70
Self-employed persons 155
 (See also Self-employment tax)
Corporate directors as 97
Definition 6
Filing requirements (Table 1-3) 7
Foreign government or 
international organizations, 
U.S. citizens employed by 6
Gross income 5
Health insurance costs, 
deductible as medical 
expense 150
Homeworkers, deduction of 
expenses 189
IRAs 123
Meal allowance not permitted 
when more than 10% 
ownership of corporation 190
Ministers 6
Nonemployee compensation 97
Qualified retirement plans for 78
Travel outside U.S. 182
Work-related education 
expenses 198
Self-employment tax 207
Deduction of:
List of deductible taxes 
(Table 22-1) 154
Rental income 74
Seller-financed mortgages 117
Seminars:
Investment-related 203
Senior Companion Program 53
Separated parents 28, 32, 237
Separated taxpayers 21
Filing status 22, 23
IRAs 124
Medical and dental expenses of 
children of 146
Mortgage interest 156
Nonresident alien spouse 23
Personal exemption 26
Separate returns (See Married filing 
separately)
Separation agreements:
Defined for purposes of 
alimony 135
SEPs (See Simplified employee 
pensions (SEPs))
Series EE and E savings 
bonds 60
Series HH and H savings 
bonds 60
Series I savings bonds 60
Service charges 202
Deductibility of 161
Employer treating as wages for tip 
income 55
Service Corps of Retired 
Executives (SCORE) 53
Services:
No charitable deduction for value 
of 164
Property received for 102
Settlement date of securities 
transaction 110
Settlement fees:
Real property transactions 100
Sale of home 113
Severance pay 48
Accrued leave payment 48
Outplacement services 48
Shipping:
Business-related travel 
expense 180
Shipwrecks:
Casualty loss due to 171
Short tax year:
Change in annual accounting 
period 141
Short-term debt instruments:
Government obligations 109
Ordinary gain 109
Short-term gains and losses 108, 
119
Priority in deducting 119
Sale or trade of property held 1 
year or less 110
Sick leave:
Cash payments for unused 
leave 147
Federal employees buying 
back 54
Sick pay:
Collective bargaining 
agreements 40
FECA payments 54
Income 48
Railroad Unemployment 
Insurance Act 54
Withholding 40
Signatures 13
Agent, use of 13
Joint returns 21
Mentally incompetent 13
Parent for child 13
Physically disabled 13
Signing your return 9
Silver (See Gold and silver)
SIMPLE plans:
Rollover to Roth IRA 134
Simplified employee pensions 
(SEPs):
IRAs as 123
Simplified Method:
Computation of taxable annuity:
Worksheet 79
Single taxpayers 21
Charitable contributions to, no 
deduction for 164, 166
Filing requirements 5
Filing status 5, 20, 21
Form 1040EZ, use of 6, 21
Gross income filing requirements 
(Table 1-1) 4
Small businesses:
Capital gains or losses from stock 
of 120
Keogh plans 78
Losses on stock of 110
Smoking cessation programs:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Social clubs:
Contributions to, no charitable 
deduction for 164
Dues:
Not entertainment 
expenses 184
Social security and Medicare 
taxes 207, 219
Allocated tips 57
Reporting of (Table 1-3) 7
Support, not included in 35
Social security benefits 34, 85, 89
Deductions related to 89
Employer retirement plans 
different from 124
Estimated tax 86
Foreign employer 52
Form SSA-1042S for nonresident 
aliens 85
Form SSA-1099 85
Group-term life insurance, taxes 
owed on 7
Income 7
IRAs for recipients of 
benefits 125
Joint returns 89
Lump-sum election 87
Married filing separately 22, 86
Paid by employer 48
Repayment of benefits 86, 93
Repayments 202
Reporting of 86
Taxability of 85, 86
Tips, taxes owed on 7
Withholding 41
Withholding for 86
Not deductible 155
Social security number (SSN) 12
Alimony recipient's number 
required 137
Child's 1
Number to be obtained at 
birth 36
Correspondence with IRS, 
include SSN 12
Dependents 1, 12
Exception 12
Dividend payers to use 65
Earned income credit 231, 234
Failure to include penalty 12
Form SS-5 to request number 12
Nonresident alien spouse 12
Penalty for failure to provide:
To dividend payers 65
Resident aliens 12
Social security card 231
Sonic booms:
Casualty loss due to 171
Special needs children:
Adoption credit 249
Spouse 5, 12, 13, 20, 21, 82, 91
 (See also Married taxpayers)
 (See also Surviving spouse)
Disabled, qualifying for 
dependent care credit 214
Student 214
Spouse's death 142
SSN (See Social security number 
(SSN))
SSN (SSN) 214
Stamps (See Collectibles)
Stamp taxes:
Real estate transactions and 154
Standard deduction 141, 143
Standard meal allowance 180, 
181, 191
Amount of 181
Areas outside continental 
U.S. 181
Prorating on partial days of 
travel 191
Standard medical mileage 
rates 145
Medical reasons for use of 
car 148
Standard mileage rates 186
Business-related miles 177, 186
Car expenses 186
Charitable organization service, 
auto use for 166
Not allowed 187
Work-related education 194, 197
State:
Obligations, interest on 63
State bar associations:
Bar review courses 196
Charitable contributions to 166
State or local governments:
Bonds, tax-exempt 109
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Employees:
Section 457 plans 
for (See Section 457 
deferred compensation 
plans)
Unemployment 
compensation 95
Fee-basis officials:
Business expenses of 193
Work-related education 
expenses 199
State or local income taxes 143
Deduction of 151
List of deductible taxes 
(Table 22-1) 154
Schedule A (Form 1040) 155
Electronic returns filed with 
federal 9
Exception to deduction 151
Federal changes, effect on 18
Form W-2 to show withheld 
taxes 151
Interest on, not deductible 161
Publication 17 (2017) Page 285

Page 288 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
State or local income taxes (Cont.)
Joint state and local returns but 
federal returns filed 
separately 151
Married filing separately 151
Refunds, treatment of 151, 152
State or local taxes:
Refunds 92
Statute of limitations:
Claim for refund 14
Claim for refunds 17
Statutory employees 189
Stillborn child 28
Stock appreciation rights 48
Stock bonus plans 41
Stock certificates:
Charitable contributions, date 
of 169
Stockholders 18
 (See also Securities)
Debts 90
Stockholders' meeting 
expenses 204
Stock options 51, 67
Stocks 18
 (See also Securities)
Stolen funds:
Reporting of 98
Stolen property 98
Stop-smoking programs:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Storms 175
 (See also Disaster relief)
Casualty loss due to 171
Straddles:
Interest from 160
Strike benefits 98
Student loan interest deduction:
Loan repayment assistance 139
Student loans:
Cancellation of debt 90
Interest, defined 138
Interest deduction 6, 7, 138, 161
Academic period 138
Amount of deduction 139
Claiming 139
Double deduction not 
allowed 139
Eligible educational 
institution 139
Eligible student 138
Features of (Table 19-1) 138
Married filing separately 22
Qualified student loan 138
Worksheet 139
Student claimed as exemption on 
tax return of another 
person 139
Students:
Credit (See Education credits)
Defined 28
Exemption from withholding 40
Foreign 26
Foreign students 165
Loans (See Student loans)
Scholarships (See Scholarships 
and fellowships)
Tuition programs, 
qualified (See Qualified tuition 
programs)
Work-related 
education (See Work-related 
education)
Substantial gainful activity 220
Substitute forms 11
Sunday, deadline falling on 43
Supplemental wages 40
Supplies:
Regularly used or consumed in 
ordinary course of trade or 
business 108
Support test:
Qualifying child 29
Qualifying relative 34
Surveys:
Property basis to include 101
Surviving spouse:
Annuity 84
Filing status 20
With dependent child 24
Gross income filing requirements 
(Table 1-1) 4
Life insurance proceeds paid 
to 91
Rollovers by 82
Single filing status 21
Tax (See Estate tax)
Synagogues (See Churches, 
temples, etc.)
T
Tables and figures:
Adjusted basis, examples of 
(Table 13-1) 101
Alimony requirements 
(instruments executed after 
1984) (Table 18-1) 136
Capital gain rates 
(Table 16-1) 120
Car expenses, reporting of 
(Table 26-3) 192
Casualty and theft losses:
Deduction limits for personal 
property (Table 25-1) 175
Deduction of loss, when to 
take (Table 25-2) 176
Charitable contributions, 
deductibility of 
(Table 24-1) 163
Children's income:
Inclusion on parent's return 
(Figure 31-A) 210
Unearned income, reporting 
of (Figure 31-B) 212
Entertainment expenses:
50% limit (Figure 26-A) 184
Proof of (Table 26-2) 188
Reporting of 
(Table 26-3) 192
Estimated tax, who must make 
payments (Figure 4-A) 43
Filing requirements:
Dependents (Table 1-2) 5
Gross income levels 
(Table 1-1) 4
Other situations requiring 
filing (Table 1-3) 7
Gift expenses:
Proof of (Table 26-2) 188
Reporting of 
(Table 26-3) 192
Head of household, qualifying 
person (Table 2-1) 23
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs):
Figuring modified AGI 
(Worksheet 17-1) 126
Modified AGI, effect on 
deduction if covered by 
retirement plan at work 
(Table 17-1) 125
Modified AGI, effect on 
deduction if not covered 
by retirement plan at work 
(Table 17-2) 125
Roth IRAs, effect of modified 
AGI on contributions 
(Table 17-3) 131
Roth IRAs, modified AGI 
(Worksheet 17-2) 131
Interest deductions, forms to use 
(Table 23-1) 162
Meal expenses and 50% limit 
(Figure 26-A) 184
Medical and dental expenses:
Checklist for deductible 
expense 
(Table 21-1) 147
Reimbursement, excess 
algorithm (Figure 
21-A) 149
Roth IRA and modified adjusted 
gross income (MAGI) 
phaseout (Table 17-3) 131
Standard deduction tables 144
Student loan interest deduction 
(Table 19-1) 138
Taxes that are deductible 
(Table 22-1) 154
Tax returns:
Due dates (Table 1-5) 9
Steps to prepare 
(Table 1-6) 11
Travel and transportation 
expenses:
Examples of deductible 
expenses 
(Table 26-1) 180
Local transportation (Figure 
26-B) 185
Proof of (Table 26-2) 188
Reporting of 
(Table 26-3) 192
Volunteers, deductibility of 
contributions 
(Table 24-2) 165
Work-related education (Figure 
27-A) 196
Taxable exchanges:
Definition of 102
Tax computation worksheet 265
Tax counsel fees 201
Tax Counseling for the Elderly 9
Tax credits (See Credits)
Taxes, not support 35
Taxes 38, 150–155, 187, 206
 (See also Sales tax)
Alternative minimum 207
Business taxes, deduction 
of 151
Deduction of 151
Schedules to use 155
Types of taxes deductible 
(Table 22-1) 154
Estate (See Estate tax)
Excise (See Excise taxes)
Federal income taxes, not 
deductible 155
Foreign taxes 151
Income tax. deduction of 152
Gift taxes 155
How to figure 206
Income taxes, deduction of 151
Indian tribal government taxes, 
deduction of 151
Inheritance tax 155
Kiddie tax (See Children, 
subheading: Unearned 
income of)
Not deductible 155
Personal property taxes:
Car taxes 187
Deduction of 154
Real estate taxes (See Real 
estate taxes)
Sales tax 100
Tax evasion 19
Tax-exempt:
Bonds and other obligations 63
Income 204
Interest 63
Obligations:
Adjusted basis 104
Organizations:
Related party 
transactions 107
Section 457 deferred 
compensation plans 77
Tax-exempt income 34
Tax-exempt obligations:
Adjusted basis for 104
Tax figured by IRS 208
Tax-free exchanges:
Definition of 102
Holding period, determination 
of 110
Tax help 2, 9, 269
Tax Counseling for the Elderly 9
Volunteer counseling (Volunteer 
Income Tax Assistance 
program) 9, 53
Taxis:
Business-related travel 
expense 180
Standard mileage rate not 
allowed 187
Tax on Unearned Income of 
Certain Children 209
Taxpayer identification number 
(TIN) 213, 214
Adoption (ATIN) 12
Child and dependent care 
credit 217
Childcare provider 217
Individual (ITIN) 12, 36
Social security 
number (See Social security 
number (SSN))
Tax preference items 208
Tax rates 21
Married filing separately 
(Schedule Y-2) 22
Tax refunds:
Agreement with IRS extending 
assessment period, claim 
based on 18
Bad debts 18
Business tax credit 
carrybacks 18
Cashing check 14
Check's expiration date 14
Claim for 17, 18
Limitations period 17
Litigation 18
Direct deposit 14
Erroneous refunds 17
Federal income tax refunds 92
Financially disabled 18
Foreign tax paid or accrued 18
General rules 9
Inquiries 9
Interest on 17, 18, 59
Late filed returns 2
Limits 18
Exceptions 18
More or less than expected 14
Net operating loss carryback 18
Offset:
Against debts 9, 14
Against next year's tax 13
Offset against next year's tax 44
Past-due 9, 17
Real estate taxes, treatment 
of 153
Reduced 18
State and local income tax 
refunds 151, 152
State liability, effect on 18
Under $1 14
Withholding 6
Worthless securities 18
Claim for refund 105
Tax return preparation:
Rental expenses 70
Tax returns 9, 13, 21
 (See also Due dates)
 (See also Signatures)
 (See also Joint Returns)
Tax Returns:
Aliens 6
Amended 17, 143
Attachments to returns 13
Child 13
Copies of 16
Dating of 13
Filing of 4
 (See also Filing requirements)
Forms to use 6
Free preparation help 9
How to file 11
Joint returns (See Joint Returns)
Mailing of 15
Paid preparer 13
Payment with 14
Phone number to be included 2
Preparation fees 201
Private delivery services 9
Steps to prepare (Table 1-6) 11
Third party designee 13
Transcript of 16
Who must file 4, 6
Tax table 253–264
Tax year 9, 11
 (See also Accounting periods)
Teachers:
Expenses, deduction of 140
Work-related education 195, 197
Telephones 204
Business-related travel 
expense 180
Fraud or misconduct of IRS 
employee, number for 
reporting anonymously 2
Tax return to include phone 
number 2
Temples (See Churches, temples, 
etc.)
Temporary absence from job:
Work-related education 
during 195
Temporary absences 28, 33
Temporary job assignments:
Travel expenses 179
Page 286 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 289 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tenants 69
 (See also Rental income and 
expenses)
By the entirety 58
In common 58
Tenants by the entirety:
Alimony, no deduction for taxes 
and insurance paid on home 
owned as 135
Dividends, reporting of 65
Real estate taxes, allocation 
when filing separately 153
Tenants in common:
Alimony deduction for taxes and 
insurance paid on home 
owned as 135
Dividends, reporting of 65
Terminal illness:
Accelerated payment of life 
insurance 
proceeds (See Accelerated 
death benefits)
Viatical settlements 91
Termite damage:
Not casualty losses 172
Terrorist attacks:
Casualty loss due to 171
Disability payments for injuries 
from, tax exclusion 77
Disability pensions for federal 
employees 54
Theft losses 171, 201, 202
$100 Rule 176
Adjusted basis in property 101, 
174
Amount of loss 173
Appraisals 173, 174
Cost of cleaning up or making 
repairs 173
Costs of photographs and 
appraisals 174
Deduction of loss:
When to take 
(Table 25-2) 176
Definition of theft 172
Fair market value of stolen 
property 173
Form 4684 to be filed 171
Insurance proceeds, treatment 
of 174
Net operating losses 177
Proof of loss 173
Property used partly for business 
and partly for personal 
purposes 175
Recovered stolen property 173
Reimbursement 174
Reporting of gain or loss 176, 
177
Third parties:
Alimony payments made to 135, 
136
Designee for IRS to discuss 
return with 13
Income from taxpayer's property 
paid to 11
Threats:
Losses due to 172
Tickets (See Entertainment 
expenses)
Tiebreaker rules 31, 236
Tip expense:
Business meal or entertainment 
activity, 50% deduction 
limit 183
Business travel expense 180, 
181
Tip income 55–57
Allocated tips 40, 57
Daily record of tips 55
Electronic tip record 55
Form 4070A for daily records 55
Noncash tips 55, 56
Penalty for failure to report 56
Reporting on tax return 56
Reporting tips to employer:
Failure to report to 
employer 7, 56
Form 4070 for 56
Service charges paid by 
employer as wages 55
Social security and Medicare tax:
Employer reporting for 
purposes of 56
Filing requirements 
(Table 1-3) 7
Uncollected 7
Tip-splitting or tip-pooling 
arrangements 55
Uncollected taxes 56
Withholding 40, 55
Employee contributing to 56
Underwithholding 40, 56
Title insurance:
Property basis to include 101
Title to property:
Abstract fees, property basis to 
include 100
Attorneys' fees:
Property basis to include 101
Tolls:
Business-related travel 187
Tools 200
Hauling to and from work 185
Rental for use on rental 
property 70
Tornadoes 175
 (See also Disaster relief)
Casualty loss due to 171
Total support 34
Tour guides:
Free tour for organizing tour 97
Trade Act of 1974:
Trade readjustment allowances 
under 94
Trade associations:
Meetings and entertainment 
expenses 183
Trade-in of car 187
Trade of property 104
 (See also Sale of property)
Definition of 105
Form 8824 for reporting 106
Like-kind exchanges 102, 106
Like property and money 
transferred 103, 106
Nontaxable exchanges 102, 106
Holding period, determination 
of 110
Partially nontaxable 
exchange 103, 106
Reporting of 106
Taxable exchange, defined 102
Trading date of securities 
transaction 110
Traditional IRAs (See Individual 
retirement arrangements (IRAs))
Traffic violations:
Fines not deductible 187
Transfer taxes:
Property basis to include 101
Real estate transactions and 154
Transit passes 51
Transportation 216
Transportation 
expenses (See Travel and 
transportation expenses)
Transportation workers:
Meal expenses 181
Deduction limits 183
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how 
to complete 192
Travel and transportation 
expenses 178, 185
Advances 190, 192
Allocation of types of costs 179, 
188
Bona fide business purpose 180
Business associates 180
Business travel:
$75 or less 188
Confidential information 
and 188
Employees' expenses 180
Incidental expenses 181
Proof of business 
purpose 188
Receipt not readily available 
to prove 188
Spouse or dependents 180
Trip outside U.S. 182
Trip primarily for 
business 181
Trip primarily for personal 
reasons 181
U.S. travel 181
Unproved amounts 192
Visiting clients or 
customers 185
Charitable organization service, 
deduction for 166
Commuting expenses:
Employer-provided commuter 
vehicle 51
Conventions:
Delegates, deduction of 
unreimbursed 
amount 165
Deductible expenses 179
Examples of 
(Table 26-1) 180
Definition of 178
Estimates of 187
Expenses paid for others 204
Federal crime investigators or 
prosecutors 179
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill 
out 192
Fringe benefits 50
Getting from home to temporary 
workplace when multiple 
regular workplaces 185
Going home on days off from 
temporary assignment 179
Going to business meeting away 
from regular workplace 185
Going to family home 179
Indefinite assignment 179
Job search expenses 98
Medical purposes, for 148
Mileage rates (See Standard 
medical mileage rates)
New employment 200
No main place of business or 
work 178
Nonaccountable plans, definition 
of 192
Parking fees:
Business-related travel 187
Commuting expense 185
Employer-provided fringe 
benefit 51
Medical-related travel 148
Probationary work periods 179
Proof of expenses 187
Summary (Table 26-2) 188
Recordkeeping 
requirements 179, 187
Rental property maintenance and 
management, for 70
Reporting of 188
Table 26-3 showing forms to 
be used 192
Resorts or cruise ships 182
School children, transporting 
of 98
Summary of rules (Figure 
26-B) 185
Tax home, determination of 178
Temporary assignment or 
job 179
Temporary work location 185
Tips 180, 181
Transit pass 51
Work-related education 197
Traveling salespersons:
Deduction of expenses 189
Tax home, determination of 178
Treasury bills, notes, and 
bonds 62
Treasury Inspector General:
Telephone number to report 
anonymously fraud or 
misconduct of IRS 
employee 2
Treasury notes 59
Trees and plants:
Cost of, when casualty or theft 
loss involved 172, 173
Trust beneficiaries:
Dividends received by 65
Losses of trust 96
Receiving income from trust 96, 
97
Rollover restrictions 82
Trustees:
Administrative fees 202
IRA 202
IRAs:
Fees 123, 124
Notification of 
recharacterization 128
Transfer from trustee to 
trustee 127, 134
Trusts 65, 96, 207
 (See also Trust beneficiaries)
Grantor trusts 96
Income 96
Child beneficiary 211
Investment interest 160
Related party transactions with 
fiduciaries 107
TTY/TDD information 268
Tubal ligation:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Tuition, benefits under GI Bill 35
Tuition:
Alimony payments made to 
cover 135
Charitable deduction not allowed 
for paying 164, 167
Qualified 
programs (See Qualified 
tuition programs)
Tuition programs, 
qualified (See Qualified tuition 
programs)
U
U.S. citizen:
Earned income credit 232
U.S. citizen or resident 26
U.S. national 26
U.S. obligations, interest 59
U.S. possessions:
Charitable contributions to 163
Deduction of income tax paid 
to 152
Income from 6
U.S. Postal Service (See Post office 
employees)
U.S. savings bonds:
Education, used for 22
Interest on 98
Transfer between spouses 103
U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and 
bonds 62
U.S. Treasury bills or notes:
Trade of 107
U.S. Virgin Islands:
Income from 6
Unclaimed reimbursement 197
Uncollected rent:
Income 70
Underpayment penalties 38, 43, 
46
IRS computation 46
Undistributed capital gains 67, 
119, 251
Unearned income:
Children 57
Unearned income of 
child (See Children, subheading: 
Unearned income of)
Unemployment compensation 6, 
7, 94
Credit card insurance paying 96
Mandatory contributions to state 
funds, deduction of 151
Private fund, from 94
Repayment of benefits 94
Reporting on Forms 1040, 1040A, 
or 1040EZ 94
Supplemental benefits 94
Voluntary benefit fund 
contributions 204
Withholding 41, 94
Unemployment tax:
State employment taxes 219
Uniformed services 115
Uniforms 201
Charitable organization requiring, 
deduction for cost and 
upkeep of 165
Uniform Settlement Statement 
(Form HUD-1):
Points shown on 158
Unions 41, 94, 98
 (See also Labor unions)
Assessments 200
Dues 200
Publication 17 (2017) Page 287

Page 290 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
United States (See headings 
starting with “Federal” or “U.S.”)
United Way (See Charitable 
contributions)
Universities (See Colleges and 
universities)
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
Unrecaptured Section 1250 
gain 108, 120
Unstated interest 100, 106
Unused sick leave:
Cash payments for 147
Used clothing and household 
goods:
Charitable deduction for 167
Used clothing and household 
items:
Charitable deduction for fair 
market value 168
Use of home in business 200
Usurious interest 59
Utilities:
Charges for installing included in 
property basis 100
Emergency energy programs, 
charitable contributions 
to 163
Energy conservation 
subsidies 96, 99
Late payment charges, not 
deductible 161
Rebates 98
V
Vacation homes:
Determining if used as home 72
Points 158
Rental expenses 71, 72
Valuations 100, 173, 174
 (See also Fair market value (FMV))
 (See also Appraisals)
Value of time or services:
No charitable deduction for 164, 
165, 167
Vandalism:
Casualty loss due to 171
Vasectomy:
Deductibility as medical 
expense 148
Veterans' benefits:
Educational assistance 98
Veterans' insurance:
Dividends on 68
Veterans' organizations:
Charitable contributions to 163, 
164
Veterans benefits 52
Retroactive determination 54
Special statute of limitations. 54
Viatical settlements 91
Victims of terrorism (See Terrorist 
attacks)
VISTA volunteers 53
Vitamins:
Not deductible as medical 
expense 148
Volunteer firefighters:
Charitable contributions to 163
IRAs 124
Volunteer work 53, 216
Deductibility of contributions 
(Table 24-2) 165
Out-of-pocket expenses, 
deductible when serving for 
qualified organization 163, 
165
Tax counseling (Volunteer 
Income Tax Assistance 
program) 9, 53
Value of income lost by, not 
deductible 167
Vouchers for payment of tax 44
W
W-2 form (See Form W-2)
Wages and salaries 11, 47–55
 (See also Form W-2)
Accident and health 
insurance 49
Accrued leave payment 48
Adoption, employer 
assistance 49
Advance commissions 47
Allowances and 
reimbursements 40, 48
Archer MSA contributions 49
Awards and prizes 48
Babysitting 47
Back pay awards 48
Bonuses 48
Child care providers 47
Children's earnings 6
Clergy 52
De minimis benefits 49
Elective deferrals 51
Employee achievement 
award 48
Employee compensation 47
Farmworkers 38
Foreign employer 52
Form W-2 (See Form W-2)
Fringe benefits 48
Garnisheed 11
Government cost-of-living 
allowances 48
Household workers 38
Income 6, 7
Foreign 47
Long-term care coverage 49
Military retirees 38, 52
Military service 52
Miscellaneous compensation 47
Note for services 48
Outplacement services 48
Religious orders 52
Restricted property 51
Dividends on restricted 
stock 51
Retirement plan contributions by 
employer 51
Severance pay 48
Sick pay 48, 55
Social security and Medicare 
taxes paid by employer 48
Stock appreciation rights 48
Stock options 51
Supplemental 40
Volunteer work 53
Withholding (See Withholding)
Waiters and waitresses:
Tips (See Tip income)
War veterans' 
organizations (See Veterans' 
organizations)
War zone (See Combat zone)
Washington State Supplemental 
Workmen's Compensation 
Fund 152
Wash sales 105, 108, 111
Welfare benefits 34, 95
What's new 1
Wheelchairs:
As medical expense 148
Where to file 15
Widow/widower (See Surviving 
spouse)
Winter energy payments 96
Withholding 11, 38
 (See also Form W-2)
Agricultural Act of 1949 
payments 41
Changing amount withheld 39
For 2018 39
Checking amount of 39
Claim for refund 6
Commodity credit loans 41
Credit for 38, 44
Cumulative wage method 39
Definition 38
Determining amount to 
withhold 38, 39
Disaster Assistance Act of 1988 
payments 41
Dividend income 65
Employers, rules for 40
Exemption from 40
Federal income taxes, not 
deductible 155
Fiscal years 45
Form W-4:
Provided by employer 40
Fringe benefits 40
Gambling winnings 41, 45
General rules 38
Highest rate, employer must 
withhold at if no W-4 40
Incorrect form 45
IRA distributions 130
New job 39
Penalties 38, 40, 41
Pensions and annuities 13, 41, 
78, 82
Railroad retirement benefits 41, 
86
Repaying withheld tax 40
Rollovers 82
Salaries and wages 38
Separate returns 45
Sick pay 40
Social security benefits 41, 86
State and local income taxes, 
deduction for 151
Supplemental wages 40
Tips (See Tip income)
Unemployment 
compensation 41, 94
Work clothes 201
Workers' compensation 54
Mandatory contributions to state 
funds, deduction of 151
Return to work 54
Work-related education 194
Business deduction:
Qualified expenses 197
Reimbursements 198
Tax benefit of 194
Education required by employer 
or by law 195
Education that qualifies for new 
trade or business 196
Education to maintain or improve 
skills 195
Education to meet minimum 
requirements 195
Indefinite absence from 
work 195
Meal expenses 198
Qualifying education (Figure 
27-A) 196
Recordkeeping 
requirements 199
Reimbursement for 198
Teachers 195, 197
Temporary absence from 
work 195
Travel expenses for 197
Unclaimed reimbursement 197
Worksheets:
Capital loss carryover 119
Casualty and theft losses 171
Excess withholding credit 252
Exemption Phaseout 36
Head of household status and 
cost of keeping up home 23
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs), 
modified AGI computation 
(Worksheet 17-1) 126
Pensions or annuities, joint 
returns 80
Roth IRA modified adjusted gross 
income (MAGI), computation 
(Worksheet 17-2) 131
Simplified Method computation of 
taxable annuity 79
Social security or railroad 
retirement benefits, to figure 
taxability 86, 87
Student loan interest 
deduction 139
Support test 30
World Trade Center 
attacks (See Terrorist attacks)
Worthless securities 105
Wristwatch 204
Write-offs (See Cancellation of debt)
Y
Youth groups:
Troop leader's travel 
expenses 166
Page 288 Publication 17 (2017)

Page 291 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where To File
Mail your return to the address shown below that applies to you. If you want to use a private delivery service, see Private 
delivery services in chapter 1.
TIP
Envelopes without enough postage will be returned to you by the post office. Your envelope may need 
additional postage if it contains more than five pages or is oversized (for example, it is over 1/4 inch thick). Also, include 
your complete return address.
AND use the zip code below according to the form you are filing and 
whether you are enclosing payment
Form 1040 Form 1040A Form 1040EZ
IF you live in...
THEN send your 
return to the 
address below if 
you are 
requesting a 
refund or are 
NOT enclosing a 
payment...
OR send your 
return to the 
address below 
if you ARE 
enclosing a 
payment 
(check or 
money order)...
No 
payment 
enclosed
Payment 
enclosed
No 
payment 
enclosed
Payment 
enclosed
No 
payment 
enclosed
Payment 
enclosed
Florida, Louisiana, 
Mississippi, Texas
Department of the 
Treasury
Internal Revenue 
Service 
Austin, TX
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
P.O. Box 1214
Charlotte, NC
73301–
0002
28201–
1214
73301–
0015
28201–
1214
73301–
0014
28201–
1214
Alaska, Arizona, 
California, Colorado, 
Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, 
New Mexico, Oregon, 
Utah, Washington, 
Wyoming
Department of the 
Treasury
Internal Revenue 
Service 
Fresno, CA
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
P.O. Box 7704
San Francisco, 
CA
93888–
0002
94120–
7704
93888–
0015
94120–
7704
93888–
0014
94120–
7704
Arkansas, Illinois, 
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, 
Michigan, Minnesota, 
Montana, Nebraska, 
North Dakota, Ohio, 
Oklahoma, South 
Dakota, Wisconsin
Department of the 
Treasury
Internal Revenue 
Service 
Fresno, CA
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
P.O. Box 
802501
Cincinnati, OH
93888–
0002
45280–
2501
93888–
0015
45280–
2501
93888–
0014
45280–
2501
Alabama, Georgia, 
Kentucky, New Jersey, 
North Carolina, South 
Carolina, Tennessee, 
Virginia
Department of the 
Treasury
Internal Revenue 
Service 
Kansas City, MO
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
P.O. Box 
931000
Louisville, KY
64999–
0002
40293–
1000
64999–
0015
40293–
1000
64999–
0014
40293–
1000
Delaware, Maine, 
Massachusetts, 
Missouri, New 
Hampshire, New York, 
Vermont
Department of the 
Treasury
Internal Revenue 
Service 
Kansas City, MO
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
P.O. Box 37008
Hartford, CT
 64999–
0002
06176–
7008
64999–
0015
06176–
7008
64999–
0014
06176–
7008
Connecticut, District of 
Columbia, Maryland, 
Pennsylvania, Rhode 
Island, West Virginia
Department of the 
Treasury
Internal Revenue 
Service 
Ogden, UT
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
P.O. Box 37910
Hartford, CT
84201–
0002
06176–
7910
84201–
0015
06176–
7008
84201– 
0014
06176–
7910
A foreign country, U.S. 
possession or territory*, 
or use an APO or FPO 
address, or file Form 
2555, 2555-EZ, or 4563, 
or are a dual-status alien
Department of the 
Treasury
Internal Revenue 
Service 
Austin, TX
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
P.O. Box 1303
Charlotte, NC
73301–
0215
28201–
1303
73301–
0215
28201–
1303
73301–
0215
28201–
1303
* If you live in American Samoa, Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or the Northern Mariana Islands, see Pub. 570.
Publication 17 (2017) Page 289

Page 292 of 292  Fileid: … ations/P17/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 17:11 - 12-Dec-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Order Form
for Forms and
Publications
How To Use the Order
Form
Circle the items you need on the order form.
Use the blank spaces to order items not
listed. If you need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
Mail Your Order Form To:
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
TIP
The most frequently ordered forms and publications are listed on the order form below. 
You will receive two copies of each form, one copy of the instructions, and one copy of 
each publication you order. To help reduce waste, please order only the items you need 
to prepare your return.
/uni25B2                              /uni25B2
Circle the forms and 
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be included. 
Cut here
Name
Postal mailing address
City
Order Form
Please print.
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime phone number
State ZIP code
International postal code
( )
Use the blank spaces to 
order items not listed.
Save Money and Time by Going Online!
Download or order these and other forms and publications at IRS.gov/Forms
Schedule R
(1040A or
1040)
2106
1040
1040A
Schedule SE
(1040)
Pub. 590-A
8829
Schedule A
(1040)
1040EZ
Pub. 1
Schedule 8812
(1040A or
 1040)
Pub. 523
Schedule C
(1040)
1040-V
4506
Pub. 526
Schedule D
(1040)
1040X
Pub. 334
Pub. 527
4562Schedule E
(1040)
5405
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule F
(1040) Pub. 505
Schedule EIC
(1040A or
1040)
Pub. 596
8822
Schedule
C-EZ (1040)
6251
8283
Pub. 501
Pub. 502 Pub. 550
Pub. 575
Pub. 554Schedule H
(1040)
Pub. 9151040-ES
(2018)
Schedule J
(1040)
8606
8863
Pub. 972
Form 8949
8917
2441
Pub. 5354506-T
Pub. 525
Pub. 547
3903 Pub. 587
Pub. 551
Pub. 583
Pub. 9464868
4684
Pub. 4681
Schedule B
(1040A or
1040)
Pub. 970
8959
8960
 Print or type your name and address 
accurately in the space provided on the order 
form to ensure delivery of your order. Enclose 
the order form in an envelope and mail it to the 
IRS address shown next. You should receive 
your order within 10 business days after we 
receive your request.
Pub. 590-B
8962
8965
You can view and download the tax forms and publications you need at 
IRS.gov/Forms. You also can place an order for forms at IRS.gov/OrderForms to 
avoid having to complete and mail the order form.
Use your QR Reader app on 
your smartphone to scan 
this code and get connected 
to the IRS Forms and 
Publications homepage.
     Don’t send your tax return to the 
address shown here. Instead, see Where 
To File.
Page 290 Publication 17 (2017)