Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -35% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P463.SGM ( 1-Feb-2006) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\xcgcb\documents\2005 Publications\Publication 463\05p463 error correction.sgm
Page 1 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
What’s New ..................... 2Department
of the Reminder ...................... 2Travel,Treasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Entertainment, 1. Travel....................... 2Service
Traveling Away From Home........ 3
Travel to Family Home........ 3Gift, and Car Tax Home ................. 3
Temporary Assignment or Job...... 4
What Travel Expenses AreExpenses
Deductible?................ 4
Meals .................... 5
Travel in the United States...... 6
Travel Outside the UnitedFor use in preparing
States................. 7
Luxury Water Travel.......... 82005 Returns Conventions............... 8
2. Entertainment.................. 9
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Deductible?............. 10
Directly-Related Test......... 10
Associated Test............. 11
50% Limit.................... 12
Exceptions to the 50% Limit..... 12
3. Gifts........................ 13
4. Transportation................. 13
Car Expenses................. 15
Standard Mileage Rate........ 15
Actual Car Expenses......... 16
Leasing a Car.............. 23
Disposition of a Car............. 24
5. Recordkeeping................. 24
How To Prove Expenses.......... 24
What Are Adequate
Records? .............. 24
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? .............. 25
Separating and Combining
Expenses .............. 25
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts...... 26
Examples of Records......... 26
6. How To Report................. 27
Where To Report............... 27
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer .............. 27
Reimbursements ............... 27
Accountable Plans........... 28
Nonaccountable Plans........ 31
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients..... 31
Completing Forms 2106 and
2106-EZ .................. 31
Special Rules.............. 32
Illustrated Examples.......... 34
Get forms and other information
7. How To Get Tax Help............ 39faster and easier by:
Appendices ..................... 40
Internet • www.irs.gov
Index.......................... 54

Page 2 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ever, there are exceptions if the use of the vehi- You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
cle qualifies as a working condition fringe benefitasterisk must be included in the address.)What’s New (such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal use Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
vehicle). ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-Standard mileage rate.For 2005, the stan- ally to each email, we do appreciate yourA working condition fringe benefit is anydard mileage rate for the cost of operating your feedback and will consider your comments asproperty or service provided to you by your em-car for business use is: we revise our tax products.ployer for which you could deduct the cost as an
employee business expense if you had paid for• 401/2 cents per mile for the period January Tax questions. If you have a tax question,it.1 through August 31, 2005, and visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. WeA qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is onecannot answer tax questions at either of the• 481/2 cents per mile for the period Septem-that is not likely to be used more than minimallyaddresses listed above.ber 1 through December 31, 2005. for personal purposes because of its design.
Ordering forms and publications. VisitSee Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles underCar expenses and use of the standard mile- www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andActual Car Expenses in chapter 4.age rate are explained in chapter 4. publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theFor information on how to report your car
National Distribution Center at the addressexpenses that your employer did not provide orDepreciation limits on cars, trucks, and shown under How To Get Tax Help in the backreimburse you for (such as when you pay for gasvans. The total section 179 deduction and de- of this publication.and maintenance for a car your employer pro-preciation you can claim on cars, trucks, and
vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employervans you use for business purposes has de-
Useful Itemsin chapter 6.creased for vehicles first placed in service in
You may want to see:2005. See Depreciation limits in chapter 4. Who does not need to use this publication.
Partnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ-Publication
ers who reimburse their employees for business
❏ 225 Farmer’s Tax Guideexpenses should refer to their tax form instruc-Reminder tions and chapter 13 of Publication 535, Busi-❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
ness Expenses, for information on deducting
❏ 535 Business ExpensesPhotographs of missing children.The Inter- travel, meals, entertainment, and transportation
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theexpenses. ❏ 946 How To Depreciate PropertyNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-If you are an employee, you will not need to❏ 1542 Per Diem Ratesdren. Photographs of missing children selectedread this publication if all of the following are
by the Center may appear in this publication ontrue. Form (and Instructions)pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
• You fully accounted to your employer forhelp bring these children home by looking at the ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemizedyour work-related expenses.photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST Deductions(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. • You received full reimbursement for your❏ Schedule C (Form 1040)Profit or Lossexpenses. From Business
• Your employer required you to return any❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040)Net Profitexcess reimbursement and you did so.Introduction From Business
• There is no amount shown with a code “L”You may be able to deduct the ordinary and ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040)Profit or Lossin box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage andnecessary business-related expenses you have From FarmingTax Statement.for: ❏ 2106 Employee Business ExpensesIf you meet all of these conditions, there is no• Travel, need to show the expenses or the reimburse-❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee
ments on your return. If you would like more• Entertainment, Business Expenses
information on reimbursements and accounting• Gifts, or ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortizationto your employer, see chapter 6.
• Transportation. See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help, for
If you meet these conditions and yourinformation about getting these publications andAn ordinary expense is one that is common and employer included reimbursements forms.accepted in your field of trade, business, or on your Form W-2 in error, ask your
TIP
profession. A necessary expense is one that isemployer for a corrected Form W-2.helpful and appropriate for your business. An
expense does not have to be required to be Volunteers. If you perform services as a
considered necessary. volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may
be able to deduct some of your costs as aThis publication explains: charitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex- 1.penses in Giving Services in Publication 526,• What expenses are deductible,
Charitable Contributions, for information on the• How to report them on your return, expenses you can deduct.
• What records you need to prove your ex-
TravelComments and suggestions. We welcomepenses, and
your comments about this publication and your• How to treat any expense reimbursementssuggestions for future editions. If you temporarily travel away from your taxyou may receive. You can write to us at the following address:home, you can use this chapter to determine if
you have deductible travel expenses.
Who should use this publication. You Internal Revenue Service This chapter discusses:should read this publication if you are an em-Individual Forms and Publications Branch
ployee or a sole proprietor who has business-re- • Traveling away from home,SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
lated travel, entertainment, gift, or transportation1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406 • Temporary assignment or job, andexpenses. Washington, DC 20224
• What travel expenses are deductible.Users of employer-provided vehicles.If
an employer-provided vehicle was available for We respond to many letters by telephone. It also discusses the standard meal allowance,
your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener- Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in- rules for travel inside and outside the United
ally, your employer must include the value of the clude your daytime phone number, including the States, luxury water travel, and deductible con-
use or availability in your income as pay. How- area code, in your correspondence. vention expenses.
Page 2 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 3 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel expenses defined.For tax purposes, If you are working temporarily in the sameExample. You live in Cincinnati where you
travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary have a seasonal job for 8 months each year andcity where you and your family live, you may be
expenses of traveling away from home for your earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months inconsidered as traveling away from home. See
business, profession, or job. Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.Example 2, below.
Cincinnati is your main place of work becauseAn ordinary expense is one that is common
you spend most of your time there and earnExample 1. You are a truck driver and youand accepted in your field of trade, business, or
most of your income there.and your family live in Tucson. You are em-profession. A necessary expense is one that is
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal inhelpful and appropriate for your business. An
No main place of business or work. YouPhoenix. At the end of your long runs, you returnexpense does not have to be required to be
may have a tax home even if you do not have ato your home terminal in Phoenix and spend oneconsidered necessary.
regular or main place of work. Your tax homenight there before returning home. You cannotYou will find examples of deductible travel may be the home where you regularly live.deduct any expenses you have for meals andexpenses in Table 1-1, later.
lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling fromFactors used to determine tax home.IfPhoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix isyou do not have a regular or main place of
your tax home. business or work, use the following three factors
to determine where your tax home is.Traveling Away From Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-
burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The1. You perform part of your business in theHome rest of the year you work for the same employerarea of your main home and use thatin Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurantshome for lodging while doing business inYou are traveling away from home if: and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is thethe area.
same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-• Your duties require you to be away from 2. You have living expenses at your mainmore.the general area of your tax home (defined home that you duplicate because yourlater) substantially longer than an ordinaryBecause you spend most of your working business requires you to be away from thatday’s work, and time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,home.that city is your tax home. You cannot deduct• You need to sleep or rest to meet theany expenses you have for meals and lodging 3. You have not abandoned the area in whichdemands of your work while away from both your historical place of lodging andthere. However, when you return to work inhome. your claimed main home are located; youPittsburgh, you are away from your tax home
This rest requirement is not satisfied by merely have a member or members of your familyeven though you stay at your family home. You
napping in your car. You do not have to be away living at your main home; or you often usecan deduct the cost of your roundtrip between
from your tax home for a whole day or from dusk that home for lodging.Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deductto dawn as long as your relief from duty is longyour part of your family’s living expenses forIf you satisfy all three factors, your tax homeenough to get necessary sleep or rest. meals and lodging while you are living and work-is the home where you regularly live. If youing in Pittsburgh. satisfy only two factors, you may have a taxExample 1. You are a railroad conductor.
home depending on all the facts and circum-You leave your home terminal on a regularlyTax Home stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are anscheduled round-trip run between two cities and
itinerant; your tax home is wherever you workreturn home 16 hours later. During the run, youTo determine whether you are traveling awayand you cannot deduct travel expenses.have 6 hours off at your turnaround point wherefrom home, you must first determine the locationyou eat two meals and rent a hotel room to getof your tax home. Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-necessary sleep before starting the return trip.Generally, your tax home is your regularton in an apartment you rent. You have workedYou are considered to be away from home. place of business or post of duty, regardless of for your employer in Boston for a number of
years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-monthwhere you maintain your family home. It in-Example 2. You are a truck driver. You
executive training program. You do not expect tocludes the entire city or general area in whichleave your terminal and return to it later the
return to work in Boston after you complete youryour business or work is located.same day. You get an hour off at your turn-
training.If you have more than one regular place ofaround point to eat. Because you are not off to
business, your tax home is your main place ofget necessary sleep and the brief time off is not During your training, you do not do any work
business. See Main place of business or work,an adequate rest period, you are not traveling in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and
later.away from home. on-the-job training throughout the United States.
You keep your apartment in Boston and return toIf you do not have a regular or a main place
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a it frequently. You use your apartment to conductof business because of the nature of your work,
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- your personal business. You also keep up yourthen your tax home may be the place where you
nent duty assignment overseas, you are not community contacts in Boston. When you com-regularly live. See No main place of business or
traveling away from home. You cannot deduct plete your training, you are transferred to Loswork, later.
your expenses for meals and lodging. You can- Angeles. If you do not have a regular place of busi-not deduct these expenses even if you have to You do not satisfy factor (1) because you didness or post of duty and there is no place wheremaintain a home in the United States for your not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-you regularly live, you are considered an itiner-family members who are not allowed to accom- cause you had duplicate living expenses. Youant (a transient) and your tax home is whereverpany you overseas. If you are transferred from also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim aone permanent duty station to another, you may don your apartment in Boston as your maintravel expense deduction because you arehave deductible moving expenses, which are home, you kept your community contacts, andnever considered to be traveling away fromexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses. you frequently returned to live in your apartment.home.
A naval officer assigned to permanent duty You have a tax home in Boston.
aboard a ship that has regular eating and livingMain place of business or work.If you havefacilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel Example 2. You are an outside salespersonmore than one place of work, consider the fol-expense purposes. with a sales territory covering several states.lowing when determining which one is your main
Your employer’s main office is in Newark, butplace of business or work.
you do not conduct any business there. YourTravel to Family Home • The total time you ordinarily spend in eachwork assignments are temporary, and you have
place.If you (and your family) do not live at your tax no way of knowing where your future assign-
home (defined later), you cannot deduct the cost ments will be located. You have a room in your• The level of your business activity in eachof traveling between your tax home and your married sister’s house in Dayton. You stay thereplace.family home. You also cannot deduct the cost of for one or two weekends a year, but you do no
• Whether your income from each place ismeals and lodging while at your tax home. See work in the area. You do not pay your sister for
significant or insignificant.Example 1 that follows. the use of the room.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You do not satisfy any of the three factorsExample 1. You are a construction worker. home on business. The type of expense you can
You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You deduct depends on the facts and your circum-listed earlier. You are an itinerant and have no
are a member of a trade union in Los Angeles stances.tax home.
that helps you get work in the Los Angeles area.Table 1-1 summarizes travel expenses you
Because of a shortage of work, you took a job onmay be able to deduct. You may have other
a construction project in Fresno. Your job wasdeductible travel expenses that are not covered
scheduled to end in 8 months. The job actuallythere, depending on the facts and your circum-Temporary lasted 10 months. stances.
You realistically expected the job in FresnoAssignment or Job When you travel away from home onto last 8 months. The job actually did last less business, you should keep records ofthan 1 year. The job is temporary and your taxYou may regularly work at your tax home and all the expenses you have and anyRECORDS
home is still in Los Angeles.also work at another location. It may not be advances you receive from your employer. Youpractical to return to your tax home from this can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherExample 2. The facts are the same as inother location at the end of each work day. written record to keep track of your expenses.Example 1, except that you realistically ex-
The types of expenses you need to record,pected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. TheTemporary assignment vs. indefinite assign- along with supporting documentation, are de-job actually was completed in 10 months.ment. If your assignment or job away from scribed in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).Your job in Fresno is indefinite because youyour main place of work is temporary, your taxrealistically expected the work to last longer thanhome does not change. You are considered to Separating costs.If you have one expense1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1be away from home for the whole period you are that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,year. You cannot deduct any travel expensesaway from your main place of work. You can and other services (such as lodging or transpor-you had in Fresno because Fresno became yourdeduct your travel expenses if they otherwise tation), you must allocate that expense betweentax home.qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary the cost of meals and entertainment and the cost
assignment in a single location is one that is of other services. You must have a reasonableExample 3. The facts are the same as inrealistically expected to last (and does in fact basis for making this allocation. For example,Example 1, except that you realistically ex-last) for one year or less. you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-pected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. AfterHowever, if your assignment or job is indefi- cludes one or more meals in its room charge.8 months, however, you were asked to remainnite, the location of the assignment or job be-for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15Travel expenses for another individual.If acomes your new tax home and you cannot months). spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withdeduct your travel expenses while there. AnInitially, you realistically expected the job inyou (or your employee) on a business trip or to aassignment or job in a single location is consid-Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, duebusiness convention, you generally cannot de-ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to lastto changed circumstances occurring after 8duct his or her travel expenses.for more than one year, whether or not it actuallymonths, it was no longer realistic for you to
lasts for more than one year. expect that the job in Fresno would last for oneEmployee. You can deduct the travel ex-
If your assignment is indefinite, you mustyear or less. You can only deduct your travelpenses of someone who goes with you if that
include in your income any amounts you receiveexpenses for the first 8 months. You cannotperson:
from your employer for living expenses, even ifdeduct any travel expenses you had after that
they are called travel allowances and you ac-time because Fresno became your tax home 1. Is your employee,
count to your employer for them. You may bewhen the job became indefinite. 2. Has a bona fide business purpose for theable to deduct the cost of relocating to your new travel, andGoing home on days off. If you go back totax home as a moving expense. See Publication
your tax home from a temporary assignment on521 for more information. 3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the
your days off, you are not considered away fromtravel expenses.
home while you are in your hometown. YouException for federal crime investigations or
cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-Business associate.If a business associ-prosecutions. If you are a federal employee
ing there. However, you can deduct your travelate travels with you and meets the conditions inparticipating in a federal crime investigation or
expenses, including meals and lodging, while(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travelprosecution, you are not subject to the one-year
traveling between your temporary place of workexpenses you have for that person. A businessrule. This means you may be able to deduct
and your tax home. You can claim these ex-associate is someone with whom you could rea-travel expenses even if you are away from yourpenses up to the amount it would have cost yousonably expect to actively conduct business. Atax home for more than one year. to stay at your temporary place of work. business associate can be a current or prospec-For you to qualify, the Attorney General mustIf you keep your hotel room during your visittive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier,certify that you are traveling: home, you can deduct the cost of your hotelemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi-
room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-• For the federal government, sor.
penses of returning home up to the amount you• In a temporary duty status, and Bona fide business purpose.A bona fidewould have spent for meals had you stayed atbusiness purpose exists if you can prove a realyour temporary place of work.• To investigate or prosecute, or provide business purpose for the individual’s presence.support services for the investigation or Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-Probationary work period.If you take a jobprosecution of, a federal crime. sisting in entertaining customers, are notthat requires you to move, with the understand-
You can deduct your otherwise allowable travel enough to make the expenses deductible.ing that you will keep the job if your work is
expenses throughout the period of certification.satisfactory during a probationary period, the job
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of your
Determining temporary or indefinite.You ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda isexpenses for meals and lodging during the pro-
must determine whether your assignment is not Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally typesbationary period.
temporary or indefinite when you start work. If notes, performs similar services, and accompa-
you expect an assignment or job to last for one nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-
year or less, it is temporary unless there are formance of these services does not establish
facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise. that her presence on the trip is necessary to theWhat Travel ExpensesAn assignment or job that is initially temporary conduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses are
may become indefinite due to changed circum- not deductible.Are Deductible?
stances. A series of assignments to the same Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A
location, all for short periods but that togetherOnce you have determined that you are travel- single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the
cover a long period, may be considered an in-ing away from your tax home, you can determine total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,
definite assignment. what travel expenses are deductible. but only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he uses
The following examples illustrate whether anYou can deduct ordinary and necessary ex- public transportation, he can deduct only his
assignment or job is temporary or indefinite.penses you have when you travel away from fare.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
standard meal allowance. If you use the stan-Table 1-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-
ords to prove the time, place, and businessThis chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home
purpose of your travel. See the recordkeepingfor business purposes.
rules for travel in chapter 5.
IF you have Incidental expenses.The term “incidental ex-expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of... penses” means:
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your• Fees and tips given to porters, baggagebusiness destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you arecarriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewardsriding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, youror stewardesses and others on ships, andcost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise hotel servants in foreign countries,Ships (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits.
• Transportation between places of lodging
taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you or business and places where meals arebus, and airport between: taken, if suitable meals can be obtained atlimousine 1) The airport or station and your hotel, and the temporary duty site, and2) The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your
• Mailing costs associated with filing travelbusiness meeting place, or your temporary work location.
vouchers and payment of employer-spon-
baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your regularsored charge card billings.
shipping and temporary work locations.
Incidental expenses do not include expenses for
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home onlaundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-
business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileageing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a carcalls.
while away from home on business, you can deduct only the
business-use portion of the expenses. Incidental expenses only method.You can
use an optional method (instead of actual cost)lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or longfor deducting incidental expenses only. Theenough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform youramount of the deduction is $3 a day for inciden-duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, andtal expenses paid or incurred for travel awayrelated tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits. from home in 2005. You can use this method
only if you did not pay or incur any meal ex-cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
penses. You cannot use this method on any daytelephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes businessthat you use the standard meal allowance. Thiscommunication by fax machine or other communication devices. method is subject to the proration rules for par-
tial days. See Travel for days you depart andtips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
return, later in this chapter.
other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your Federal employees should refer to thebusiness travel. These expenses might include transportation to or Federal Travel Regulations atfrom a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, computer rental www.gsa.gov. Click on “Per DiemCAUTION
!
fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer. Rates,” then on “Federal Travel Regulation
(FTR) Overview” for changes affecting claims
for reimbursement of these expenses.can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost
Meals
of your meals. 50% limit may apply.If you use the standard
You can deduct the cost of meals in either of the meal allowance method for meal expenses andIf you are reimbursed for the cost of yourfollowing situations. you are not reimbursed or you are reimbursedmeals, how you apply the 50% limit depends onunder a nonaccountable plan, you can generallywhether your employer’s reimbursement plan• It is necessary for you to stop for substan- deduct only 50% of the standard meal allow-was accountable or nonaccountable. If you aretial sleep or rest to properly perform your ance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta-not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whetherduties while traveling away from home on ble plan and you are deducting amounts that arethe unreimbursed meal expense is for businessbusiness. more than your reimbursements, you can de-travel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-• The meal is business-related entertain- duct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50%cusses the 50% limit in more detail, and chapterment. limit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and6 discusses accountable and nonaccountableaccountable and nonaccountable plans are dis-plans.Business-related entertainment is discussed in cussed in chapter 6.chapter 2. The following discussion deals only
with meals that are not business-related enter- There is no optional standard lodging
Actual Costtainment. amount similar to the standard meal
allowance. Your allowable lodging ex-CAUTION
!
You can use the actual cost of your meals toLavish or extravagant.You cannot deduct pense deduction is your actual cost.figure the amount of your expense before reim-expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-
bursement and application of the 50% deductionWho can use the standard meal allowance.gant. An expense is not considered lavish or
limit. If you use this method, you must keepYou can use the standard meal allowanceextravagant if it is reasonable based on the facts
records of your actual cost. whether you are an employee or self-employed,and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-
and whether or not you are reimbursed for yourlowed merely because they are more than a
traveling expenses.fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-Standard Meal Allowancetaurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. Use of the standard meal allowance for other
Generally, you can use the “standard meal al-travel.You can use the standard meal allow-50% limit on meals. You can figure your lowance” method as an alternative to the actual ance to figure your meal expenses when youmeals expense using either of the followingcost method. It allows you to use a set amount travel in connection with investment and othermethods. for your daily meals and incidental expenses income-producing property. You can also use it
(M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac- to figure your meal expenses when you travel for• Actual cost.
tual costs. The set amount varies depending on qualifying educational purposes. You cannot• The standard meal allowance. where and when you travel. In this publication, use the standard meal allowance to figure the
Both of these methods are explained below. But, “standard meal allowance” refers to the federal cost of your meals when you travel for medical
regardless of the method you use, you generally rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount of or charitable purposes.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Amount of standard meal allowance. The United States) from October 1, 2005, through home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.
December 31, 2005.standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE You spend $1,070 for the 9 days you are away
rate. For travel in 2005, the rate for most small from home for travel, meals, lodging, and otherUsing the special rate for transportation work-localities in the United States is $31 a day from travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-ers eliminates the need for you to determine theJanuary 1, 2005, through September 30, 2005, bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, andstandard meal allowance for every area whereand $39 a day from October 1, 2005, through your total cost would have been $920. You canyou stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to useDecember 31, 2005. deduct $920 for your trip, including the cost ofthe special rate for any trip, you must use the
Most major cities and many other localities in round-trip transportation to and from New Orle-special rate (and not use the regular standard
the United States are designated as high-cost ans. The deduction for your meals is subject tomeal allowance rates) for all trips you take that
areas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-year. the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.
lowances. These rates are listed in Publication
1542, which is available on the Internet atTravel for days you depart and return.For
www.irs.gov. both the day you depart for and the day youTrip Primarily for
return from a business trip, you must prorate thePersonal ReasonsYou can also find this information onstandard meal allowance (figure a reducedthe Internet at www.gsa.gov. Click on If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,amount for each day). You can do so by one of“Per Diem Rates,” then select “2005” such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is atwo methods.for the period January 1, 2005 – September 30, nondeductible personal expense. However, you2005, and select “2006” for the period October 1,• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- can deduct any expenses you have while at your2005 – December 31, 2005. However, you can dard meal allowance. destination that are directly related to your busi-apply the rates in effect before October 1, 2005,• Method 2: You can prorate using any ness.for expenses of all travel within the United Statesmethod that you consistently apply and A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be afor 2005 instead of the updated rates. You mustthat is in accordance with reasonable busi-vacation even if the promoter advertises that it isconsistently use either the rates for the first 9ness practice. primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-months of 2005 or the updated rates for the
period of October 1, 2005, through December dental business activities during a trip, such as
Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans31, 2005. viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealing
as a convention planner. In March, her employerwith general subjects, will not change what isIf you travel to more than one location in one
sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, toreally a vacation into a business trip.day, use the rate in effect for the area where you
attend a planning seminar. She left her home instop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-
New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday andtation industry, however, see Special rate for
arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. AfterPart of Trip Outsidetransportation workers, later. spending two nights there, she flew back to Newthe United StatesStandard meal allowance for areas outsideOrleans on Friday and arrived back home at
the continental United States.The standard 8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amountIf part of your trip is outside the United States,meal allowance rates do not apply to travel into cover her expenses and included it with heruse the rules described later in this chapterAlaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outsidewages. under Travel Outside the United States for thatthe continental United States. The federal perUnder Method 1, Jen can claim 21/2 days of part of the trip. For the part of your trip that isdiem rates for these locations are publishedthe standard meal allowance for Washington,inside the United States, use the rules for travelmonthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al- DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andin the United States. Travel outside the Unitedlowances for Foreign Areas. Friday (the days she departed and returned),States does not include travel from one point inand the full daily rate for Thursday.You can access foreign per diem the United States to another point in the UnitedUnder Method 2, Jen could also use anyrates at www.state.gov/m/a/als/prdm. States. The following discussion can help youmethod that she applies consistently and that isdetermine whether your trip was entirely withinin accordance with reasonable business prac-the United States.tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of the
Your employer may have these ratesstandard meal allowance even though a federalPublic transportation.If you travel by publicavailable, or you can purchase theemployee would have to use Method 1 and be
transportation, any place in the United Statespublication from the: limited to only 21/2 days.
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
point in the United States. Once the vehicleTravel in the United Statesleaves the last scheduled stop in the UnitedSuperintendent of Documents
States on its way to a point outside the UnitedU.S. Government Printing Office The following discussion applies to travel in the
States, you apply the rules under Travel OutsideP.O. Box 371954 United States. For this purpose, the United
the United States.Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954 States includes the 50 states and the District of
Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-You can also order it by calling the Example. You fly from New York to Puertopenses depends on how much of your trip wasGovernment Printing Office at Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You returnbusiness related and on how much of your trip1-202-512-1800 (not a toll-free num- to New York nonstop. The flight from New Yorkoccurred within the United States. See Part ofber). to Miami is in the United States, so only the flightTrip Outside the United States, later.
Special rate for transportation workers. from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United
You can use a special standard meal allowance States. Because there are no scheduled stops
if you work in the transportation industry. YouTrip Primarily for Business between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the
are in the transportation industry if your work: return trip is outside the United States.You can deduct all of your travel expenses if
• Directly involves moving people or goodsyour trip was entirely business related. If yourPrivate car.Travel by private car in the Unitedby airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, ortrip was primarily for business and, while at yourStates is travel between points in the Unitedtruck, and business destination, you extended your stay forStates, even though you are on your way to aa vacation, made a personal side trip, or had• Regularly requires you to travel away from destination outside the United States.other personal activities, you can deduct yourhome and, during any single trip, usuallybusiness-related travel expenses. These ex-involves travel to areas eligible for differ- Example. You travel by car from Denver topenses include the travel costs of getting to andent standard meal allowance rates. Mexico City and return. Your travel from Denverfrom your business destination and any
to the border and from the border back to Den-If this applies to you, you can claim a standardbusiness-related expenses at your business
ver is travel in the United States, and the rules inmeal allowance of $41 a day ($46 for traveldestination.
this section apply. The rules under Traveloutside the continental United States) from Jan-
Outside the United States apply to your trip fromuary 1, 2005, through September 30, 2005, andExample. You work in Atlanta and take a
the border to Mexico City and back to the border.$52 a day ($58 for travel outside the continental business trip to New Orleans. On your way
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This is because the day you depart does notCounting business days. Your businessTravel Outside
count as a day outside the United States. days include transportation days, days yourthe United States presence was required, days you spent on busi-You can deduct your cost of the round-trip
ness, and certain weekends and holidays.flight between Denver and Brussels. You canIf any part of your business travel is outside the
also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels forUnited States, some of your deductions for the Transportation day.Count as a businessThursday and Friday while you conducted busi-cost of getting to and from your destination may day any day you spend traveling to or from aness. However, you cannot deduct the cost ofbe limited. For this purpose, the United States business destination. However, if because of ayour stay in Brussels from Saturday throughincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum- nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a directTuesday because those days were spent onbia. route, your business days are the days it wouldnonbusiness activities.How much of your travel expenses you can take you to travel a reasonably direct route to
deduct depends in part upon how much of yourException 3 - Less than 25% of time on your business destination. Extra days for side
trip outside the United States was business re-personal activities.Your trip is consideredtrips or nonbusiness activities cannot be
lated. entirely for business if: counted as business days.
Presence required. Count as a business• You were outside the United States for
day any day your presence is required at amore than a week, andTravel Entirely for Business or
particular place for a specific business purpose.Considered Entirely for Business • You spent less than 25% of the total timeCount it as a business day even if you spendyou were outside the United States onmost of the day on nonbusiness activities.You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-nonbusiness activities.ting to and from your business destination if your Day spent on business. If your principalFor this purpose, count both the day your triptrip is entirely for business or considered entirely activity during working hours is pursuit of yourbegan and the day it ended.for business. trade or business, count the day as a business
day. Also, count as a business day any day youTravel entirely for business.If you travel Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo,are prevented from working because of circum-outside the United States and you spend thewhere you spent 14 days on business and 5stances beyond your control.entire time on business activities, you can de-days on personal matters. You then flew back to
duct all of your travel expenses. Seattle. You spent one day flying in each direc-Certain weekends and holidays. Count
tion. weekends, holidays, and other necessaryTravel considered entirely for business.
Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of yourstandby days as business days if they fall be-Even if you did not spend your entire time on
total time abroad was for nonbusiness activities,tween business days. But if they follow yourbusiness activities, your trip is considered en-
you can deduct as travel expenses what it wouldbusiness meetings or activity and you remain attirely for business if you meet at least one of the
have cost you to make the trip if you had notyour business destination for nonbusiness orfollowing four exceptions.
engaged in any nonbusiness activity. The personal reasons, do not count them as busi-
Exception 1 - No substantial control. amount you can deduct is the cost of the ness days.
Your trip is considered entirely for business ifround-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-
you did not have substantial control over arrang- Example 1. Your tax home is New Yorkject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other related
ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of City. You travel to Quebec, where you have aexpenses.
your trip does not, by itself, mean that you have business appointment on Friday. You have an-Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-substantial control over arranging your trip. other appointment on the following Monday. Be-eration. Your trip is considered entirely forYou do not have substantial control over cause your presence was required on bothbusiness if you can establish that a personalyour trip if you: Friday and Monday, they are business days.vacation was not a major consideration, even ifBecause the weekend is between business• Are an employee who was reimbursed oryou have substantial control over arranging thedays, Saturday and Sunday are counted aspaid a travel expense allowance, trip. business days. This is true even though you use
• Are not related to your employer, and the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or
other nonbusiness activity.• Are not a managing executive. Travel Primarily for Business
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you had noIf you travel outside the United States primarily“Related to your employer” is defined later in
business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed untilfor business but spend some of your time onchapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances.
Monday before starting home, Saturday andother activities, you generally cannot deduct allA “managing executive” is an employee who
Sunday would be nonbusiness days.of your travel expenses. You can only deduct thehas the authority and responsibility, without be-
business portion of your cost of getting to anding subject to the veto of another, to decide on Nonbusiness activity on the way to or fromfrom your destination. You must allocate thethe need for the business travel. your business destination.If you stoppedcosts between your business and other activitiesA self-employed person generally has sub- for a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei-to determine your deductible amount. Seestantial control over arranging business trips. ther on the way from the United States to yourTravel allocation rules, later.Exception 2 - Outside United States no business destination, or on the way back to the
more than a week. Your trip is considered United States from your business destination,You do not have to allocate your
entirely for business if you were outside the you must allocate part of your travel expenses totravel expenses if you meet one of the
United States for a week or less, combining the nonbusiness activity.four exceptions listed earlier under
TIP
business and nonbusiness activities. One week The part you must allocate is the amount itTravel considered entirely for business. In those
means seven consecutive days. In counting the would have cost you to travel between the pointcases, you can deduct the total cost of getting to
days, do not count the day you leave the United where travel outside the United States beginsand from your destination.
States, but do count the day you return to the and your nonbusiness destination and a return
Travel allocation rules.If your trip outside theUnited States. to the point where travel outside the United
United States was primarily for business, youStates ends.
must allocate your travel time on a day-to-dayExample. You traveled to Brussels primarily You determine the nonbusiness portion of
basis between business days and nonbusinessfor business. You left Denver on Tuesday and that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The
days. The days you depart from and return to theflew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew from numerator of the fraction is the number of non-
United States are both counted as days outsideNew York to Brussels, arriving the next morning. business days during your travel outside the
the United States.On Thursday and Friday, you had business dis- United States and the denominator is the total
cussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, you To figure the deductible amount of yournumber of days you spend outside the United
were sightseeing. You flew back to New York, round-trip travel expenses, use the followingStates.
arriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday, fraction. The numerator (top number) is the total
you flew back to Denver. number of business days outside the United Example. You live in New York. On May 4
Although you were away from your home in States. The denominator (bottom number) is the you flew to Paris to attend a business confer-
Denver for more than a week, you were not total number of travel days outside the United ence that began on May 5. The conference
outside the United States for more than a week. States. ended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Highest Daily Limitto Dublin where you visited with friends until the more clearly reflects the time spent on other
2005 Federal on Luxuryafternoon of May 21, when you flew directlythan business activities outside the United Dates Per Diem Water Travelhome to New York. The primary purpose for theStates.
trip was to attend the conference. Jan. 1 –  March 31 $296 $592
If you had not stopped in Dublin, you would April 1 –  April 30 228 456
have arrived home the evening of May 14. YouTravel Primarily for Personal May 1 –  June 30 251 502did not meet any of the exceptions that wouldReasons
July 1 –  August 31 246 492allow you to consider your travel entirely for
If you travel outside the United States primarilybusiness. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are Sept. 1 –  Sept. 30 259 518for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-business days and May 15 through May 21 (7 Oct. 1 –  Nov. 30 290 580tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personaldays) are nonbusiness days.
Dec. 1 –  Dec. 31 344 688You can deduct the cost of your meals (sub-expense. If you spend some time attending brief
ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and otherprofessional seminars or a continuing education
business-related travel expenses while in Paris.program, you can deduct your registration feesExample. Caroline, a travel agent, traveledYou cannot deduct your expenses while inand other expenses you have that are directlyby ocean liner from New York to London, Eng-Dublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it related to your business. land, on business in May. Her expense for thewould have cost you to travel round-trip between 6-day cruise was $3,500. Caroline’s deductionNew York and Dublin. Example. The university from which youfor the cruise cannot exceed $3,012 (6 days ×You paid $450 to fly from New York to Paris,graduated has a continuing education program$502 daily limit).$200 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $500 to flyfor members of its alumni association. This pro-
from Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfaregram consists of trips to various foreign coun-
from New York to Dublin would have been $850. Meals and entertainment.If your expensestries where academic exercises andYou figure the deductible part of your air for luxury water travel include separately statedconferences are set up to acquaint individuals intravel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of the amounts for meals or entertainment, thosemost occupations with selected facilities in sev-round-trip fare and other expenses you would amounts are subject to the 50% limit on mealseral regions of the world. However, none of thehave had in traveling directly between New York and entertainment before you apply the dailyconferences are directed toward specific occu-and Dublin ($850 × 7/18 = $331) from your total limit. For a discussion of the 50% limit, seepations or professions. It is up to each partici-expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to chapter 2.pant to seek out specialists and organizationalDublin and back to New York ($450 + $200 +settings appropriate to his or her occupational$500 = $1,150). Example. In the previous example,interests.Your deductible air travel expense is $819 Caroline’s luxury water travel had a total cost ofThree-hour sessions are held each day over($1,150 − $331). $3,500. Of that amount, $1,600 was separatelya 5-day period at each of the selected overseasstated as meals and entertainment. Caroline,Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond facilities where participants can meet with indi-who is self-employed, is not reimbursed for anybusiness destination.If you had a vacationvidual practitioners. These sessions are com-of her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de-or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyondposed of a variety of activities includingductible travel expenses as follows.your business destination, you must allocateworkshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-
part of your travel expenses to the nonbusinessvelopment, and exercises. Professional confer-Meals and entertainment...... $1,600activity. ence directors schedule and conduct the 50% limit................ × .50The part you must allocate is the amount itsessions. Participants can choose those ses-Allowable meals & entertainment $  800would have cost you to travel between the point Other travel expenses....... +  1,900sions they wish to attend.where travel outside the United States begins Allowable cost before the daily limit.... $2,700You can participate in this program since youand your business destination and a return toare a member of the alumni association. YouDaily limit for May 2005...... $5 0 2the point where travel outside the United States Times number of days....... × 6and your family take one of the trips. You spendends. Maximum luxury water travel deduction $3,012about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.You determine the nonbusiness portion ofThe rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-Amount of allowable deduction..... $2,700that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. Theing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1numerator of the fraction is the number of non- Caroline’s deduction for her cruise is limited toweek.business days during your travel outside the $2,700, even though the limit on luxury waterYour travel expenses for the trip are notUnited States and the denominator is the total travel is higher.deductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-number of days you spend outside the United
tion. However, registration fees and any otherNot separately stated.If your meal or en-States.
incidental expenses you have for the fiveNone of your travel expenses for nonbusi- tertainment charges are not separately stated or
ness activities at, near, or beyond your business planned sessions you attended that are directlyare not clearly identifiable, you do not have to
destination are deductible. related and beneficial to your business are de-allocate any portion of the total charge to meals
ductible business expenses. These expensesor entertainment.
Example. Assume that the dates are theshould be specifically stated in your records to
same as in the previous example but that in-ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-
stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you fly Exceptionsness expenses.
to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.
The daily limit on luxury water travel (discussedYou cannot deduct any part of the cost ofLuxury Water Travel earlier) does not apply to expenses you have toyour trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris.
In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfare attend a convention, seminar, or meeting onIf you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other
and other expenses from New York to Paris and board a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships underform of luxury water transportation for businessback to New York. Conventions Held Outside the North Americanpurposes, there is a daily limit on the amountYou can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip plane Area.you can deduct. The limit is twice the highestfare and other travel expenses from New York tofederal per diem rate allowable at the time ofParis, plus your meals (subject to the 50% limit), Conventionsyour travel. (Generally, the federal per diem islodging, and any other business expenses youthe amount paid to federal government employ-had in Paris. (Assume these expenses total You can deduct your travel expenses when youees for daily living expenses when they travel$900). If the round-trip plane fare and other attend a convention if you can show that youraway from home, but in the United States, fortravel-related expenses (such as food during the attendance benefits your trade or business. Youbusiness purposes.)trip) are $800 from New York to Paris, you can cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-deduct travel costs of $489 (11/18 × $800), plus ily.Daily limit on luxury water travel.The high-the full $900 for the expenses you had in Paris.
If the convention is for investment, political,est federal per diem rate allowed and the daily
social, or other purposes unrelated to your tradelimit for luxury water travel in 2005 is shown inOther methods. You can use another method
the following table. or business, you cannot deduct the expenses.of counting business days if you establish that it
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your appointment or election as a Club dues and membership fees. You can-Cruise Ships
delegate does not, in itself, determine not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for
You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of yourwhether you can deduct travel ex- membership in any club organized for:CAUTION
!
expenses of attending conventions, seminars,penses. You can deduct your travel expenses
• Business,or similar meetings held on cruise ships. Allonly if your attendance is connected to your own
ships that sail are considered cruise ships.trade or business. • Pleasure,You can deduct these expenses only if all of
• Recreation, orthe following requirements are met.Convention agenda. The convention agenda
• Other social purpose.or program generally shows the purpose of the1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di-convention. You can show your attendance at rectly related to your trade or business.This rule applies to any membership organiza-the convention benefits your trade or business tion if one of its principal purposes is either:2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered inby comparing the agenda with the official duties
the United States. • To conduct entertainment activities forand responsibilities of your position. The agenda
members or their guests, ordoes not have to deal specifically with your offi-3. All of the cruise ship’s ports of call are in
cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enoughthe United States or in possessions of the• To provide members or their guests with
if the agenda is so related to your position that itUnited States. access to entertainment facilities, dis-
shows your attendance was for business pur- cussed later.4. You attach to your return a written state-poses. ment signed by you that includes informa-The purposes and activities of a club, not itstion about: name, will determine whether or not you can
Conventions Held Outside deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paida. The total days of the trip (not including
the North American Area to:the days of transportation to and from
the cruise ship port),You cannot deduct expenses for attending a • Country clubs,
b. The number of hours each day that youconvention, seminar, or similar meeting held • Golf and athletic clubs,devoted to scheduled business activi-outside the North American area unless:
ties, and • Airline clubs,• The meeting is directly related to your
c. A program of the scheduled business • Hotel clubs, andtrade or business, and
activities of the meeting. • Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-• It is as reasonable to hold the meeting
cumstances generally considered to beoutside the North American area as in it.5. You attach to your return a written state-conducive to business discussions.ment signed by an officer of the organiza-If the meeting meets these requirements, yoution or group sponsoring the meeting thatalso must satisfy the rules for deducting ex-includes: Entertainment facilities.Generally, you can-penses for business trips in general, discussed not deduct any expense for the use of an enter-earlier under Travel Outside the United States. a. A schedule of the business activities oftainment facility. This includes expenses for
each day of the meeting, and depreciation and operating costs such as rent,North American area. The North American utilities, maintenance, and protection.b. The number of hours you attended thearea includes the following locations.
scheduled business activities. An entertainment facility is any property you
American Samoa Johnston Island own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples
Antigua and Barbuda Kingman Reef include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp,
Baker Island Marshall Islands swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car,Barbados Mexico airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in aBermuda Micronesia vacation resort.Canada Midway Islands
Costa Rica Northern Mariana Out-of-pocket expenses.You can deductDominica Islands out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and2.Dominican Republic Palau beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, thatGrenada Palmyra you provided during entertainment at a facility.Guam Puerto Rico
These are not expenses for the use of an enter-Guyana Saint Lucia
tainment facility. However, these expenses areHonduras Trinidad and Tobago Entertainment
Howland Island USA subject to the directly-related and associated
Jamaica U.S. Virgin Islands tests and to the 50% limit, all discussed later.You may be able to deduct business-relatedJarvis Island Wake Island entertainment expenses you have for entertain-
Gift or entertainment.Any item that might being a client, customer, or employee. The rules
considered either a gift or entertainment gener-The North American area also includes U.S.and definitions are summarized in Table 2-1.
ally will be considered entertainment. However,islands, cays, and reefs that are possessions ofYou can deduct entertainment expenses
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-the United States and not part of the fifty statesonly if they are both ordinary and necessary and
ages that you intend the customer to use at aor the District of Columbia. meet one of the following tests.
later date, treat it as a gift.
• Directly-related test. If you give a customer tickets to a theaterReasonableness test. The following factors
performance or sporting event and you do not go• Associated test.are taken into account to determine if it was
with the customer to the performance or event,reasonable to hold the meeting outside theBoth of these tests are explained later underyou have a choice. You can treat the tickets asNorth American area. What Entertainment Expenses Are Deductible.either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to
• The purpose of the meeting and the activi-An ordinary expense is one that is commonyour advantage.
ties taking place at the meeting. and accepted in your field of trade, business, orYou can change your treatment of the tickets
profession. A necessary expense is one that isat a later date by filing an amended return.• The purposes and activities of the spon-helpful and appropriate for your business. AnGenerally, an amended return must be filedsoring organizations or groups. expense does not have to be required to bewithin 3 years from the date the original return• The homes of the active members of theconsidered necessary. was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxsponsoring organizations and the places was paid, whichever is later.The amount you can deduct for enter-at which other meetings of the sponsoring If you go with the customer to the event, youtainment expenses may be limited.organizations or groups have been or will must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-Generally, you can deduct only 50%CAUTION
!
be held. ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
• Other relevant factors you may present. to treat the tickets as a gift.This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are more than a fixed dollar amount or take more than one event at the same sports arena,
place at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs,you generally cannot deduct more than the priceWhat Entertainment
or resorts. of a nonluxury box seat ticket.
Expenses To determine whether a skybox has beenAllocating between business and
rented for more than one event, count eachnonbusiness. If you entertain business andAre Deductible? game or other performance as one event. Fornonbusiness individuals at the same event, you
must divide your entertainment expenses be-example, renting a skybox for a series of playoffThis section explains different types of entertain-tween business and nonbusiness. You can de-games is considered renting it for more than onement expenses that you may be able to deduct.duct only the business part. If you cannotevent. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,It also explains the directly-related test and theestablish the part of the expense for each per-along with any rentals by related parties, areassociated test. son participating, allocate the expense to eachconsidered in making this determination.
participant on a pro rata basis.Entertainment. Entertainment includes any Related parties include:activity generally considered to provide enter-
Example. You entertain a group of individu-tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples • Family members (spouses, ancestors, andals that includes yourself, three business pros-include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so- lineal descendants),pects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of thecial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at
• Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-expense qualifies as a business entertainmentsporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-
rangement involving the sharing ofexpense. You cannot deduct the expenses foring, vacation, and similar trips.
the seven social guests because those costs are skyboxes,Entertainment also may include meeting per-
nonbusiness expenses.sonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such • Related corporations,as providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car toTrade association meetings.You can de- • A partnership and its principal partners,customers or their families. duct entertainment expenses that are directlyandrelated to and necessary for attending businessA meal as a form of entertainment.Enter-
• A corporation and a partnership with com-meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-tainment includes the cost of a meal you provide
mon ownership.nizations if the expenses of your attendance areto a customer or client, whether the meal is a
related to your active trade or business. Thesepart of other entertainment or by itself. A meal
organizations include business leagues, cham-expense includes the cost of food, beverages, Example. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seatbers of commerce, real estate boards, tradetaxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an skybox at Team Stadium for three baseballassociations, and professional associations.entertainment-related meal, you or your em- games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seatsployee must be present when the food or bever- at each event is $20 a seat. You can deductEntertainment tickets.Generally, you cannotages are provided. deduct more than the face value of an entertain- (subject to the 50% limit) $600 ((10 seats × $20
You cannot claim the cost of yourment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. Foreach) × 3 events).
meal both as an entertainment ex-example, you cannot deduct service fees youFood and beverages in skybox seats.Ifpense and as a travel expense. pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amountCAUTION
!
expenses for food and beverages are separatelyover the face value of the tickets you pay tostated, you can deduct these expenses in addi-scalpers.Meals sold in the normal course of tion to the amounts allowable for the skybox,
Exception for events that benefit charita-your business are not considered en- subject to the requirements and limits that apply.
ble organizations.Different rules apply whentertainment.
TIP
The amounts separately stated for food andthe cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits abeverages must be reasonable. You cannot in-charitable organization. You can take into ac-flate the charges for food and beverages toDeduction may depend on your type of count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itavoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals.business. Your kind of business may deter-is more than the face value, if all of the followingmine if a particular activity is considered enter-conditions apply.tainment. For example, if you are a dress Directly-Related Test
designer and have a fashion show to introduce• The event’s main purpose is to benefit a
your new designs to store buyers, the show qualified charitable organization. To meet the directly-related test for entertain-
generally is not considered entertainment. This ment expenses (including entertainment-related• The entire net proceeds go to the charity.is because fashion shows are typical in your meals), you must show that:
• The event uses volunteers to perform sub-business. But, if you are an appliance distributor
• The main purpose of the combined busi-stantially all the event’s work.and hold a fashion show for the spouses of your
ness and entertainment was the activeretailers, the show generally is considered en-
tertainment. conduct of business,The 50% limit on entertainment does
not apply to any expense for a pack-• You did engage in business with the per-Separating costs.If you have one expense
age deal that includes a ticket to suchson during the entertainment period, andthat includes the costs of entertainment, and
TIP
a charitable sports event.other services (such as lodging or transporta- • You had more than a general expectationtion), you must allocate that expense between of getting income or some other specificExample 1. You purchase tickets to a golfthe cost of entertainment and the cost of other business benefit at some future time.tournament organized by the local volunteer fireservices. You must have a reasonable basis for
company. All net proceeds will be used to buymaking this allocation. For example, you must Business is generally not considered to be thenew fire equipment. The volunteers will run theallocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter- main purpose when business and entertainmenttournament. You can deduct the entire cost oftainment in its lounge on the same bill with your are combined on hunting or fishing trips, or onthe tickets as a business expense if they other-room charge. yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you showwise qualify as an entertainment expense.
that business was the main purpose, you gener-Taking turns paying for meals or entertain-
ally cannot deduct the expenses for the use ofment. If a group of business acquaintancesExample 2.  You purchase tickets to a col-
take turns picking up each others’ meal or enter- an entertainment facility. See Entertainment fa-lege football game through a ticket broker. After
tainment checks without regard to whether any cilities earlier in this chapter.having a business discussion, you take a client
business purposes are served, no member ofto the game. Net proceeds from the game go toYou must consider all the facts, including thethe group can deduct any part of the expense.colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.nature of the business transacted and the rea-However, since the colleges also pay individualssons for conducting business during the enter-Lavish or extravagant expenses.You can- to perform services, such as coaching andtainment. It is not necessary to devote more timenot deduct expenses for entertainment that arerecruiting, you can only use the face value of theto business than to entertainment. However, iflavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid-tickets in determining your business deduction.the business discussion is only incidental to theered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable
entertainment, the entertainment expenses doconsidering the facts and circumstances. Ex-Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes.If
not meet the directly-related test.penses will not be disallowed just because they you rent a skybox or other private luxury box for
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Associated with trade or business.Gener-
ally, an expense is associated with the active
conduct of your trade or business if you can
show that you had a clear business purpose for
having the expense. The purpose may be to get
new business or to encourage the continuation
of an existing business relationship.
Substantial business discussion.Whether
a business discussion is substantial depends on
the facts of each case. A business discussion
will not be considered substantial unless you
can show that you actively engaged in the dis-
cussion, meeting, negotiation, or other business
transaction to get income or some other specific
business benefit.
The meeting does not have to be for any
specified length of time, but you must show that
the business discussion was substantial in rela-
tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-
sary that you devote more time to business than
to entertainment. You do not have to discuss
business during the meal or entertainment.
Meetings at conventions.You are consid-
ered to have a substantial business discussion if
you attend meetings at a convention or similar
event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-
sored and conducted by a business or profes-
sional organization. However, your reason for
attending the convention or meeting must be to
further your trade or business. The organization
that sponsors the convention or meeting must
schedule a program of business activities that is
the main activity of the convention or meeting.
Directly before or after business discussion.
If the entertainment is held on the same day as
the business discussion, it is considered to be
held directly before or after the business discus-
sion.
If the entertainment and the business discus-
sion are not held on the same day, you must
Table 2-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
Definitions
Tests to be met
Other rules
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a
client, customer, or employee if the expenses meet the
directly-related test or the associated test.
● Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to
provide entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes
meals provided to a customer or client.
● An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your
field of business, trade, or profession.
● A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate,
although not necessarily required, for your business.
Directly-related test
● Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
● Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of
business, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or
some other specific business benefit.
Associated test
● Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
● Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
● You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment
expense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
● You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under
the circumstances.
● You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed
entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
You did engage in business with the person during the
entertainment period, and
consider the facts of each case to see if theYou do not have to show that busi-situations where there are substantial distrac-associated test is met. Among the facts to con-ness income or other business benefittions that generally prevent you from activelysider are the place, date, and duration of theactually resulted from each entertain-conducting business. The following are exam-
TIP
business discussion. If you or your businessment expense. ples of situations where there are substantialassociates are from out of town, you must alsodistractions. consider the dates of arrival and departure, andClear business setting.If the entertainment the reasons the entertainment and the discus-• A meeting or discussion at a nightclub,takes place in a clear business setting and is for sion did not take place on the same day.your business or work, the expenses are consid-theater, or sporting event.
ered directly related to your business or work. Example. A group of business associates• A meeting or discussion during what isThe following situations are examples of enter- comes from out of town to your place of busi-essentially a social gathering, such as atainment in a clear business setting. ness to hold a substantial business discussion.cocktail party.
If you entertain those business guests on the• Entertainment in a hospitality room at a• A meeting with a group that includes per-evening before the business discussion, or onconvention where business goodwill is sons who are not business associates atthe evening of the day following the businesscreated through the display or discussionplaces such as cocktail lounges, countrydiscussion, the entertainment generally is con-of business products.
clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation sidered to be held directly before or after the
• Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate discussion. The expense meets the associatedresorts.
on the sale of your products (such as a test.
restaurant owner providing an occasional
Expenses for spouses.You generally cannotfree meal to a loyal customer). Associated Test
deduct the cost of entertainment for your spouse• Entertainment of a clear business natureEven if your expenses do not meet the or for the spouse of a customer. However, youoccurring under circumstances where directly-related test, they may meet the associ-can deduct these costs if you can show that youthere is no meaningful personal or social had a clear business purpose, rather than aated test.relationship between you and the persons personal or social purpose, for providing theTo meet the associated test for entertain-entertained. An example is entertainment entertainment.ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedof business and civic leaders at the open-
meals), you must show that the entertainment is:ing of a new hotel or play when the pur- Example. You entertain a customer. Thepose is to get business publicity rather cost is an ordinary and necessary business ex-• Associated with the active conduct of yourthan to create or maintain the goodwill of pense and is allowed under the entertainmenttrade or business, andthe persons entertained. rules. The customer’s spouse joins you because
• Directly before or after a substantial busi-it is impractical to entertain the customer without
Expenses not considered directly related. ness discussion (defined later). the spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter-
Entertainment expenses generally are not con- taining the customer’s spouse. If your spouse
sidered directly related if you are not there or in joins the party because the customer’s spouse
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
under the other rules discussed in this publica-
tion.
Example 1. You spend $100 for a
business-related meal. If $40 of that amount is
not allowable because it is lavish and extrava-
gant, the remaining $60 is subject to the 50%
limit. Your deduction cannot be more than $30
(50% × $60).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
paid $150 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $60 each ($120 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $60 (50% × $120).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit.Your
meal or entertainment expense is not subject to
the 50% limit if the expense meets one of the
following exceptions.
1 - Employee’s reimbursed expenses.If
you are an employee, you are not subject to the
50% limit on expenses for which your employer
reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
2 - Self-employed. If you are self-em-
ployed, your deductible meal and entertainment
expenses are not subject to the 50% limit if all of
the following requirements are met.
• You have these expenses as an indepen-
dent contractor.
• Your customer or client reimburses you or
gives you an allowance for these ex-
penses in connection with services you
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
perform.is present, the cost of the entertainment for yourIncluded expenses. Expenses subject to the
50% limit include:spouse is also deductible. • You provide adequate records of these ex-
penses to your customer or client. (See• Taxes and tips relating to a business mealchapter 5.)or entertainment activity,
• Cover charges for admission to a night-In this case, your client or customer is subject50% Limit club, to the 50% limit on the expenses.
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your• Rent paid for a room in which you hold aExample. You are a self-employed attorneybusiness-related meal and entertainment ex- dinner or cocktail party, and who adequately accounts for meal and enter-penses. (If you are subject to the Department of• Amounts paid for parking at a sports tainment expenses to a client who reimbursesTransportation’s “hours of service” limits, youarena. you for these expenses. You are not subject tocan deduct a higher percentage. See Individuals
the directly-related or associated test, nor areHowever, the cost of transportation to and fromsubject to “hours of service” limits, later.)
you subject to the 50% limit. If the client cana business meal or a business-related entertain-The 50% limit applies to employees or their deduct the expenses, the client is subject to thement activity is not subject to the 50% limit.employers, and to self-employed persons (in- 50% limit.cluding independent contractors) or their clients, If you (the contractor) have expenses forApplication of 50% limit.The 50% limit ondepending on whether the expenses are reim- meals and entertainment related to providingmeal and entertainment expenses applies if thebursed. services for a client but do not adequately ac-expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-Figure A summarizes the general rules ex- count for and seek reimbursement from the cli-ered by one of the exceptions discussed later.plained in this section. ent for those expenses, you are subject to theThe 50% limit also applies to certain meal
The 50% limit applies to business meals or directly-related or associated test and to theand entertainment expenses that are not busi-
entertainment expenses you have while: 50% limit.ness related. It applies to meal and entertain-
ment expenses you have for the production of• Traveling away from home (whether eat- 3 - Advertising expenses.You are not sub-income, including rental or royalty income. Iting alone or with others) on business, ject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, enter-also applies to the cost of meals included intainment, or recreational facilities to the general• Entertaining customers at your place ofdeductible educational expenses. public as a means of advertising or promotingbusiness, a restaurant, or other location, goodwill in the community. For example, neitherWhen to apply the 50% limit.You apply theor the expense of sponsoring a television or radio50% limit after determining the amount that
• Attending a business convention or recep- show nor the expense of distributing free foodwould otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
tion, business meeting, or business lunch- and beverages to the general public is subject tohave to determine the amount of meal and en-
eon at a club. the 50% limit.tertainment expenses that would be deductible
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4 - Sale of meals or entertainment.You If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
are not subject to the 50% limit if you actuallyyou are treated as one taxpayer. It does not
sell meals, entertainment, goods and services,matter whether you have separate businesses,4.or use of facilities to the public. For example, ifare separately employed, or whether each of
you run a nightclub, your expense for the enter-you has an independent connection with the
tainment you furnish to your customers, such asrecipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
a floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit.ship and the partners are treated as one tax-Transportation
payer.5 - Charitable sports event.You are not
subject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package This chapter discusses expenses you can de-Example. Bob Jones sells products to Localdeal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita- duct for business transportation when you areCompany. He and his wife, Jan, gave Localble sports event. For the conditions the sports not traveling away from home as defined inCompany three cheese packages to thank themevent must meet, see Exception for events that chapter 1. These expenses include the cost offor their business. They paid $80 for each pack-benefit charitable organizations under Entertain- transportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and theage, or $240 total. Three of Local Company’sment tickets, earlier. cost of driving and maintaining your car.executives took the packages home for theirTransportation expenses include the ordi-families’ use. Bob and Jan have no independentIndividuals subject to “hours of service” nary and necessary costs of all of the following.business relationship with any of the executives’limits.You can deduct a higher percentage of
• Getting from one workplace to another inother family members. They can deduct a totalyour meal expenses while traveling away from
the course of your business or professionof $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the cheese packages.your tax home if the meals take place during or
when you are traveling within the city orincident to any period subject to the Department
general area that is your tax home. Taxof Transportation’s “hours of service” limits. TheIncidental costs.Incidental costs, such as home is defined in chapter 1.percentage is 70% for 2005, and it graduallyengraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,increases to 80% by the year 2008. • Visiting clients or customers.and mailing, are generally not included in deter-Individuals subject to the Department ofmining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25• Going to a business meeting away fromTransportation’s “hours of service” limits includelimit. your regular workplace.the following persons.
A cost is incidental only if it does not add• Getting from your home to a temporary• Certain air transportation workers (such assubstantial value to the gift. For example, theworkplace when you have one or morepilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, andcost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-regular places of work. These temporarycontrol tower operators) who are underever, the purchase of an ornamental basket forworkplaces can be either within the areaFederal Aviation Administration regula-packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if theof your tax home or outside that area.tions. value of the basket is substantial compared toTransportation expenses do not include ex-the value of the fruit.• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers penses you have while traveling away fromwho are under Department of Transporta- home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-tion regulations. Exceptions. The following items are not con-penses which are discussed in chapter 1. How-
• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. ever, if you use your car while traveling away
neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- from home overnight, use the rules in this chap-
ers, and control operations personnel)1. An item that costs $4 or less and: ter to figure your car expense deduction. See
who are under Federal Railroad Adminis- Car Expenses, later.a. Has your name clearly and permanentlytration regulations.
imprinted on the gift, and Illustration of transportation expenses.• Certain merchant mariners who are under Figure B illustrates the rules that apply for de-b. Is one of a number of identical itemsCoast Guard regulations. ducting transportation expenses when you haveyou widely distribute.
a regular or main job away from your home. You
Examples include pens, desk sets, andmay want to refer to it when deciding whether
plastic bags and cases. you can deduct your transportation expenses.
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotionalTemporary work location.If you have one or
material to be used on the business prem-more regular work locations away from your
ises of the recipient. home and you commute to a temporary work3. location in the same trade or business, you can
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
Gift or entertainment.Any item that might betransportation between your home and the tem-
considered either a gift or entertainment gener-porary location, regardless of distance.Gifts ally will be considered entertainment. However,If your employment at a work location is
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-realistically expected to last (and does in fact
ages that you intend the customer to use at alast) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo-If you give gifts in the course of your trade or
rary unless there are facts and circumstanceslater date, treat it as a gift.business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.
that would indicate otherwise.This chapter explains the limits and rules forIf you give a customer tickets to a theaterIf your employment at a work location isdeducting the costs of gifts. performance or sporting event and you do not gorealistically expected to last for more than 1 yearwith the customer to the performance or event,$25 limit.You can deduct no more than $25 or if there is no realistic expectation that theyou have a choice. You can treat the cost of thefor business gifts you give directly or indirectly to employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-any one person during your tax year. A gift to a ployment is not temporary, regardless ofment expense, whichever is to your advantage.company that is intended for the eventual per- whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
You can change your treatment of the ticketssonal use or benefit of a particular person or a If employment at a work location initially is
at a later date by filing an amended return.limited class of people will be considered an realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
Generally, an amended return must be filedindirect gift to that particular person or to the but at some later date the employment is realisti-
within 3 years from the date the original returnindividuals within that class of people who re- cally expected to last more than 1 year, that
was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxceive the gift. employment will be treated as temporary (un-
was paid, whichever is later.If you give a gift to a member of a customer’s less there are facts and circumstances that
family, the gift is generally considered to be an would indicate otherwise) until your expectation If you go with the customer to the event, you
indirect gift to the customer. This rule does not changes. It will not be treated as temporary aftermust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi- the date you determine it will last more than 1ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
ness connection with that family member and year.to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.the gift is not intended for the customer’s even- If the temporary work location is beyond the
tual use. general area of your regular place of work and
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 13

Page 14 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct your travel expenses. These expenses
are discussed in chapter 1.
If you travel more than 100 miles away from
home in connection with your performance of
services as a member of the reserves, you may
be able to deduct some of your reserve-related
travel costs as an adjustment to gross income
rather than as an itemized deduction. For more
information, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav-
eling More Than 100 Miles From Home under
Special Rules, in chapter 6.
Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct
the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi,
or of driving a car between your home and your
main or regular place of work. These costs are
personal commuting expenses. You cannot de-
duct commuting expenses no matter how far
your home is from your regular place of work.
You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if
you work during the commuting trip.
Example. You had a telephone installed in
your car. You sometimes use that telephone to
make business calls while commuting to and
from work. Sometimes business associates ride
with you to and from work, and you have a
business discussion in the car. These activities
do not change the trip from personal to busi-
ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex-
penses.
Parking fees.Fees you pay to park your car
at your place of business are nondeductible
commuting expenses. You can, however, de-
duct business-related parking fees when visiting
a customer or client.
Advertising display on car.Putting display
material that advertises your business on your
car does not change the use of your car from
personal use to business use. If you use this car
for commuting or other personal uses, you still
cannot deduct your expenses for those uses.
Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of
using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not
include payments you receive from the passen-
gers in your income. These payments are con-
sidered reimbursements of your expenses.
However, if you operate a car pool for a profit,
you must include payments from passengers in
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Neverdeductible
onadayofffrom
regularormainjob
Deductibleif youhavea
regular or mainjob
at another location Always deductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home. )
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
your income. You can then deduct your caryou stay overnight, you are traveling away from Transportation expenses you have in going
expenses (using the rules in this publication).home. You may have deductible travel ex- between home and a part-time job on a day off
penses as discussed in chapter 1. from your main job are commuting expenses. Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling
You cannot deduct them. tools or instruments in your car while commutingNo regular place of work.If you have no to and from work does not make your car ex-Armed Forces reservists.A meeting of anregular place of work but ordinarily work in the penses deductible. However, you can deductArmed Forces reserve unit is a second place ofmetropolitan area where you live, you can de- any additional costs you have for hauling tools orbusiness if the meeting is held on a day on whichduct daily transportation costs between home instruments (such as for renting a trailer you towyou work at your regular job. You can deduct theand a temporary work site outside that metropol- with your car).expense of getting from one workplace to theitan area.
other as just discussed under Two places of Union members’ trips from a union hall.IfGenerally, a metropolitan area includes the
work. you get your work assignments at a union hallarea within the city limits and the suburbs that
You usually cannot deduct the expense if theand then go to your place of work, the costs ofare considered part of that metropolitan area.
reserve meeting is held on a day on which yougetting from the union hall to your place of workYou cannot deduct daily transportation costs
do not work at your regular job. In this case, yourare nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-between your home and temporary work sites
transportation generally is a nondeductible com-though you need the union to get your workwithin your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
muting expense. However, you can deduct yourassignments, you are employed where youductible commuting expenses.
transportation expenses if the location of thework, not where the union hall is located.
Two places of work.If you work at two places meeting is temporary and you have one or more
Office in the home.If you have an office inin one day, whether or not for the same em- regular places of work.
your home that qualifies as a principal place ofployer, you can deduct the expense of getting If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
business, you can deduct your daily transporta-from one workplace to the other. However, if for itan area but not at any specific location and the
tion costs between your home and another worksome personal reason you do not go directly reserve meeting is held at a temporary location
location in the same trade or business. (Seefrom one location to the other, you cannot de- outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct
Publication 587, Business Use of Your Home,duct more than the amount it would have cost your transportation expenses.
for information on determining if your home of-you to go directly from the first location to the If you travel away from home overnight to
fice qualifies as a principal place of business.)second. attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Examples of deductible transportation.The the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de- mileage rate, see Exception under Methods of
following examples show when you can deduct duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You mustdepreciation under Depreciation Deduction,
transportation expenses based on the location complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form later.
of your work and your home. 1040.
Standard mileage rate not allowed. YouA “qualified reimbursement” is the reim-
cannot use the standard mileage rate if you:Example 1. You regularly work in an officebursement you receive that meets both of the
in the city where you live. Your employer sendsfollowing conditions.
• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),you to a one-week training session at a different• It is given as an equipment maintenanceoffice in the same city. You travel directly from • Use five or more cars at the same time (asallowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.your home to the training location and return in fleet operations),Postal Service.each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily • Claimed a depreciation deduction for theround-trip transportation between your home• It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-car using any method other than straightand the training location. lective bargaining agreement. Any later line, for example, MACRS (as discussedagreement cannot increase the qualified later under Depreciation Deduction),Example 2. Your principal place of businessreimbursement amount by more than the
is in your home. You can deduct the cost of rate of inflation. • Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis-
round-trip transportation between your qualify- cussed later) on the car,See your employer for information on your reim-ing home office and your client’s or customer’sbursement. • Claimed the special depreciation allow-place of business. ance on the car,
If you are a rural mail carrier and re-Example 3. You have no regular office, and • Claimed actual car expenses after 1997ceived a qualified reimbursement,you do not have an office in your home. In this for a car you leased, oryou cannot use the standard mileageCAUTION
!
case, the location of your first business contactrate. • Are a rural mail carrier who received ais considered your office. Transportation ex- qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mailpenses between your home and this first contact carriers under Car Expenses, earlier.)Standard Mileage Rateare nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-
portation expenses between your last business Five or more cars.If you own or lease fiveYou may be able to use the standard mileagecontact and your home are also nondeductible or more cars that are used for business at therate to figure the deductible costs of operatingcommuting expenses. Although you cannot de- same time, you cannot use the standard mile-your car for business purposes. For 2005, theduct the costs of these trips, you can deduct the age rate for the business use of any car. How-standard mileage rate for the cost of operatingcosts of going from one client or customer to ever, you may be able to deduct your actualyour car for business use is:another. expenses for operating each of the cars in your• 401/2 cents per mile for the period Januarybusiness. See Actual Car Expenses, later, for1 through August 31, 2005, and information on how to figure your deduction.
• 481/2 cents a mile for the period SeptemberYou are not using five or more cars for busi-Car Expenses 1 through December 31, 2005. This rate isness at the same time if you alternate using (use
adjusted periodically. at different times) the cars for business.If you use your car for business purposes, you
The following examples illustrate the rulesordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener-
for when you can and cannot use the standardally can use one of the two following methods to If you use the standard mileage rate
mileage rate for five or more cars.figure your deductible expenses. for a year, you cannot deduct your
actual car expenses for that year. YouCAUTION
!
• Standard mileage rate. Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, ownscannot deduct depreciation, lease payments,
three cars and two vans that she alternates• Actual car expenses. maintenance and repairs, gasoline (including
using for calling on her customers. She can usegasoline taxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle regis-
the standard mileage rate for the business mile-If you use actual expenses to figure your de-tration fees. See Choosing the standard mileage
age of the three cars and the two vans becauseduction for a car you lease, there are rules thatrate and Standard mileage rate not allowed,
she does not use them at the same time.affect the amount of your lease payments thatlater.
you can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later. You generally can use the standard mileage
Example 2. Tony and his employees use In this publication, “car” includes a van,rate whether or not you are reimbursed and
his four pickup trucks in his landscaping busi-pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of “car”whether or not any reimbursement is more or
ness. During the year, he traded in two of his oldfor depreciation purposes, see Car defined less than the amount figured using the standard
trucks for two newer ones. Tony can use theunder Actual Car Expenses, later. mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more information
standard mileage rate for the business mileageon reimbursements.
of all six of the trucks he owned during the year.You may be entitled to a tax credit forChoosing the standard mileage rate.If youan electric vehicle or a deduction fromwant to use the standard mileage rate for a carExample 3. Chris owns a repair shop andgross income for a part of the cost of a
TIP
you own, you must choose to use it in the firstan insurance business. He and his employeesclean-fuel vehicle that you place in service dur-year the car is available for use in your business.use his two pickup trucks and van for the repairing the year. The vehicle must meet certainThen in later years, you can choose to use eithershop. Chris alternates using his two cars for therequirements, and you do not have to use it inthe standard mileage rate or actual expenses.insurance business. No one else uses the carsyour business to qualify for the credit or theIf you want to use the standard mileage ratefor business purposes. Chris can use the stan-deduction. However, you must reduce your ba-for a car you lease, you must use it for the entiredard mileage rate for the business use of thesis for depreciation of the electric vehicle orlease period. For leases that began on or beforepickup trucks, van, and the cars because heclean-fuel vehicle property by the amount of theDecember 31, 1997, the standard mileage ratenever has more than four vehicles used for busi-credit or deduction you claim. See Depreciation must be used for the entire portion of the leaseness at the same time.Deduction, later, under Actual Car Expenses. period (including renewals) that is after 1997.For more information on electric or clean-fuelIf you choose to use the standard mileageExample 4. Maureen owns a car and fourvehicles, see chapter 12 of Publication 535.rate, you are considered to have chosen not tovans that are used in her housecleaning busi-
Rural mail carriers.If you are a rural mail use the depreciation methods discussed later.ness. Her employees use the vans and she uses
carrier, you may be able to treat the qualified This is because the standard mileage rate in-the car to travel to various customers. Maureen
reimbursement you received as your allowable cludes an allowance for depreciation that is notcannot use the standard mileage rate for the car
expense. Because the qualified reimbursement expressed in terms of years. If you change to theor the vans. This is because all five vehicles are
is treated as paid under an accountable plan, actual expenses method in a later year, butused in Maureen’s business at the same time.
your employer should not include the reimburse- before your car is fully depreciated, you have toShe must use actual expenses for all vehicles.
ment in your income. estimate the remaining useful life of the car and
If your vehicle expenses are more than the use straight line depreciation. For more informa-Interest.If you are an employee, you cannot
amount of your reimbursement, you can deduct tion about depreciation included in the standard deduct any interest paid on a car loan. This
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
applies even if you use the car 100% for busi-purposes, you can deduct your actual un- • An ambulance, hearse, or combinationness as an employee. reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use the ambulance-hearse used directly in a busi-However, if you are self-employed and use standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided by ness,your car in your business, you can deduct thatYour Employer in chapter 6.
• A vehicle used directly in the business ofpart of the interest expense that represents your
Interest on car loans.If you are an employee, transporting persons or property for pay orbusiness use of the car. For example, if you use
you cannot deduct any interest paid on a carhire, oryour car 60% for business, you can deduct 60%
loan. This interest is treated as personal interestof the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You • A truck or van that is a qualified nonper-and is not deductible. If you are self-employedcannot deduct the rest of the interest expense. sonal use vehicle.and use your car in that business, see Interest,If you use a home equity loan to earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate. Electric car.For purposes of depreciation,purchase your car, you may be able to
the term “electric car” refers to passenger auto-deduct the interest. See Publication
TIP
Taxes paid on your car.If you are an em- mobiles designed to be propelled primarily by936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, forployee, you can deduct personal property taxeselectricity and built by an original equipmentmore information. paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Entermanufacturer.the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (FormPersonal property taxes.If you itemize your
1040). More information. See Depreciation De-deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can
duction, later, for more information on how todeduct on line 7 state and local personal prop-Sales taxes.Generally, sales taxes on yourdepreciate your vehicle.erty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take thiscar are part of your car’s basis and are recov-
deduction even if you use the standard mileageered through depreciation, discussed later.Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles.rate or if you do not use the car for business.However, to the extent the car is not used in yourThese are vehicles that by their nature are notIf you are self-employed and use your car intrade or business, you can choose to deduct thelikely to be used more than a minimal amount foryour business, you can deduct the business partnonbusiness part of the sales tax deduction onpersonal purposes. They include trucks andof state and local personal property taxes onSchedule A (Form 1040). You can only choosevans that have been specially modified so thatmotor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ,to deduct state and local sales taxes as anthey are not likely to be used more than a mini-or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize youritemized deduction if you choose not to deductmal amount for personal purposes, such as bydeductions, you can include the remainder ofstate and local income taxes. installation of permanent shelving and paintingyour state and local personal property taxes on the vehicle to display advertising or thethe car on Schedule A (Form 1040). Fines and collateral.You cannot deduct finescompany’s name. Delivery trucks with seating
you pay or collateral you forfeit for traffic viola-only for the driver, or only for the driver plus aParking fees and tolls.In addition to usingtions. folding jump seat are qualified nonpersonal usethe standard mileage rate, you can deduct any
vehicles.business-related parking fees and tolls. (ParkingCasualty and theft losses.If your car is dam-fees that you pay to park your car at your placeaged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able toof work are nondeductible commuting ex- deduct part of the loss that is not covered bySection 179 Deductionpenses.) insurance. See Publication 547, Casualties, Di-
The section 179 deduction allows you to treatsasters, and Thefts, for information on deductingSale, trade-in, or other disposition.If you
part or all of the business cost of a car as aa loss on your car.sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car,
current expense rather than taking depreciationyou may have a gain or loss on the transaction
Depreciation and section 179 deductions. deductions over a number of years.or an adjustment to the basis of your new car.
Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax andSee Disposition of a Car, later. The limit on total section 179 and de-improvements, is a capital expense. Because preciation deductions (discussedthe benefits last longer than one year, you gen-Actual Car Expenses later) may reduce or eliminate any
TIP
erally cannot deduct a capital expense. How-benefit from claiming the section 179 deduction.ever, you can recover this cost through theIf you do not use the standard mileage rate, you You can claim the section 179 deductionsection 179 deduction (the deduction allowed bymay be able to deduct your actual car expenses. only in the year you place the car in service. Forsection 179 of the Internal Revenue Code) and
this purpose, a car is placed in service when it isIf you qualify to use both methods,depreciation deductions. Depreciation allows
ready and available for a specific use, whether inyou may want to figure your deductionyou to recover the cost over more than one year
a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, aboth ways to see which gives you a
TIP
by deducting part of it each year. The section
personal activity, or for the production of in-larger deduction. 179 deduction and the depreciation deduction
come. Even if you are not using the property, it isActual car expenses include: are discussed later.
in service when it is ready and available for itsGenerally, there are limits on these deduc-Depreciation Lease Registration specific use.tions. Special rules apply if you use your carLicenses payments fees A car first used for personal purposes cannot50% or less in your work or business.Gas Insurance Repairs qualify for the deduction in a later year when itsOil Garage rent Tires You can claim a section 179 deduction anduse changes to business.Tolls Parking fees use a depreciation method other than straight
line only if you do not use the standard mileageIf you have fully depreciated a car that you Example. In 2004 you bought a new car andrate to figure your business-related car ex-still use in your business, you can continue to placed it in service for personal purposes. Thispenses in the year you first place a car in serv-claim your other actual car expenses. Continue year, you began to use it for business. Changingice.to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5. its use to business use does not qualify the cost
If you claim either a section 179 deduction orof your car for a section 179 deduction this year.Business and personal use.If you use youruse a depreciation method other than straightHowever, you can claim a depreciation deduc-car for both business and personal purposes,line in the year you first place a car in service,tion for the business use of the car. See Depreci-you must divide your expenses between busi-you cannot use the standard mileage rate onation Deduction, later.ness and personal use. You can divide yourthat car in any future year.expense based on the miles driven for each More than 50% business use requirement.purpose. Car defined.For depreciation purposes, a carYou must use the property more than 50% for
is any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck orbusiness to claim any section 179 deduction. IfExample. You are a sales representativevan) that is made primarily for use on publicyou used the property more than 50% for busi-for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000streets, roads, and highways. Its unloaded grossness, multiply the cost of the property by themiles during the year: 12,000 miles for businessvehicle weight (gross vehicle weight in the casepercentage of business use. The result is theand 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claimof a truck or van) must not be more than 6,000cost of the property that can qualify for the sec-only 60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of oper-pounds. A car includes any part, component, ortion 179 deduction.ating your car as a business expense. other item that is physically attached to it or is
usually included in the purchase price.Employer-provided vehicle.If you use a ve- Example. Peter purchased a car in April
hicle provided by your employer for business A car does not include: 2005 for $19,500 and he used it 60% for busi-
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limit on total section 179 and deprecia-ness. The total cost of Peter’s car that qualifies the recovery period, you have to recapture (in-
tion deductions.Generally, the total amountclude in income) in that later year any excessfor the section 179 deduction is $11,700
of section 179 and depreciation deductions thatdepreciation. Any section 179 deduction($19,500 cost × 60% business use). But see
you can claim for a qualified car that you placedclaimed on the car is included in calculating theLimit on total section 179 and depreciation de-
in service in 2005 is $2,960. The limit is reducedexcess depreciation. For information on this cal-ductions, discussed later.
if your business use of the car is less than 100%.culation, see Excess depreciation later in this
See Depreciation Limits, later, for more informa-chapter under Car Used 50% or Less for Busi-Limits. There are limits on:
tion. ness.
• The amount of the section 179 deduction,
Dispositions.If you dispose of a car on whichExample. In the earlier example under• The section 179 deduction for sport utility you had claimed the section 179 deduction, theMore than 50% business use requirement, Peterand certain other vehicles, and amount of that deduction is treated as a depreci-had a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes of
ation deduction for recapture purposes. You• The total amount of the section 179 de-the section 179 deduction) of $11,700. How-
treat any gain on the disposition of the propertyduction plus the depreciation deductionever, Peter’s total section 179 and depreciation
as ordinary income up to the amount of thededuction is limited to $1,776. ($2,960 limit x(discussed later) you can claim for a quali-
section 179 deduction and any allowable depre-60% business use).fied property.
ciation (unless you establish the amount actually
Cost of car.For purposes of the section 179allowed). For information on the disposition of aLimit on the amount of the section 179 deduction, the cost of the car does not includecar, see Disposition of a Car, later.deduction. For 2005, the total amount youany amount figured by reference to any othercan choose to deduct under section 179 gener-property held by you at any time. For example, ifally cannot be more than $105,000. you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car toDepreciation DeductionIf the cost of your qualifying section 179use in your business, your cost for purposes ofproperty placed in service in 2005 is over If you use actual car expenses to figure yourthe section 179 deduction does not include your$420,000, you must reduce the $105,000 dollar deduction for a car you own and use in youradjusted basis in the car you trade in for the new
limit (but not below zero) by the amount of cost business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-car. Your cost includes only the cash you paid.
over $420,000. If the cost of your section 179 tion: that is, you can deduct a certain amountBasis of car for depreciation.The amountproperty placed in service during 2005 is each year as a recovery of your cost or otherof the section 179 deduction reduces your basis$525,000 or more, you cannot take a section basis in your car.in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc-179 deduction. You generally need to know the followingtion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc-things about the car you intend to depreciate.The total amount you can deduct under sec-tion from the cost of your car. The resultingtion 179 each year after you apply the limits • Your basis in the car.amount is the basis in your car that you use tolisted above cannot be more than the taxablefigure your depreciation deduction. • The date you place the car in service.income from the active conduct of any trade or
When to choose. If you want to take the sec-business during the year. • The method of depreciation and recoverytion 179 deduction, you must make the choice inIf you are married and file a joint return, you period you will use.the tax year you both purchase the car and placeand your spouse are treated as one taxpayer in
it in service for business or work.determining any reduction to the dollar limit, Basis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-regardless of which of you purchased the prop-How to choose. Employees use Form 2106 toation is generally its cost. This includes anyerty or placed it in service. make this choice and report the section 179amount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-If you and your spouse file separate returns,deduction. All others use Form 4562. erty, or services.you are treated as one taxpayer for the dollarFile the appropriate form with either of theGenerally, you figure depreciation using yourlimit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after anyfollowing. basis. However, in some situations (such as usereduction) between you. of the straight line method) you will use your• Your original tax return filed for the yearFor more information on the above section adjusted basis (your basis reduced by deprecia-the property was placed in service179 deduction limits, see Publication 946. tion allowed or allowable in earlier years). For(whether or not you file it timely).
one of these situations see Exception underLimit for sport utility and certain other ve-• An amended return filed within the timeMethods of depreciation, later.hicles. For sport utility and certain other vehi-prescribed by law. An election made on anIf you change the use of a car from personalcles placed in service in 2005, the portion of theamended return must specify the item ofto business, your basis for depreciation is thevehicle’s cost taken into account in figuring yoursection 179 property to which the electionlesser of the fair market value or your adjustedsection 179 deduction is limited to $25,000. Thisapplies and the part of the cost of eachbasis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-rule applies to any 4-wheeled vehicle primarilysuch item to be taken into account. Thetional rules concerning basis are discussed laterdesigned or used to carry passengers over pub-amended return must also include any re-in this chapter under Unadjusted basis.lic streets, roads, or highways, that is not subjectsulting adjustments to taxable income.to any of the passenger automobile limits ex- Placed in service.You generally place a car
plained under Depreciation Limits, later, and in service when it is available for use in yourYou must keep records that show thethat is rated at no more than 14,000 pounds work or business, in an income-producing activ-specific identification of each piece ofgross vehicle weight. However, the $25,000 limit ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation beginsqualifying section 179 property.does not apply to any vehicle: CAUTION
!
when the car is placed in service for use in yourThese records must show how you acquired thework or business or for the production of income.• Designed to have a seating capacity ofproperty, the person you acquired it from, andFor purposes of computing depreciation, ifmore than nine persons behind the when you placed it in service. you first start using the car only for personal usedriver’s seat, and later convert it to business use, you placeRevoking an election.An election (or any
• Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6 the car in service on the date of conversion.specification made in the election) to take a
feet in interior length that is an open areasection 179 deduction for 2005 can be revokedCar placed in service and disposed of inor is designed for use as an open area butwithout IRS approval by filing an amended re-the same year. If you place a car in serviceis enclosed by a cap and is not readilyturn. The amended return must be filed withinand dispose of it in the same tax year, youaccessible directly from the passengerthe time prescribed by law. The amended returncannot claim any depreciation deduction for thatcompartment, or must also include any resulting adjustment tocar.taxable income. Once made, the revocation is• That has an integral enclosure, fully en-irrevocable. Methods of depreciation.Generally, you fig-closing the driver compartment and load ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-carrying device, does not have seatingReduction in business use.To be eligible tocelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS).rearward of the driver’s seat, and has noclaim the section 179 deduction, you must useMACRS is discussed later in this chapter.body section protruding more than 30 in-your car more than 50% for business or work in
ches ahead of the leading edge of thethe year you acquired it. If your business use ofException. If you used the standard mile-
windshield. the car is 50% or less in a later tax year during age rate in the first year of business use and
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
change to the actual expenses method in a later may not have mileage records for the time the depreciation limit that applies for that year.
year, you cannot depreciate your car under the before the change to business use. In this case, See Depreciation Limits, later.
MACRS rules. You must use straight line depre- you figure the percentage of business use for
Car trade-in.If you traded one car (the “oldciation over the estimated remaining useful life the year as follows. 
car”) in on another car (the “new car”) in 2005,of the car.
1. Determine the percentage of business usethere are two ways you can treat the transaction.To figure depreciation under the straight line
for the period following the change. Do thismethod, you must reduce your basis in the car 1. You can elect to treat the transaction as aby dividing business miles by total miles(but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for all tax-free disposition of the old car and thedriven during that period.miles for which you used the standard mileage purchase of the new car. If you make thisrate. The rate per mile varies depending on the2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction.election, you treat the old car as disposedyear(s) you used the standard mileage rate. ForThe numerator (top number) is the number of at the time of the trade-in. The deprecia-the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustment of months the car is used for business andble basis of the new car is the adjustedwhen you used the standard mileage rate under the denominator (bottom number) is 12. basis of the old car (figured as if 100% ofDisposition of a Car, later. the car’s use had been for business pur-This reduction of basis is in addition to those poses) plus any additional amount youExample. You use a car only for personalbasis adjustments described later under Unad- paid for the new car. You then figure yourpurposes during the first 6 months of the year.justed basis. You must use your adjusted basis depreciation deduction for the new car be-During the last 6 months of the year, you drivein your car to figure your depreciation deduction. ginning with the date you placed it in serv-the car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000For additional information on the straight line ice. You make this election by completingmiles are for business. This gives you a busi-method of depreciation, see Publication 946. Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This methodness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000)
is explained later, beginning at Effect ofMore-than-50%-use test. Generally, you for that period. Your business use for the year is
trade-in on basis.must use your car more than 50% for qualified40% (80% × 6/12).
business use (defined next) during the year to 2. If you do not make the election describedLimits. The amount you can claim for sectionuse MACRS. You must meet this in (1), you must figure depreciation sepa-179 and depreciation deductions may be limited.more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov- rately for the remaining basis of the old carThe maximum amount you can claim dependsery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car. and for any additional amount you paid foron the year in which you placed your car inIf your business use is 50% or less, you must the new car. You must apply two deprecia-service. You have to reduce the maximumuse the straight line method to depreciate your tion limits (see Depreciation Limits, later).amount if you did not use the car exclusively forcar. This is explained later under Car Used 50% The limit that applies to the remaining ba-business. See Depreciation Limits, later.or Less for Business. sis of the old car generally is the amount
that would have been allowed had you notQualified business use.A qualified businessUnadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted traded in the old car. The limit that appliesuse is any use in your trade or business. It doesbasis (often referred to as your basis or yourto the additional amount you paid for thenot include use for the production of incomebasis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia-new car generally is the limit that applies(investment use). However, you do combinetion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex-for the tax year, reduced by the deprecia-your business and investment use to computeplained later under Modified Accelerated Cost tion allowance for the remaining basis ofyour depreciation deduction for the tax year.Recovery System (MACRS). Your unadjusted the old car. You must use Form 4562, De-basis for figuring depreciation is your originalUse of your car by another person.Do not preciation and Amortization, to computebasis increased or decreased by certaintreat any use of your car by another person as your depreciation deduction. You cannotamounts.use in your trade or business unless that use use Form 2106, Part II, Section D. ThisTo figure your unadjusted basis, begin withmeets one of the following conditions. method is explained in Publication 946.your car’s original basis, which generally is its
• It is directly connected with your business.cost. Cost includes sales taxes, destinationIf you elect to use the method described in
charges, and dealer preparation. Increase your(1), you must do so on a timely filed tax return• It is properly reported by you as income to
basis by any substantial improvements you(including extensions). Otherwise, you must usethe other person (and, if you have to, you
make to your car, such as adding air condition-the method described in (2).withhold tax on the income).
ing or a new engine. Decrease your basis by anyEffect of trade-in on basis.The discussion• It results in a payment of fair market rent.deductible casualty loss, section 179 deduction,that follows applies to trade-ins of cars in 2005,This includes any payment to you for thespecial depreciation allowance (claimed in priorwhere the election was made to treat the trans-use of your car. years), diesel fuel tax credit, gas guzzler tax,action as a tax-free disposition of the old car andclean-fuel vehicle deduction, and qualified elec-the purchase of the new car. For information ontric vehicle credit. See Publication 535 for moreBusiness use changes. If you used your car how to figure depreciation for cars involved in ainformation on the clean-fuel vehicle deductionmore than 50% in qualified business use in the like-kind exchange (trade-in) in 2005, for whichand the qualified electric vehicle credit.year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in a the election was not made, see Publication 946later year (including the year of disposition), youIf your business use later falls to 50%and Temporary Regulations sectionhave to change to the straight line method of or less, you may have to recapture1.168(i)-6T(d)(3).depreciation. See Qualified business use 50% (include in your income) any excessCAUTION
!
Traded car used only for business.If youor less in a later year under Car Used 50% or depreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for trade in a car that you used only in your businessLess for Business, later. Business, later, for more information. for another car that will be used only in yourIf you acquired the car by gift or inheritance,Property does not cease to be used business, your original basis in the new car issee Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor-more than 50% in qualified business your adjusted basis in the old car, plus anymation on your basis in the car.use by reason of a transfer at death.
TIP
additional amount you pay for the new car.
Improvements. A major improvement to a
car is treated as a new item of 5-year recoveryExample 1. Paul trades in a car that has anUse for more than one purpose.If you use property. It is treated as placed in service in theadjusted basis of $5,000 for a new car. In addi-your car for more than one purpose during theyear the improvement is made. It does not mat-tion, he pays cash of $20,000 for the new car.tax year, you must allocate the use to the vari-ter how old the car is when the improvement isHis original basis of the new car is $25,000 (hisous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile-added. Follow the same steps for depreciating$5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus theage. Figure the percentage of qualified businessthe improvement as you would for depreciating$20,000 cash paid). Paul’s unadjusted basis isuse by dividing the number of miles you drivethe original cost of the car. However, you must$25,000 unless he claims the section 179 de-your car for business purposes during the yeartreat the improvement and the car as a wholeduction, or has other increases or decreases toby the total number of miles you drive the carwhen applying the limits on the depreciationhis original basis, discussed under Unadjustedduring the year for any purpose. deductions. Your car’s depreciation deductionbasis, earlier.
Change from personal to business use.If for the year (plus any section 179 deduction,
you change the use of a car from 100% personal special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-Example 2. In October 2002, Marcia pur-
use to business use during the tax year, you tion on any improvements) cannot be more than chased a car for $26,000 and placed it in service
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cost of old car $21,000for 100% use in her business. Marcia did not 2. The total of the amounts actually allowable
Less: Total depreciation allowed:claim a section 179 deduction but she did claim as depreciation during those years.
2004 — 14,400 mi. × .16 $2,304the special depreciation allowance. Marcia’s un-For information about figuring depreciation, see2003 — 12,000 mi. × .16 1,920adjusted basis for the car was $18,340 ($26,000 2002 — 9,600 mi. × .15 1,440 − 5,664Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System− $7,660 (30% special depreciation allowance, Adjusted basis of old car(MACRS) , which follows Example 2, later.up to the maximum amount allowed)). For 2002 before trade-in adjustment $15,336
through 2004, Marcia figured her depreciationExample 1. In March, Mark traded his 2001deduction using the MACRS depreciation chart Trade-in adjustment:van (placed in service in June 2001) for a newDepreciation at 100% business use:for those years. 2005 model. He used the old van 75% for busi-2004 — 18,000 mi. × .16 $2,880In September 2005, Marcia traded that car inness and he used the new van 75% for business2003 — 16,000 mi. × .16 2,560and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be usedin 2005. Mark claimed actual expenses (includ-2002 — 15,000 mi. × .15 2,250100% in her business. Marcia is allowed ing $10,356 depreciation expense) for the busi-Total $7,690one-half of the MACRS depreciation amount Less: Actual depreciationness use of the old van since 2001. He did notfigured for 2005 for her old car. (See Disposition allowed − 5,664claim a section 179 deduction for the old or theof a Car, later.) Excess of 100% over actual $2,026new van.Marcia figures her basis in the new car asMark paid $19,500 for the 2001 van in JuneLess: Lesser of excess amountfollows. ($2,026) or adjusted basis2001. He paid an additional $12,500 when he
of old car ($15,336) − 2,026acquired the 2005 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 ofCost of old car $26,000 the depreciation deduction amount (which is in-Less total depreciation allowed: Unadjusted basis of part of new carcluded in the $10,356 depreciation expense to-2005 — ($18,340 × .1152) × 1/2 that can be treated as newlytal) for his old van for 2005, the year of(Limit: $1,775) $1,056 purchased MACRS property $13,3102004 — ($18,340 × .192) disposition, as explained later under Disposition
(Limit: $2,950) 2,950 of a Car. Mark does not claim the special depre-Additional basis (cash paid) for new2003 — ($18,340 × .32) ciation allowance. car that is treated as newly(Limit: $4,900) 4,900 purchased MACRS property  $10,000Mark figures the unadjusted basis for depre-2002 — ($26,000 × .30) 1
ciating his new van as shown next.($18,340 × .20)
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System(Limit: $7,660) 7,660 Cost of old van $19,500 (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-Total depreciation allowed – 16,566 Less: Total depreciation allowed on covery System (MACRS) is the name given tothe business cost of old vanAdjusted basis of old car and basis of the tax rules for getting back (recovering)from 2001 – 2005 −10,356part of new car that can be treated as through depreciation deductions the cost ofAdjusted basis of old van beforenewly purchased MACRS property $9,434 property used in a trade or business or to pro-trade-in adjustment $ 9,144
duce income.Additional basis (cash paid) for new car Trade-in adjustment: The maximum amount you can deduct isthat is treated as newly purchased Depreciation at 100% business use: limited, depending on the year you placed yourMACRS property +14,200 2005 — ($19,500 × .1152) × 1/2 car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.
(Limit: $1,775) $  1,123Total basis of new car $23,634 Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are2004 — 19,500 × .1152
(Limit: $1,775) 1,775 classified as 5-year property. You actually de-1 30% special depreciation allowance ($26,000 × 30% =
2003 — 19,500 × .192$7,800). Unadjusted basis of the car: ($26,000 − $7,660 preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a
(Limit: $2,950) 2,950= $18,340). Regular depreciation: ($18,340 × .20 = period of 6 calendar years. This is because your$3,668). Total depreciation ($7,800 + $3,668 = 2002 — 19,500 × .32 car is generally treated as placed in service in$11,468) cannot exceed first year limit ($7,660). (Limit: $4,900) 4,900 the middle of the year and you claim deprecia-2001 — 19,500 × .20 tion for one-half of both the first year and theTraded car used partly in business.If you (Limit: $3,060) 3,060
sixth year.Total $13,808trade in a car that you used partly in your busi-
Less: Actual depreciationness for a new car that you will use in your Depreciation deduction for certain Indianallowed −10,356business, you must make a “trade-in” adjust- reservation property.Shorter recovery peri-Excess of 100% over actual $ 3,452ment for the personal use of the old car. This ods are provided under MACRS for qualified
Less: Lesser of excess amountadjustment has the effect of reducing your basis Indian reservation property placed in service on($3,394) or adjusted basisin your old car, but not below zero, for purposes Indian reservations after 1993 and before 2006.of old van ($9,144) − 3,452of figuring your depreciation deduction for the The recovery period that applies for a
new car. (This adjustment is not used, however, business-use car is 3 years instead of 5 years.Unadjusted basis of part of new vanwhen you determine the gain or loss on the later However, the depreciation limits, discussedthat can be treated as newlydisposition of the new car. See Publication 544, later, will still apply.purchased MACRS property $5,692
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets, for in- For more information on the qualifications for
formation on how to report the disposition ofAdditional basis (cash paid) for new this shorter recovery period and the percent-
van that is treated as newlyyour car.) ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-
purchased MACRS property $12,500To figure the unadjusted basis of your new tion, see chapter 4 of Publication 946.
car for depreciation, first add to your adjusted Depreciation methods. You can use onebasis in the old car any additional amount you of the following methods to depreciate your car.pay for the new car. Then subtract from that totalExample 2. Rob paid $21,000 for a new car
the excess, if any, of: that he placed in service in 2002. He used it• The 200% declining balance method
partly for business in 2002 (9,600 business (200% DB) over a 5-year recovery period1. The total of the amounts that would havemiles of 15,000 total miles), 2003 (12,000 busi-that switches to the straight line methodbeen allowable as depreciation during theness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 2004 when that method provides an equal ortax years before the trade if 100% of the(14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used thegreater deduction.use of the car had been business and in-standard mileage rate in those years to claim the• The 150% declining balance methodvestment use, over business use of his car. (See Depreciation ad- (150% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodjustment when you used the standard mileage that switches to the straight line methodrate under Disposition of a Car, later.) when that method provides an equal orOn January 3, 2005, Rob traded in this cargreater deduction.and paid an additional $10,000 for his new car.
Rob figures the unadjusted basis for his new car• The straight line method (SL) over a
as shown next. 5-year recovery period.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
MaximumIf you use Table 4-1 (discussed later In future years, do not use the chart in
Depreciation Deductionunder MACRS depreciation chart) to this edition of the publication. Instead,
for Carsdetermine your depreciation rate for use the chart in the publication or the
TIP TIP
2005, you do not need to determine in what year form instructions for those future years.Date 4th &using the straight line method provides an equalDisposition of car during recovery period.Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Lateror greater deduction. This is because the chart In Service Year Year Year YearsIf you dispose of the car before the end of thehas the switch to the straight line method builtrecovery period, you are generally allowed a half2005 $ 2,960 $4,700 $2,850 $1,675into its rates. year of depreciation in the year of disposition2004 10,610 1 4,800 2,850 1,675Before choosing a method, you may wish tounless you purchased the car during the lastconsider the following facts. 5/06/2003 – 10,7102 4,900 2,950 1,775quarter of a year. See Depreciation deduction
12/31/2003for the year of disposition under Disposition of a• Using the straight line method provides
Car, later, for information on how to figure theequal yearly deductions throughout the re- 1/01/2003 – 7,6603 4,900 2,950 1,775
5/05/2003depreciation allowed in the year of disposition.covery period.
2001 – 2002 7,6603 4,900 2,950 1,775How to use the 2005 chart.To figure your• Using the declining balance methods pro-
depreciation deduction for 2005, find the per-vides greater deductions during the earlier 2000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775
centage in the column of the chart based on therecovery years with the deductions gener- 1999 3,060 5,000 2,950 1,775date that you first placed the car in service andally getting smaller each year.
1998 3,160 5,000 2,950 1,775the depreciation method that you are using. Mul-
tiply the unadjusted basis of your car (defined1997 3,160 5,000 3,050 1,775MACRS depreciation chart.A 2005 MACRS earlier) by that percentage to determine the1995 – 1996 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775Depreciation Chart and instructions are includedamount of your depreciation deduction. If youin this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this table will 1$2,960 if the car is not qualified property or if you electprefer to figure your depreciation deduction with-not to claim the special depreciation allowance.make it easy for you to figure the 2005 deprecia-out the help of the chart, see Publication 946.tion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap- 2$7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $3,060 if
the car is not qualified property or if you elect not topears in the Instructions for Form 2106. Your deduction cannot be more than
claim any special depreciation allowance.the maximum depreciation limit forYou may have to use the tables in 3$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the carcars. See Depreciation Limits, later.CAUTION
!
Publication 946 instead of using this is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim the
MACRS Depreciation Chart. special depreciation allowance.CAUTION
!
Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru-Trucks and vans. For 2005, the maximumYou must use the Depreciation Tables in ary 2004 to use exclusively in his landscapedepreciation deductions for trucks and vans andPublication 946 rather than the 2005 MACRS business. He paid $9,200 for the truck with nopassenger vehicles such as minivans and sportDepreciation Chart in this publication if any onetrade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de-utility vehicles that are built on a truck chassisof the following three conditions applies to you.duction, the truck did not qualify for the specialare generally higher than those for cars. Fordepreciation allowance, and he chose to use the1. You file your return on a fiscal year basis. trucks and vans placed in service before 2003,200% DB method to get the largest depreciationuse the Maximum Depreciation Deduction for2. You file your return for a short tax yeardeduction in the early years. Cars table.(less than 12 months). Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart in
Maximum2004 to find his percentage. The unadjusted3. During the year, all of the following condi- Depreciation Deductionbasis of his truck equals its cost because Philtions apply. for Trucks and Vansused it exclusively for business. He multiplied
a. You placed some property in servicethe unadjusted basis of his truck, $9,200, by theDate 4th &from January through September. percentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2004 Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Laterdepreciation deduction of $1,840. In Service Year Year Year Yearsb. You placed some property in service In 2005, Phil used the truck for personalfrom October through December. 2005 $ 3,260 $5,200 $3,150 $1,875purposes when he repaired his father’s cabin.
2004 10,910 1 5,300 3,150 1,875c. Your basis in the property you placed inHis records show that the business use of his
service from October through Decem-truck was 90% in 2005. Phil used Table 4-1 to2003 11,010 2,3 5,400 3,250 1,975
ber (excluding nonresidential real prop-find his percentage. Reading down the first col-1If the special depreciation allowance does not apply orerty, residential rental property, andumn for the date placed in service and across toyou make the election not to claim the special
property placed in service and disposedthe 200% DB column, he locates his percent-depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,260.
of in the same year) was more than age, 32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of2If the special depreciation allowance does not apply or
40% of your total bases in all propertyhis truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost × 90% business you make the election not to claim the special
depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,360.you placed in service during the year.use), by 32% to figure his 2005 depreciation
deduction of $2,650. 3If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/03, the truck
or van is qualified property, and you claim the special
Depreciation in future years.If you use depreciation allowance for the truck or van, the
maximum deduction is $7,960.the percentages from the chart, you generallyDepreciation Limitsmust continue to use them for the entire recov-
Exceptions for clean-fuel cars.There areery period of your car. However, you cannotThere are limits on the amount you can deducttwo exceptions to the depreciation limits forcontinue to use the chart if your basis in your carfor depreciation of your car, truck or van, orcars. They are effective after August 5, 1997, foris adjusted because of a casualty. In that case,electric car. The section 179 deduction is treatedcars that run on clean fuel. Clean-fuel cars arefor the year of the adjustment and the remainingas depreciation for purposes of the limits. Thediscussed in chapter 12 of Publication 535. Therecovery period, figure the depreciation withoutmaximum amount you can deduct each year exceptions follow.the chart using your adjusted basis in the car atdepends on the year you place the car in serv-
the end of the year of the adjustment and overice. These limits are shown in the following ta-• Amounts you pay for retrofit parts andthe remaining recovery period. See Figuring thebles. components to modify a car to run onDeduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 4 clean fuel are not subject to the deprecia-of Publication 946. tion limit on cars. Only the cost of the car
before modification is subject to the limit.
• If you place a car in service after August 5,
1997, that was produced to run on elec-
tricity, your depreciation limit is increased.
The amounts are shown in the following
tables.
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4-1.
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below
to find the depreciation method and percentage to use for your
2005 return. If your car was placed in service before 1987, see
the depreciation chart in the Form 2106 instructions.
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the
car in service. Then select the depreciation method and
percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2005, you must use the same
method you used on last year’s return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line
method. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business. )
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in
the chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for
2005. (Also see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the
same year, you may have to use the Jan. 1—Sept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1—Dec. 31 percentage for your car.
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of t hat year
and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in  service
after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the enti re
year, use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of
Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2005 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2005, both used 100% in
your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30, 2005, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the
$20,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in
service during the year (40% /H11003 ($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
Date Placed In Service 200% Declining
Balance (200% DB)
1
150% Declining
Balancing (150% DB)
1
Straight Line
(SL)
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2005
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2005
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2004
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2004
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2003
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2003
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2002
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2002
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2001
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2001
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2000
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2000
Prior to 2000
200 DB 5.0%
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
20.0
38.0
32.0
22.8
19.2
13.68
11.52
10.94
11.52
9.58
5.76
150 DB 3.75%
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
15.0
28.88
25.5
20.21
17.85
16.4
16.66
16.41
16.66
14.35
8.33
SL 2.5%
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
10.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
17.5
10.0
(b)(a) (c)
You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to c laim depreciation. See
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
2005 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2005.)
If you made the election under Notice 2001-70 to use the higher percentage rate for vehicles placed in service January 1 throug h September 30, 2001,
use the percentage rate shown for vehicles placed in service January 1 through September 30, 2001.
2
CAUTION
3
1
2
3
Maximum The examples throughout this chapter2000 9,280 14,800 8,850 5,325Depreciation Deduction for illustrate gas-fueled cars.1999 9,280 14,900 8,950 5,325Electric Cars Placed in Service CAUTION
!
After August 5, 1997 1998 9,380 15,000 8,950 5,425
1997 9,480 15,100 9,050 5,425Date 4th & Car used less than full year.The deprecia-
 Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later tion limits are not reduced if you use a car for1$8,880 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect
In Service Year Year Year Years not to claim the special depreciation allowance.less than a full year. This means that you do not
reduce the limit when you either place a car in2$22,880 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $9,080 if2005 $ 8,880 $14,200 $8,450 $5,125
the car is not qualified property or if you elect not toservice or dispose of a car during the year.2004 31,830 1 14,300 8,550 5,125 claim any special depreciation allowance. However, the depreciation limits are reduced if
5/06/2003 – 32,0302 14,600 8,750  5,225 3$9,180 if the car is not qualified property or if you electyou do not use the car exclusively for business
not to claim the special depreciation allowance.12/31/2003 and investment purposes. See Reduction for
4$9,280 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the car1/01/2003 – 22,8803 14,600 8,750 5,225 personal use, later.
is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim the5/05/2003 special depreciation allowance.
Example. Marie purchased a car in June2002 22,980 3 14,700 8,750 5,325
2005 for $20,000 to use exclusively in her busi-2001 23,080 4 14,800 8,850 5,325 ness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc-
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tion and she chooses the 200% DB method of Jack will use the unadjusted basis to figure his If Bob’s business use of the car was less
depreciation. than 100% during any year, his depreciationdepreciation deduction for 2006.
deduction would be less than the maximumMarie’s MACRS depreciation (using the rate
amount allowable for that year. However, in de-from Table 4-1) is $4,000 ($20,000 × 20%). Deductions in years after the recovery pe-
termining his unrecovered basis in the car, heHowever, the maximum amount she can deductriod. If the depreciation limits apply to your
would still reduce his original basis by the maxi-for depreciation is $2,960. (See the Maximum car, you may have unrecovered basis in your car
mum amount allowable. Bob’s unrecovered ba-Depreciation Deduction for Cars table earlier.)at the end of the recovery period. If you continue
sis at the beginning of 2005 would be $12,265to use your car for business, you can deduct that
($28,600 – $16,335) in this example. This isReduction for personal use.The deprecia- unrecovered basis after the recovery period
true even if his actual depreciation deduction fortion limits are reduced based on your percent-ends.
any year was less than the maximum amountage of personal use. If you use a car less thanUnrecovered basis. This is your cost orshown.100% in your business or work, you must deter-other basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuelmine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-vehicle deduction, electric vehicle credit, andplying the limit amount by the percentage of
depreciation and section 179 deductions thatCar Used 50% or Lessbusiness and investment use during the tax
would have been allowable if you had used thefor Businessyear.
car 100% for business and investment use.
If you use your car 50% or less for qualifiedExample. In April 2005, Karl, an outsideThe recovery period.For 5-year property,business use (defined earlier under Deprecia-dental supply salesman, purchased a new caryour recovery period is 6 calendar years. A parttion Deduction) either in the year the car isfor $25,400 to make sales calls in a territory thatyear’s depreciation is allowed in the first calen-placed in service or in a later year, special rulesextends 200 miles around his home base. Hedar year, a full year’s depreciation is allowed inapply. The rules that apply in these two situa-uses his car 85% for his business. Karl does noteach of the next 4 calendar years, and a parttions are explained in the following paragraphs.claim the section 179 deduction and he choosesyear’s depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen-(For this purpose, “car” was defined earlierthe 200% DB method to figure his depreciationdar year. under Actual Car Expenses and includes certaindeduction. Under MACRS, your recovery period is thetrucks and vans and electric cars.)In 2005, Karl figures his MACRS deprecia-same whether you use declining balance ortion deduction to be $4,318 (($25,400 x 85%) xstraight line depreciation. You determine yourQualified business use 50% or less in year20%). However, Karl’s deduction is limited tounrecovered basis in the 7th year after youplaced in service.If you use your car 50% or$2,516. This is the depreciation limit ($2,960)placed the car in service. less for qualified business use (defined earliermultiplied by the business use percentage under Depreciation Deduction) in the year the(85%). How to treat unrecovered basis.If you car is placed in service, the following rules apply.Karl continues to use his car 85% for busi- continue to use your car for business after the
ness. Depreciation in the next four years contin-recovery period, you can claim a depreciation• You cannot take the section 179 deduc-
ues to be subject to deduction limits. Karl figuresdeduction in each succeeding tax year until yoution.
his depreciation limits for those years as follows.recover your full basis in the car. The maximum• You must figure depreciation using theamount you can deduct each year is determinedstraight line method over a 5-year recov-Year Limit x Business Use Depreciation by the date you placed the car in service andery period. You must continue to use theyour business-use percentage. For example, no2006 $4,700 × 85% $3,995 straight line method even if your percent-2007 2,850 × 85% 2,423 deduction is allowed for a year you use your carage of business use increases to more2008, 2009 1,675 × 85% 1,424 100% for personal purposes. than 50% in a later year.In 2010, using the rate from Table 4-1, Karl’sExample. In May 1999, Bob bought andMACRS deduction is $1,244 (($25,400 × 85%) × Instead of making the computation yourself,placed in service a car that he used exclusively5.76%). Since that amount is less than the de- you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find thein his business. The car cost $28,600. Bob didpreciation limit of $1,424 ($1,675 × 85%), Karl’s percentage to use.not claim a section 179 deduction for the car. Hedepreciation deduction for 2010 is $1,244.
continued to use the car 100% in his businessIf Karl continues to use his car for business Example. On May 22, 2005, Dan bought athroughout the recovery period (1999 throughafter 2010, he can continue to claim a deprecia- car for $15,000. He used it 40% for his consult-2004). For those years, Bob used Table 4-1 andtion deduction for his unrecovered basis. How- ing business. Because he did not use the carthe Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Carsever, he cannot deduct more than $1,675 more than 50% for business, Dan cannot taketable (as explained earlier) to compute his de-multiplied by his business use percentage. See any section 179 deduction and he must use thepreciation deductions as shown in the followingDeductions in years after the recovery period, straight line method over a 5-year recovery pe-table.later. riod to recover the cost of his car.
Dan deducts $600 in 2005. This is the lesserMACRS MACRS Maximum Deprec.Section 179 deduction.The section 179 de- of:Year % Amount Deduction Allowedduction is treated as a depreciation deduction. If
1999 20.00 $5,720 $ 3,060 $ 3,060you place a car that is not a truck, van, or electric 1. $600 (($15,000 cost × 40% business use)2000 32.00 9,152 5,000 5,000vehicle in service in 2005, use it only for busi- × 10% recovery percentage (from column2001 19.20 5,491 2,950 2,950ness, and choose the section 179 deduction, the (c), Table 4-1)), or2002 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775combined section 179 and depreciation deduc-2003 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775 2. $1,184 ($2,960 maximum limit × 40% busi-tion for that car for 2005 is limited to $2,960.2004 5.76 1,647 1,775 1,647 ness use).Total $16,335 $16,207
Example. On September 4, 2005, Jack
At the end of 2004, Bob had an unrecoveredbought a used car for $10,000 and placed it in Qualified business use 50% or less in a later
basis in the car of $12,393. This was theservice. He used it 80% for his business and he year. If you use your car more than 50% in
$28,600 original basis of his car less thechooses to take a section 179 deduction for the qualified business use in the tax year it is placed
$16,207 depreciation deductions allowed duringcar. in service but the business use drops to 50% or
the recovery period. less in a later year, you can no longer use anBefore applying the limit, Jack figures his
Bob continued to use the car 100% for busi-accelerated depreciation method for that car.maximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000.
ness in 2005. He can claim a depreciation de-This is the cost of his qualifying property (up to For the year the business use drops to 50%
duction of $1,775 (the maximum allowed forthe maximum $105,000 amount) multiplied by or less and all later years in the recovery period,
each subsequent year) for the year. If he contin-his business use ($10,000 × 80%). you must use the straight line depreciation
ues to use the car 100% for business in 2006method over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-Jack then figures that his section 179 deduc-
and later years, Bob can deduct the lesser oftion, for the year your business use drops totion for 2005 is limited to $2,368 (80% of
$1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis in50% or less, you must recapture (include in your$2,960). He then has an unadjusted basis of
each of those years until his deductions total thegross income) any excess depreciation (dis-$5,632 (($10,000 × 80%) − $2,368) for determin-
$10,618 unrecovered basis ($12,393 − $1,775 cussed later). You also increase the adjusteding his depreciation deduction. Since he has
claimed in 2005). basis of your car by the same amount.already reached the maximum limit for 2005,
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. In June 2002, you purchased a figure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, or and many local libraries. You can also find them
van. on the Internet at www.irs.gov.car for exclusive use in your business. You met
For each tax year during which you lease thethe more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 yearsDeductible payments. You can deduct the car for business, determine your inclusionof the recovery period (2002 through 2004) butpart of each lease payment that is for the use ofamount by following these three steps.failed to meet it in the fourth year (2005). Youthe car in your business. You cannot deduct anydetermine your depreciation for 2005 using 20%part of a lease payment that is for personal use1. Locate the appendix that applies to you.(from column (c) of Table 4-1). You also willof the car, such as commuting. To find the inclusion amount, do the follow-have to determine and include in your grossYou must spread any advance payments ing.income any excess depreciation, discussedover the entire lease period. You cannot deduct
next. a. Find the line that includes the fair mar-any payments you make to buy a car, even if the
ket value of the car on the first day ofpayments are called lease payments.Excess depreciation. You must include
the lease term.If you lease a car for 30 days or more, youany excess depreciation in your gross income
may have to reduce your lease payment deduc-and add it to your car’s adjusted basis for the b. Go across the line to the column for thetion by an “inclusion amount.”first tax year in which you do not use the car tax year in which the car is used under
more than 50% in qualified business use. Use the lease to find the dollar amount. For
Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig- the last tax year of the lease, use theInclusion Amountsure and report the excess depreciation in your dollar amount for the preceding year.
gross income. If you lease a car that you use in your business
2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) forExcess depreciation is: for a lease term of 30 days or more, you may
the number of days of the lease term in-have to include an inclusion amount in your
1. The amount of the depreciation deductions cluded in the tax year.income for each tax year you lease the car. To
allowable for the car (including any sectiondo this, you do not add an amount to income.3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) by179 deduction claimed and any special de-Instead, you reduce your deduction for your the percentage of business and investmentpreciation allowance claimed) for tax yearslease payment. (This reduction has an effectuse for the tax year. This is your inclusionin which you used the car more than 50%similar to the limit on the depreciation deductionamount.in qualified business use, minus you would have on the car if you owned it.)
The inclusion amount is a percentage of part2. The amount of the depreciation deductions Example. On January 17, 2004, you leasedof the fair market value of the leased car multi-that would have been allowable for those a car for 3 years and placed it in service for useplied by the percentage of business and invest-years if you had not used the car more in your business. The car had a fair market valuement use of the car for the tax year. It is proratedthan 50% in qualified business use for the of $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. Youfor the number of days of the lease term in theyear you placed it in service. This means use the car 75% for business and 25% for per-tax year.the amount of depreciation figured using sonal purposes during each year of the lease.The inclusion amount applies to each taxthe straight line method. Assuming you continue to use the car 75% foryear that you lease the car if the fair marketbusiness, you use Appendix A-5 to arrive at thevalue (defined next) of the car when the leasefollowing inclusion amounts for each year of theExample. On September 25, 2002, you began was more than the amounts shown in thelease:bought a car for $20,500 and placed it in service.following table.
You did not claim the section 179 deduction but Tax Dollar Business Inclusionyou did claim the 30% special depreciation al-Year Lease Began Fair Market Value* year amount Proration use amountlowance. You used the car exclusively in quali-2005 $15,200 2004 $ 64 349/366 75% $ 46fied business use for 2002, 2003, and 2004. For2004 17,500 2005 141 365/365 75% 106those years, you figured the special depreciation2003  18,000 2006 209 365/365 75% 157allowance and you used the appropriate 1999 – 2002  15,500 2007 209 16/365 75% 7
MACRS Depreciation Chart to figure deprecia- 1997 – 1998 15,800
For each year of the lease that you deduct lease1995 – 1996 15,500tion deductions totaling $15,007 ($7,660 for payments, you must reduce your deduction by1994 14,6002002, $4,592 for 2003, and $2,755 for 2004)
1993 14,300 the inclusion amount computed for that year.under the 200% DB method. 1992 13,700During 2005, you used the car 50% for busi- Leased car changed from business to per-1991 13,400
ness and 50% for personal purposes. Since you sonal use. If you lease a car for business use1987 – 1990 12,800
did not meet the more-than-50%-use test, you and, in a later year, change it to personal use,
*For 2005, the fair market value for trucks and vans ismust include in gross income for 2005 your follow the rules explained earlier under Figuring$16,700 and for electric cars it is $45,000.excess depreciation determined as follows. the inclusion amount. For the tax year in which
you stop using the car for business, use theFair market value.Fair market value is theTotal depreciation claimed: $15,007 dollar amount for the previous tax year. Prorateprice at which the property would change hands(MACRS 200% DB method) the dollar amount for the number of days in thebetween a buyer and a seller, neither having toMinus total depreciation allowable: lease term that fall within the tax year.buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl-(Straight line method)
2002 — 10% of $20,500.... $2,050 edge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similarExample. On August 16, 2004, Will leased2003 — 20% of $20,500.... 4,100 property around the same date may be helpful inan electric car with a fair market value of2004 — 20% of $20,500.... 4,100 10,250 figuring the fair market value of the property.$58,600 for 3 years. He used the car exclusivelyExcess depreciation $4,757 Figure the fair market value on the first day ofin his own data processing business. On No-the lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car isIn 2005, using Form 4797, you figure and vember 5, 2005, Will closed his business andspecified in the lease agreement, use thatreport the $4,757 excess depreciation you must went to work for a company where he is notamount as the fair market value.include in your gross income. Your adjusted required to use a car for business. Using Appen-
basis in the car is also increased by $4,757.Figuring the inclusion amount. Inclusion dix C-5, Will computed his inclusion amount for
Your 2005 depreciation deduction is $2,050amounts are listed in Appendix A for cars, in2004 and 2005 as shown in the following table
($20,500 (unadjusted basis) × 50% (business Appendix B for trucks and vans, and in Appendix and reduced his deductions for lease payments
use percentage) × 20% (from column (c) of Ta-C  for electric cars leased after August 5, 1997. Ifby those amounts.
ble 4-1 on the line for Jan. 1— Sept. 30, 2002)).the fair market value of the car is $100,000 or
Tax Dollar Business Inclusionless, use the appropriate appendix (depending
year amount Proration use amounton the year you first placed the car in service) toLeasing a Car
determine the inclusion amount. If the fair mar-2004 $ 51 138/366 100% $19
If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in 2005 112 309/365 100% 95ket value is more than $100,000, see the Reve-
your business, you can use the standard mile-nue Procedure(s) identified in the footnote of the
age rate or actual expenses to figure your de-appendices for the inclusion amount. RevenueLeased car changed from personal to busi-
ductible expense. This section explains how to Procedures are available at most IRS officesness use. If you lease a car for personal use
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
July, Aug., Sept.............. 62.5%and, in a later year, change it to business use, (but not below zero) by the amount of this depre-
Oct., Nov., Dec.............. 87.5%you must determine the car’s fair market value ciation.
on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-These rates do not apply for any year Do not use this table if you are a fiscalsion amount using the rules explained earlier in which the actual expenses method year filer. See Sale or Other Disposi-under Figuring the inclusion amount. Use the was used.
TIP
tion Before the Recovery Period EndsCAUTION
!
fair market value on the date of conversion.
in chapter 4 of Publication 946.
DepreciationExample. In March 2003, Janice leased a
Year(s) Rate per Milecar for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,
2005, she started working as a self-employed 2005 $.17
2003 –  2004 .16advertising consultant and started using the
2001 –  2002 .15leased car for business purposes. Her records
2000 .14show that her business use for June 1 through1994 –  1999 .12December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusion 5.1992 –  1993 .11 1/2
amount for 2005, Janice obtained an appraisal1989 –  1991 .11from an independent car leasing company that 1988 .10 1/2
showed the fair market value of her 2003 car on 1987 .10
June 1, 2005, was $21,650. Using Appendix 1986 .09 Recordkeeping
A-6, Janice computed her inclusion amount for 1983 –  1985 .08
1982 .07 1/22005 as shown in the following table. If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-1980 –  1981 .07 portation expenses, you must be able to proveTax Dollar Business Inclusion (substantiate) certain elements of expense. Thisyear amount Proration use amount For tax years after 1989, the depreciationchapter discusses the records you need to keep2005 $32 214/365 60% $11 rates apply to all business miles. For tax yearsto prove these expenses.before 1990, the depreciation rates apply to the
If you keep timely and accurate rec-first 15,000 miles.Reporting inclusion amounts.   For informa-
ords, you will have support to showtion on reporting inclusion amounts, employees
the IRS if your tax return is ever ex-Example. In 2000, you bought a car for ex-RECORDS
should see Car rentals under Completing Forms
amined. You will also have proof of expensesclusive use in your business. The car cost2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprietors
that your employer may require if you are reim-$18,000. From 2000 through 2005, you used theshould see the instructions for Schedule C
bursed under an accountable plan. These plansstandard mileage rate to figure your car expense(Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc-
are discussed in chapter 6 under Reimburse-deduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles intions for Schedule F (Form 1040).
ments.2000, 16,300 miles in 2001, 15,600 miles in
2002, 16,700 miles in 2003, 15,100 miles in
2004, and 14,900 miles in 2005. Your deprecia-
tion is figured as follows.Disposition of a Car How To ProveYear Miles x Rate DepreciationIf you dispose of your car, you may have a
2000 14,100 × .14 $ 1,974 Expensestaxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion of
2001 16,300 × .15 2,445any gain that is due to depreciation (including2002 15,600 × .15 2,340 Table 5-1 is a summary of records you need toany section 179 or clean-fuel vehicle deduction)2003 16,700 × .16 2,672 prove each expense discussed in this publica-that you claimed on the car will be treated as2004 15,100 × .16 2,416 tion. You must be able to prove the elementsordinary income. However, you may not have to2005 14,900 × .17 2,533 listed across the top portion of the chart. Yourecognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the carTotal depreciation $14,380 prove them by having the information and re-because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in.At the end of 2005, your adjusted basis in the carceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed inThis section gives some general informationis $3,620 ($18,000 − $14,380). the first column.about dispositions of cars. For information on
how to report the disposition of your car, seeDepreciation deduction for the year of You cannot deduct amounts that you
Publication 544. disposition.If you deduct actual car ex- approximate or estimate.
penses and you dispose of your car before theCAUTION
!
Casualty or theft.For a casualty or theft, aend of its recovery period, you are allowed again results when you receive insurance or otherreduced depreciation deduction for the year ofYou should keep adequate records to provereimbursement that is more than your adjusteddisposition. your expenses or have sufficient evidence thatbasis in your car. If you then spend all of theTo figure the reduced depreciation deductionwill support your own statement. You must gen-proceeds to acquire replacement property (afor a car disposed of in 2005, first determine theerally prepare a written record for it to be consid-new car or repairs to the old car) within a speci-depreciation deduction for the full year usingered adequate. This is because written evidencefied period of time, you do not recognize anyTable 4-1. is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-gain. Your basis in the replacement property isIf you used a Date Placed in Service line forever, if you prepare a record in a computerits cost minus any gain that is not recognized.Jan. 1—Sept. 30, you can deduct one-half ofmemory device with the aid of a logging pro-See Publication 547 for more information.the depreciation amount figured for the full year.gram, it is considered an adequate record.
Figure your depreciation deduction for the fullTrade-in. When you trade in an old car for a
year using the rules explained in this chapternew one, the transaction is considered a What Are Adequateand deduct 50% of that amount with your otherlike-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is Records?actual car expenses.recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of
If you used a Date Placed in Service line forPublication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your You should keep the proof you need in an ac-Oct. 1—Dec. 31, you can deduct a percentagebasis in the new property is generally your ad- count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-of the depreciation amount figured for the fulljusted basis in the old property plus any addi- ilar record. You should also keep documentaryyear. The percentage you use is determined bytional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis, evidence that, together with your record, willthe month you disposed of the car. Figure yourearlier.) support each element of an expense.depreciation deduction for the full year using the
Depreciation adjustment when you used therules explained in this chapter and multiply theDocumentary evidence. You generally muststandard mileage rate.If you used the stan- result by the percentage from the following tablehave documentary evidence, such as receipts,dard mileage rate for the business use of your for the month that you disposed of the car.canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-car, depreciation was included in that rate. The penses.Month Percentagerate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan-
dard mileage rate is shown in the chart that Exception. Documentary evidence is notJan., Feb., March............ 12.5%
follows. You must reduce your basis in your carApril, May, June............. 37.5% needed if any of the following conditions apply.
Page 24 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 25 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
purpose of an expense. However, the degree of continues at the same rate during the later• You have meals or lodging expenses proof varies according to the circumstances in weeks of each month. Your weekly records arewhile traveling away from home for whicheach case. If the business purpose of an ex- representative of the use of the car each monthyou account to your employer under anpense is clear from the surrounding circum- and are sufficient evidence to support the per-accountable plan, and you use a per diemstances, then you do not need to give a written centage of business use for the year.allowance method that includes meals explanation.and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and Exceptional circumstances.You can satisfy
per diem allowances are discussed in the substantiation requirements with other evi-Example. If you are a sales representativechapter 6.) dence if, because of the nature of the situation inwho calls on customers on an established sales
which an expense is made, you cannot get aroute, you do not have to give a written explana-• Your expense, other than lodging, is less
receipt. This applies if all the following are true.tion of the business purpose for traveling thatthan $75.
route. You can satisfy the requirements by re-• You were unable to obtain evidence for an• You have a transportation expense forcording the length of the delivery route once, theelement of the expense or use that com-which a receipt is not readily available.date of each trip at or near the time of the trips,pletely satisfies the requirements ex-and the total miles you drove the car during theplained earlier under What Are AdequateAdequate evidence. Documentary evi- tax year. You could also establish the date ofRecords.dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if iteach trip with a receipt, record of delivery, orshows the amount, date, place, and essential • You are unable to obtain evidence for another documentary evidence.character of the expense. element that completely satisfies the two
For example, a hotel receipt is enough toConfidential information.You do not need to rules listed earlier under What if I Have
support expenses for business travel if it has allput confidential information relating to an ele-Incomplete Records.
of the following information. ment of a deductible expense (such as the • You have presented other evidence for theplace, business purpose, or business relation-• The name and location of the hotel. element that is the best proof possibleship) in your account book, diary, or other re-under the circumstances.• The dates you stayed there. cord. However, you do have to record the
information elsewhere at or near the time of the• Separate amounts for charges such as expense and have it available to fully prove thatDestroyed records. If you cannot produce alodging, meals, and telephone calls. element of the expense. receipt because of reasons beyond your control,
you can prove a deduction by reconstructingA restaurant receipt is enough to prove an
your records or expenses. Reasons beyondWhat If I Have Incompleteexpense for a business meal if it has all of the
your control include fire, flood, and other casu-following information. Records? alty.
• The name and location of the restaurant.If you do not have complete records to prove an
• The number of people served. element of an expense, then you must prove theSeparating and Combining
element with: Expenses• The date and amount of the expense.
• Your own written or oral statement con-If a charge is made for items other than food and This section explains when expenses must betaining specific information about the ele-beverages, the receipt must show that this is the kept separate and when expenses can be com-ment, andcase. bined.
• Other supporting evidence that is sufficientCanceled check. A canceled check, to- Separating expenses. Each separate pay-to establish the element.gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es- ment is generally considered a separate ex-tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check pense. For example, if you entertain a customerIf the element is the description of a gift, or theby itself does not prove a business expense or client at dinner and then go to the theater, thecost, time, place, or date of an expense, thewithout other evidence to show that it was for a dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-supporting evidence must be either direct evi-business purpose. ets are two separate expenses. You must recorddence or documentary evidence. Direct evi-
them separately in your records.dence can be written statements, or the oralDuplicate information.You do not have to
testimony of your guests or other witnesses set-record information in your account book or other Season or series tickets.If you buy sea-ting forth detailed information about the element.record that duplicates information shown on a son or series tickets for business use, you mustDocumentary evidence can be receipts, paidreceipt as long as your records and receipts treat each ticket in the series as a separate item.bills, or similar evidence.complement each other in an orderly manner. To determine the cost of individual tickets, divideIf the element is either the business relation-You do not have to record amounts your the total cost (but not more than face value) byship of your guests or the business purpose ofemployer pays directly for any ticket or other the number of games or performances in thethe amount spent, the supporting evidence cantravel item. However, if you charge these items series. You must keep records to show whetherbe circumstantial, rather than direct. For exam-to your employer, through a credit card or other- you use each ticket as a gift or entertainment.ple, the nature of your work, such as makingwise, you must keep a record of the amounts Also, you must be able to prove the cost ofdeliveries, provides circumstantial evidence ofyou spend. nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox orthe use of your car for business purposes. In-other private luxury box for more than one event.Timely-kept records.You should record thevoices of deliveries establish when you used theSee Entertainment tickets in chapter 2.elements of an expense or of a business use atcar for business.
or near the time of the expense or use and Combining items. You can make one dailySampling. You can keep an adequate recordsupport it with sufficient documentary evidence. entry in your record for reasonable categories offor parts of a tax year and use that record toA timely-kept record has more value than a expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneprove the amount of business or investment usestatement prepared later when generally there is calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealsfor the entire year. You must demonstrate bya lack of accurate recall. should be in a separate category. You can in-other evidence that the periods for which anYou do not need to write down the elements clude tips for meal-related services with theadequate record is kept are representative ofof every expense on the day of the expense. If costs of the meals.the use throughout the tax year.you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac- Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-
counts for use during the week, the log is consid- ing the course of a single event are considered aExample. You use your car to visit the of-ered a timely-kept record. single expense. For example, if during entertain-fices of clients, meet with suppliers and otherIf you give your employer, client, or customer ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forsubcontractors, and pick up and deliver items toan expense account statement, it can also be each serving of refreshments, the total expenseclients. There is no other business use of theconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true if for the refreshments is treated as a single ex-car, but you and your family use the car foryou copy it from your account book, diary, state- pense.personal purposes. You keep adequate recordsment of expense, or similar record.
during the first week of each month that showCar expenses. You can account for several
Proving business purpose.You must gener- that 75% of the use of the car is for business. uses of your car that can be considered part of a
ally provide a written statement of the business Invoices and bills show that your business use single use, such as a round trip or uninterrupted
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 25

Page 26 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business use, with a single record. Minimal per- An allocation would be needed, for example,Reimbursed for expenses. Employees who
if you did not have a business relationship withsonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the way give their records and documentation to their
all of your guests. See Allocating between busi-between two business stops, is not an interrup- employers and are reimbursed for their ex-
ness and nonbusiness in chapter 2.tion of business use. penses generally do not have to keep copies of
this information. However, you may have toIf your return is examined.If your return isExample. You make deliveries at several prove your expenses if any of the following con-examined, you may have to provide additionaldifferent locations on a route that begins and ditions apply.information to the IRS. This information could beends at your employer’s business premises andneeded to clarify or to establish the accuracy or• You claim deductions for expenses thatthat includes a stop at the business premisesreliability of information contained in your rec-are more than reimbursements.between two deliveries. You can account forords, statements, testimony, or documentarythese using a single record of miles driven. • Your expenses are reimbursed under aevidence before a deduction is allowed. nonaccountable plan.Gift expenses.You do not always have to
record the name of each recipient of a gift. A • Your employer does not use adequate ac-How Long To Keepgeneral listing will be enough if it is evident that counting procedures to verify expense ac-Records and Receiptsyou are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limit counts.
on the amount you can deduct for gifts to anyYou must keep records as long as they may be• You are related to your employer as de-one person. For example, if you buy a largeneeded for the administration of any provision offined under Per Diem and Car Allowances,number of tickets to local high school basketballthe Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this later.games and give one or two tickets to each ofmeans you must keep records that support your
many customers, it is usually enough to record a Reimbursements, adequate accounting, anddeduction (or an item of income) for 3 years from
general description of the recipients. nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapterthe date you file the income tax return on which
6.the deduction is claimed. A return filed early is
Allocating total cost.If you can prove theconsidered filed on the due date. For a more
total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-complete explanation of how long to keep rec-Examples of Records
not prove how much it cost for each person whoords, get Publication 583, Starting a Business
participated in the event, you may have to allo- Examples of records that show the informationand Keeping Records.
cate the total cost among you and your guests you need to keep for different types of expensesYou must keep records of the business use
on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establish are included in this publication as Table 6-2 andof your car for each year of the recovery period.
the number of persons who participated in the Table 6-3. They are part of the illustrated exam-See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 under
event. ples shown at the end of chapter 6.Depreciation Deduction.
Table 5-1. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have
expenses
for...
Travel
Entertainment
Gifts
Transportation
Amount Time
Place or
Description
Business Purpose and
Business Relationship
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Cost of each separate expense
for travel, lodging, and meals.
Incidental expenses may be
totaled in reasonable categories
such as taxis, daily meals for
traveler, etc.
Dates you
left and
returned for
each trip
and number
of days
spent on
business.
Destination or area
of your travel
(name of city, town,
or other
designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
Incidental expenses such as
taxis, telephones, etc., may be
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of
entertainment.
(Also see
Business
Purpose.)
Name and address
or location of place
of entertainment.
Type of
entertainment if not
otherwise apparent.
(Also see Business
Purpose.)
Cost of the gift. Date of the
gift.
Description of the
gift.
Date of the
expense.
For car
expenses,
the date of
the use of
the car.
Your business
destination.
Cost of each separate expense.
For car expenses, the cost of
the car and any improvements,
the date you started using it for
business, the mileage for each
business use, and the total miles
for the year.
Purpose:
 Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 N/A
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or other
designations) about the recipients that
shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that
you or your employee was present if the
entertainment was a business meal.
For entertainment, the nature of the
business discussion or activity. If the
entertainment was directly before or after a
business discussion: the date, place, nature,
and duration of the business discussion,
and the identities of the persons who took
part in both the business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
Relationship: N/A
Page 26 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 27 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you must keep separate records for each busi-Vehicle Provided by
ness activity. Report your business expenses forYour Employerself-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report yourIf your employer provides you with a car, you
business expenses for your work as an em-may be able to deduct the actual expenses of
ployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussedoperating that car for business purposes. The6. next. amount you can deduct depends on the amount
that your employer included in your income and
the business and personal miles you drove dur-Employees. If you are an employee, you gen-
ing the year. You cannot use the standard mile-erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct yourHow To Report age rate.travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-
penses. However, you can use the shorter FormValue reported on Form W-2.Your employerThis chapter explains where and how to report
2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all ofcan figure and report either the actual value ofthe expenses discussed in this publication. It
the following conditions. your personal use of the car or the value of thediscusses reimbursements and how to treat
car as if you used it only for personal purposesthem under accountable and nonaccountable • You are an employee deducting expenses(100% income inclusion). Your employer mustplans. It also explains rules for independent con-attributable to your job. separately state the amount if 100% of the an-tractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certain
nual lease value was included in your income. If• You were not reimbursed by your em-performing artists, Armed Forces reservists, and
you are unsure of the amount included in yourcertain disabled employees. The chapter endsployer for your expenses (amounts in-
Form W-2, ask your employer.with illustrations of how to report travel, enter-cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not
tainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 2106considered reimbursements). Full value included in your income.You canand 2106-EZ. deduct the value of the business use of an• If you claim car expenses, you use the
employer-provided car if your employer reportedstandard mileage rate.
100% of the value of the car in your income. On
your 2005 Form W-2, the amount of the valueFor more information on how to report yourWhere To Report will be included in box 1, Wages, tips, otherexpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see
compensation, and box 12.Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later.This section provides general information on To claim your expenses, complete Part II,where to report the expenses discussed in thisGifts. If you did not receive any reimburse-Sections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter yourpublication. ments (or the reimbursements were all includedactual expenses on line 23 of Section C and
in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only businessinclude the entire value of the employer-pro-Self-employed. You must report your incomeexpense you are claiming is for gifts, and thevided car on line 25. Complete the rest of theand expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form form.Special Rules discussed later do not apply to1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched-you, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.Less than full value included in your income.ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do notInstead, claim the amount of your deductibleIf less than the full annual lease value of the caruse Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. gifts directly on line 20 of Schedule A (Formwas included on your Form W-2, this means thatIf you claim car or truck expenses, you must1040). your Form W-2 only includes the value of yourprovide certain information on the use of your
personal use of the car. Do not enter this valuevehicle. You provide this information on Sched-Statutory employees. If you received a
on your Form 2106; it is not deductible.ule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Form 4562. Form W-2 and the “Statutory employee” box inIf you paid any actual costs (that your em-If you file Schedule C: box 13 was checked, report your income andployer did not provide or reimburse you for) toexpenses related to that income on Schedule C• Report your travel expenses, except operate the car, you can deduct the businessor C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Formmeals, on line 24a, portion of those costs. Examples of costs that2106 or 2106-EZ. you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-• Report your deductible meals (actual costStatutory employees include full-time life in-plete Part II, Sections A and C, of Form 2106.or standard meal allowance) and enter-surance salespersons, certain agent or commis-Enter your actual costs on line 23 of Section Ctainment on line 24b, sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certainand leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of the• Report your gift expenses and transporta-homeworkers. form.tion expenses, other than car expenses,  If you are entitled to a reimbursementon line 27, and from your employer but you do not
• Report your car expenses on line 9. Com- claim it, you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
!
Reimbursementsplete Part IV of the form unless you havefor the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-
to file Form 4562 for depreciation or amor-bursement applies.
This section explains what to do when you re-tization.
ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofReimbursement for personal expenses. If the employee business expenses discussed inIf you file Schedule C-EZ, report the total of allyour employer reimburses you for nondeduct-this publication.business expenses on line 2. You can only in-ible personal expenses, such as for vacationIf you received an advance, allowance, orclude 50% of your meals and entertainment intrips, your employer must report the reimburse-reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-that total. If you include car expenses, you mustment as wage income in box 1 of your Formport this amount and your expenses depends onalso complete Part III of the form. W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.whether the reimbursement was paid to youIf you file Schedule F:
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable• Report your car expenses on line 12. At-Income-producing property. If you have plan.tach Form 4562 and provide informationtravel or transportation expenses related toThis section explains the two types of plans,on the use of your car in Part V of Formincome-producing property, report your deducti-how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-4562. ble expenses on the form appropriate for thating the amount of your expenses, and the tax
activity. treatment of your reimbursements and ex-• Report all other business expenses dis-
penses. It also covers rules for independentcussed in this publication on line 34. YouFor example, if you have rental real estate
contractors.can only include 50% of your meals andincome and expenses, report your expenses on
entertainment on that line. Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss.No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed
See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-or given an allowance for your expenses if youSee your forms instructions for more information
erty, for more information on the rental of realare paid a salary or commission with the under-on how to complete your tax return.
estate. If you have deductible investment-re-standing that you will pay your own expenses. In
lated transportation expenses, report them onBoth self-employed and an employee. If this situation, you have no reimbursement or
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22.you are both self-employed and an employee, allowance arrangement, and you do not have to
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 27

Page 28 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
read this section on reimbursements. Instead,• You are given a periodic statement (at You must account for all amounts you re-
see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later, ceived from your employer during the year asleast quarterly) that asks you to either re-
for information on completing your tax return. advances, reimbursements, or allowances. Thisturn or adequately account for outstanding
includes amounts you charged to your employeradvances and you comply within 120 days
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance.A by credit card or other method. You must giveof the statement.
reimbursement or other expense allowance ar- your employer the same type of records and
rangement is a system or plan that an employer supporting information that you would have toEmployee meets accountable plan rules.Ifuses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex- give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductionyou meet the three rules for accountable plans,penses, advances, reimbursements, and on your return. You must pay back the amount ofyour employer should not include any reim-amounts charged to the employer for employee any reimbursement or other expense allowancebursements in your income in box 1 of yourbusiness expenses. Arrangements include per for which you do not adequately account or thatForm W-2. If your expenses equal your reim-diem and car allowances. is more than the amount for which you ac-bursement, you do not complete Form 2106.A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of counted.You have no deduction since your expensesdaily reimbursement your employer gives you
and reimbursement are equal.for your lodging, meals, and incidental expenses
when you are away from home on business. Per Diem and Car AllowancesIf your employer included reimburse-
(The term “incidental expenses” is defined in ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 andIf your employer reimburses you for your ex-chapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) A you meet all the rules for accountable
TIP
penses using a per diem or a car allowance, youcar allowance is an amount your employer givesplans, ask your employer for a corrected Formcan generally use the allowance as proof for theyou for the business use of your car. W-2. amount of your expenses. A per diem or carYour employer should tell you what method
allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-of reimbursement is used and what records youAccountable plan rules not met. Even quirements for the amount of your expensesmust provide. though you are reimbursed under an accounta-only if all of the following conditions apply.ble plan, some of your expenses may not meetEmployers. If you are an employer and youall the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all• Your employer reasonably limits paymentsreimburse employee business expenses, howthe rules for accountable plans are treated asof your expenses to those that are ordi-you treat this reimbursement on your having been reimbursed under a nonaccount- nary and necessary in the conduct of theemployee’s Form W-2 depends in part on able plan (discussed later). trade or business.whether you have an accountable plan. Reim-
bursements treated as paid under an accounta-Reimbursement of nondeductible • The allowance is similar in form to and not
ble plan, as explained next, are not reported asexpenses. You may be reimbursed under more than the federal rate (defined later).
pay. Reimbursements treated as paid underyour employer’s accountable plan for expenses• You prove the time (dates), place, andnonaccountable plans, as explained later, arerelated to that employer’s business, some ofbusiness purpose of your expenses toreported as pay. See Publication 15 (Circular E),which are deductible as employee business ex-your employer (as explained in Table 5-1)Employer’s Tax Guide, for information on em-penses and some of which are not deductible.within a reasonable period of time.ployee pay. The reimbursements you receive for the nonde-
ductible expenses do not meet rule (1) for ac-• You are not related to your employer (as
Accountable Plans countable plans, and they are treated as paid defined next). If you are related to your
employer, you must be able to prove yourunder a nonaccountable plan.
To be an accountable plan, your employer’s expenses to the IRS even if you have al-
reimbursement or allowance arrangement mustExample. Your employer’s plan reimburses ready adequately accounted to your em-
include all of the following rules. you for travel expenses while away from homeployer and returned any excess
on business and also for meals when you workreimbursement.1. Your expenses must have a business con-late at the office, even though you are not awaynection — that is, you must have paid or If the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow-from home. The part of the arrangement thatincurred deductible expenses while per- ance practices are not based on reasonablyreimburses you for the nondeductible mealsforming services as an employee of your accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-when you work late at the office is treated asemployer. ognition of cost differences in different areas forpaid under a nonaccountable plan. per diem amounts), you will not be considered to2. You must adequately account to your em- The employer makes the decision have accounted to your employer. In this case,ployer for these expenses within a reason- whether to reimburse employees you must be able to prove your expenses to theable period of time. under an accountable plan or a IRS.
TIP
3. You must return any excess reimburse-nonaccountable plan. If you are an employee
ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-who receives payments under a nonaccount-Related to employer.You are related to your
riod of time. able plan, you cannot convert these amounts toemployer if: 
payments under an accountable plan by volun-“Adequate accounting” and “returning ex- 1. Your employer is your brother or sister,tarily accounting to your employer for the ex-cess reimbursements” are discussed later. half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-penses and voluntarily returning excessAn excess reimbursement or allowance is tor, or lineal descendant,reimbursements to the employer.any amount you are paid that is more than the
2. Your employer is a corporation in whichbusiness-related expenses that you adequately
you own, directly or indirectly, more thanaccounted for to your employer. Adequate Accounting 10% in value of the outstanding stock, orThe definition of reasonable period of time
depends on the facts and circumstances of yourOne of the rules for an accountable plan is that3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-situation. However, regardless of the facts andyou must adequately account to your employerduciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,circumstances of your situation, actions thatfor your expenses. You adequately account bya trust, and your employer.take place within the times specified in the fol-giving your employer a statement of expense,You may be considered to indirectly own stock,lowing list will be treated as taking place within aan account book, a diary, or a similar record infor purposes of (2), if you have an interest in areasonable period of time. which you entered each expense at or near thecorporation, partnership, estate, or trust thattime you had it, along with documentary evi-• You receive an advance within 30 days of owns the stock or if a member of your family ordence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage,the time you have an expense. your partner owns the stock.and other employee business expenses. (See• You adequately account for your ex- Table 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need toThe federal rate.The federal rate can be fig-penses within 60 days after they were paidenter in your record and documents you need toured using any one of the following methods.or incurred. prove certain expenses.) A per diem or car al-
lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-• You return any excess reimbursement 1. For per diem amounts:
quirement under certain conditions. See Perwithin 120 days after the expense was
a. The regular federal per diem rate.diem and Car Allowances, later.paid or incurred.
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. The standard meal allowance. Effective October 1, 2005, the per• The federal rate.diem rate for certain high-cost loca-c. The high-low rate. • Whether the allowance or your actual ex-tions increased to $226 (including $58CAUTION
!
penses were more than the federal rate.for M&IE). The rate for all other locations in-2. For car expenses: creased to $141 (including $45 for M&IE). How-The following discussions explain where to re-ever, an employer can continue to use the ratesa. The standard mileage rate. port your expenses depending upon how thedescribed in the preceding paragraph for theamount of your allowance compares to the fed-b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). remainder of 2005 if those rates and locationseral rate.are used consistently during October, Novem-
Allowance less than or equal to the federalber, and December for all employees. Employ-For per diem amounts, use the rate in
rate. If your allowance is less than or equal toers who did not use the high-low method duringeffect for the area where you stop for
the federal rate, the allowance will not be in-the first 9 months of 2005 cannot begin to use itsleep or rest.
TIP
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do notbefore 2006. See Revenue Procedure 2005-67
need to report the related expenses or the allow-for more information. Also see Publication 1542Regular federal per diem rate.The regular ance on your return if your expenses are equal(available on the Internet at www.irs.gov).
federal per diem rate is the highest amount that to or less than the allowance.Prorating the standard meal allowance onthe federal government will pay to its employees However, if your actual expenses are morepartial days of travel.The standard meal al-for lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (or than your allowance, you can complete Formlowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If youmeals and incidental expenses only) while they 2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-travel for part of a day, such as on the days youule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-are traveling away from home in a particulardepart and return, you must prorate the full-daypenses, you must be able to prove to the IRS thearea. The rates are different for different loca-M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-total amount of your expenses and reimburse-tions. Your employer should have these ratesployer uses the regular federal per diem rate orments for the entire year. If you are using theavailable. (Employers can get Publication 1542,the high-low rate. standard meal allowance or the standard mile-which gives the rates in the continental UnitedYou can use either of the following methodsage rate, you do not have to prove that amount.States for the current year. Publication 1542 isto figure the federal M&IE for that day.
available on the Internet at www.irs.gov.) Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-day1. Method 1:The standard meal allowance.The stan- business trip to Denver. The federal rate for
Denver is $159 per day. As required by hisdard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) isa. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the
employer’s accountable plan, he accounts forthe federal rate for meals and incidental ex- standard meal allowance amount for
the time (dates), place, and business purpose ofpenses (M&IE). The rate for most small localitiesthat day.
the trip. His employer reimburses him $159 ain the United States is $31 a day from January 1,b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the day ($318 total) for living expenses. Jeremy’s2005, through September 30, 2005, and $39 a standard meal allowance amount for living expenses in Denver are not more thanday from October 1, 2005, through December the preceding day. $159 a day.31, 2005. Most major cities and many other Jeremy’s employer does not include any oflocalities qualify for higher rates. The rates for2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-the reimbursement on his Form W-2 and Jeremylocalities within the continental United States arelowance using any method that you con-does not deduct the expenses on his return.listed in Publication 1542. You can also find thissistently apply and that is in accordance
information on the Internet at www.gsa.gov. with reasonable business practice. For ex- Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-dayample, an employer can treat 2 full days ofYou receive an allowance only for meals and business trip to Boston. Matt’s employer usesper diem (that includes M&IE) paid forthe high-low method to reimburse employees.incidental expenses when your employer does travel away from home from 9 a.m. of oneSince Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is givenone of the following. day to 5 p.m. of the next day as being noan advance of $204 a day ($408 total) for hismore than the federal rate. This is true• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt’seven though a federal employee would bekind). actual expenses totaled $550.limited to a reimbursement of M&IE for Since Matt’s $550 of expenses are more• Reimburses you, based on your receipts, only 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate.than his $408 advance, he includes the excessfor the actual cost of your lodging. expenses when he itemizes his deductions. MattThe standard mileage rate.This is a set• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your completes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex-rate per mile that you can use to compute yourpenses and reimbursements). He must also al-lodging. deductible car expenses. For 2005, the standardlocate his reimbursement between his meals• Does not have a reasonable belief thatmileage rate for the cost of operating your car forand other expenses as discussed later underbusiness use is:you had (or will have) lodging expenses, Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.such as when you stay with friends or rela-• 401/2 cents per mile for the period Januarytives or sleep in the cab of your truck. Example 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a1 through August 31, 2005, and
year for business (6,500 miles from January 1• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to• 481/2 cents per mile for the period Septem-through August 31, 2005, and 3,500 miles fromthat used in computing your compensa- ber 1 through December 31, 2005. September 1 through December 31, 2005).tion, such as number of hours worked or Under her employer’s accountable plan, she ac-miles traveled. Fixed and variable rate (FAVR).This is an counts for the time (dates), place, and business
allowance your employer may use to reimbursepurpose of each trip. Her employer pays her aHigh-low rate.This is a simplified methodyour car expenses. Under this method, yourmileage allowance of 25 cents a mile.of computing the federal per diem rate for travelemployer pays an allowance that includes a Since Nicole’s $4,331 expenses computedwithin the continental United States. It elimi-combination of payments covering fixed and va-under the standard mileage rate (6,500 miles ×nates the need to keep a current list of the perriable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to401/2 cents ($2,633) + 3,500 miles × 481/2 centsdiem rate for each city. cover your variable operating costs (such as ($1,698)) are more than her $2,500 reimburse-gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover yourUnder the high-low method, the per diem ment (10,000 miles × 25 cents), she itemizes herfixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-deductions to claim the excess expenses. Ni-amount for travel during January through Sep-ments), insurance, etc.). If your employercole completes Form 2106 (showing all of hertember of 2005 is $204 (including $46 for M&IE)chooses to use this method, your employer willexpenses and reimbursements) and entersfor certain high-cost locations. All other areasrequest the necessary records from you. $1,831 ($4,331 − $2,500) as an itemized deduc-have a per diem amount of $129 (including $36
tion.for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542Reporting your expenses with a per diem or
(Revised November 2005) on the Internet, car allowance.If your reimbursement is in theAllowance more than the federal rate.If
which gives the areas eligible for the $204 perform of an allowance received under an ac- your allowance is more than the federal rate,
diem amount under the high-low method for allcountable plan, the following facts affect youryour employer must include the allowance
or part of this period.) reporting. amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
employer also enters $204 in box 12 of Joe’s
Form W-2.
Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-
ductible expenses. He enters the total of his
actual expenses for the year ($325) on Form
2106. He also enters the reimbursements that
were not included in his income ($204). His total
deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is
$121. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-
reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will
include the balance, $61, as an itemized deduc-
tion.
Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles for
business (7,000 miles from January 1 through
August 31, 2005, and 3,000 miles from Septem-
ber 1 through December 31, 2005). Under her
employer’s accountable plan, she gets reim-
bursed 50 cents a mile, which is more than the
standard mileage rate. Her total reimbursement
is $5,000.
Debbie’s employer must include the reim-
bursement amount up to the standard mileage
rate, $4,290 (7,000 miles × 40
1/2 cents ($2,835)
+ 3,000 miles × 481/2 cents ($1,455)), in box 12 of
her Form W-2. That amount is not taxable. Her
employer must also include $710 ($5,000 −
$4,290) in box 1 of her Form W-2. This is the
reimbursement that is more than the standard
mileage rate.
 If Debbie’s expenses are equal to or less
than the standard mileage rate, she would not
complete Form 2106. If her expenses are more
than the standard mileage rate, she would com-
plete Form 2106 and report her total expenses
and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of her
Form W-2). She would then claim the excess
expenses as an itemized deduction.
Returning Excess
Reimbursements
Under an accountable plan, you are required to
return any excess reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowances for your business expenses
to the person paying the reimbursement or al-
lowance. Excess reimbursement means any
amount for which you did not adequately ac-
count within a reasonable period of time. For
Table 6-1.
IF the type of reimbursement (or
other expense allowance)
arrangement is under:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: 
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
THEN the employer
reports on Form W-2:
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
No reimbursement plan:
Either adequate accounting or
return of excess, or both, not
required by plan
No amount.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
All expenses and
reimbursements only if
excess expenses are
claimed. Otherwise,
form is not filed.
All expenses.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106: *
Per diem or mileage allowance
exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the
federal rate only and
 excess not
returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
All expenses (and
reimbursements
reported on Form W-2,
box 12) only if expenses
in excess of the federal
rate are claimed.
Otherwise, form is not
filed.
No amount.
example, if you received a travel advance andForm W-2. This amount is not taxable. However, $86 ($43 a day × 2) in box 12 of her Form W-2.
you did not spend all the money on business-re-the excess allowance will be included in box 1 ofThis amount is not included in Laura’s income.
lated expenses, or you do not have proof of allyour Form W-2. You must report this part of yourLaura does not have to complete Form 2106;
your expenses, you have an excess reimburse-allowance as if it were wage income. however, she must include the $14 in her grossment.If your actual expenses are less than orincome as wages (by reporting the total amount
“Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-equal to the federal rate, you do not completeshown in box 1 of her Form W-2). riod of time” were discussed earlier in this chap-Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on
ter.your return. Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and
However, if your actual expenses are moreworks for the same employer as Laura. In MayTravel advance. You receive a travel ad-than the federal rate, you can complete Formthe employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 daysvance if your employer provides you with an2106 and deduct those excess expenses. Youand paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotel bill. Theexpense allowance before you actually have themust report on Form 2106 your reimbursementsemployer reimbursed Joe $60 a day for hisexpense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of yourmeals and incidental expenses. The federal ratepected to be no more than your expense. UnderForm W-2) and all your expenses. You shouldfor San Diego is $51 a day. an accountable plan, you are required to ade-be able to prove these amounts to the IRS. Joe can prove that his actual meal expensesquately account to your employer for this ad-
totaled $325. His employer’s accountable planvance and to return any excess within aExample 1.  Laura lives and works in Aus-will not pay more than $60 a day for travel to Sanreasonable period of time.tin. Her employer sent her to Albuquerque for 2
Diego, so Joe does not give his employer theIf you do not adequately account for or do notdays on business. Laura’s employer paid the
return any excess advance within a reasonablerecords that prove that he actually spent $325.hotel directly for her lodging and reimbursed
period of time, the amount you do not accountHowever, he does account for the time, place,Laura $50 a day ($100 total) for meals and
for or return will be treated as having been paidand business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’sincidental expenses. Laura’s actual meal ex-
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).only business trip this year.penses were not more than the federal rate for
Albuquerque, which is $43 per day. Joe was reimbursed $240 ($60 × 4 days), Unproved amounts. If you do not prove
which is $36 more than the federal rate of $204Her employer included the $14 that was that you actually traveled on each day for which
($51 × 4 days). The employer includes the $36more than the federal rate (($50 − $43) × 2) in you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-
as income on Joe’s Form W-2 in box 1. Thebox 1 of Laura’s Form W-2. Her employer shows ing the elements described in Table 5-1), you
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must return this unproved amount of the travelExample 1. Kim’s employer gives her $500• The contractor adequately accounts to you
advance within a reasonable period of time. If a month ($6,000 total for the year) for her busi- for these expenses.
you do not do this, the unproved amount will be ness expenses. Kim does not have to provide
considered paid under a nonaccountable plan any proof of her expenses to her employer, andContractor adequately accounts.If the con-(discussed later). Kim can keep any funds that she does not tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain-spend.Per diem allowance more than federal rate. ment expenses, you (the client or customer)Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-If your employer’s accountable plan pays you an must keep records documenting each elementcountable plan. Her employer will include theallowance that is higher than the federal rate, of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Use$6,000 on Kim’s Form W-2 as if it were wages. Ifyou do not have to return the difference between your records as proof for a deduction on your taxKim wants to deduct her business expenses,the two rates for the period you can prove return. If entertainment expenses are accountedshe must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ andbusiness-related travel expenses. However, the for separately, you are subject to the 50% limititemize her deductions.difference will be reported as wages on your on entertainment. If the contractor adequately
Form W-2. This excess amount is considered accounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you doExample 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month bypaid under a nonaccountable plan (discussed not have to report the amounts on an informationhis employer. On days that he travels away fromlater). return.home on business, his employer designates $50
a day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travelContractor does not adequately account. IfExample.  Your employer sends you on aexpenses. Because his employer would pay Ke-the contractor does not adequately account to5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you avin his monthly salary whether or not he wasyou for allowances or reimbursements of enter-$300 ($60 × 5 days) advance to cover yourtraveling away from home, the arrangement is atainment expenses, you do not have to keepmeals and incidental expenses. The federal pernonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a dayrecords of these items. You are not subject todiem for meals and incidental expenses fordesignated by his employer is treated as paidthe 50% limit on entertainment in this case. YouPhoenix is $47. Your trip lasts only 3 days.under an accountable plan. can deduct the reimbursements or allowancesUnder your employer’s accountable plan, you as payment for services if they are ordinary andmust return the $120 ($60 × 2 days) advance for necessary business expenses. However, you
Rules for Independentthe 2 days you did not travel. You do not have to must file Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous In-return the $39 difference between the allowanceContractors and Clients come, to report amounts paid to the indepen-you received and the federal rate for Phoenix dent contractor if the total of the reimbursementsThis section provides rules for independent con-(($60 − $47) × 3 days). However, the $39 will be and any other fees is $600 or more during thetractors who incur expenses on behalf of a clientreported on your Form W-2 as wages. calendar year.or customer. The rules cover the reporting and
substantiation of certain expenses discussed inNonaccountable Plans this publication, and they affect both indepen-
dent contractors and their clients or customers.A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or
Completing FormsYou are considered an independent contrac-expense allowance arrangement that does not
tor if you are self-employed and you performmeet one or more of the three rules listed earlier 2106 and 2106-EZservices for a customer or client.under Accountable Plans.
In addition, even if your employer has an This section briefly describes how employeesaccountable plan, the following payments will be complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 6-1Accounting to Your Clienttreated as being paid under a nonaccountable explains what the employer reports on Formplan: If you received a reimbursement or an allow-W-2 and what the employee reports on Form
ance for travel, entertainment, or gift expenses2106. The instructions for the forms have more• Excess reimbursements you fail to return
that you incurred on behalf of a client, youinformation on completing them.to your employer, and
should provide an adequate accounting of these If you are self-employed, do not file• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- expenses to your client. If you do not account toForm 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report yourpenses related to your employer’s busi-your client for these expenses, you must include expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or Fness. See Reimbursement of CAUTION
!
any reimbursements or allowances in income.(Form 1040). See the instructions for the formnondeductible expenses, earlier, under You must keep adequate records of these ex-that you must file.Accountable Plans. penses whether or not you account to your client
for these expenses.An arrangement that repays you for business Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the
If you do not separately account for and seekexpenses by reducing the amount reported as shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee
reimbursement for meals and entertainment inyour wages, salary, or other pay will be treated business expenses. You can use this form if you
connection with providing services for a client,as a nonaccountable plan. This is because you meet all of the following conditions.
you are subject to the 50% limit on those ex-are entitled to receive the full amount of your pay • You are an employee deducting expensespenses. See 50% Limit in chapter 2.whether or not you have any business ex- attributable to your job.penses.
Adequate accounting. As a self-employed • You were not reimbursed by your em-If you are not sure if the reimbursement orperson, you adequately account by reporting ployer for your expenses (amounts in-expense allowance arrangement is an account-your actual expenses. You should follow the cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notable or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-recordkeeping rules in chapter 5. considered reimbursements).ployer.
How to report. For information on how to • If you are claiming car expenses, you arereport expenses on your tax return, see Self-em-Reporting your expenses under a nonac- using the standard mileage rate.ployed at the beginning of this chapter.countable plan.Your employer will combine
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex- Car expenses. If you used a car to performpense allowance paid to you under a nonac- your job as an employee, you may be able toRequired Records forcountable plan with your wages, salary, or other deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-Clients or Customerspay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and thenof your Form W-2. If you are a client or customer, you generally do claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A.You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZnot have to keep records to prove the reimburse- Car expenses using the standard mileage rateand itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-ments or allowances you give, in the course of can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-your business, to an independent contractor for pleting Part II and Part I, line 1.tertainment. Your meal and entertainment travel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf.expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis- Information on use of cars.If you claimHowever, you must keep records if:cussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenses any deduction for the business use of a car, you
will be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-• You reimburse the contractor for entertain- must answer certain questions and provide in-
come limit that applies to most miscellaneous ment expenses incurred on your behalf, formation about the use of the car. The informa-
itemized deductions. and tion relates to the following items.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Enter the total amount oftion and books), office-in-the-home expenses,• Mileage (total, business, commuting, and reimbursements your employerand trade and professional publications.other personal mileage). gave you that were not reported
If line 4 expenses are the only ones to you in box 1 of Form W-2 . . . 3,000• Percentage of business use. 2. Enter the total amount of youryou are claiming, you received no re-
expenses for the periods• Date placed in service. imbursements (or the reimburse-
TIP
covered by this reimbursement 4,500ments were all included in box 1 of your Form• Use of other vehicles. 3. Of the amount on line 2, enterW-2), and the Special Rules discussed later do your total expense for meals• After-work use. not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 orand entertainment......... 2,000
2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on 4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the• Whether you have evidence to support the
result as a decimal (rounded toSchedule A (Form 1040), line 20. List the typededuction. at least three places).......  .444 and amount of each expense on the dotted lines• Whether or not the evidence is written. 5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enterand include the total on line 20. the result here and in ColumnEmployees must complete Form 2106, Part II, B, line 7............... 1,332Section A, or Form 2106-EZ, Part II, to provide 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. EnterMeal and entertainment expenses. Showthis information. the result here and in Columnthe full amount of your expenses for A, line 7............... 1,668Standard mileage rate.If you claim a de-business-related meals and entertainment on
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668duction based on the standard mileage rate in-Form 2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals
($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) instead of your actual expenses, you must while away from your tax home overnight and
Column A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in Columncomplete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. Theother business meals and entertainment. EnterB.amount on line 22c (Section B) is carried to50% of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertain-Form 2106, Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part 1,ment expenses on line 9, Column B. After you complete the form.After you haveline 2, you can deduct parking fees and tolls that completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, followIf you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the fullapply to the business use of the car. If you file the directions on that form to deduct your ex-amount of your meals and entertainment on theForm 2106-EZ, complete Part I, line 1, for the penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total bystandard mileage rate and line 2 for parking fees For most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule A50%. Enter the result on line 5.and tolls. See Standard Mileage Rate in chapter (Form 1040). However, if you are a government4 for information on using this rate. Hours of service limits.If you are subjectofficial paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,
to the Department of Transportation’s “hours ofan Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-Actual expenses. If you claim a deduction
ployee with impairment-related work expenses,based on actual expenses, you cannot use service” limits (as explained earlier under Indi-
see Special Rules, later.Form 2106-EZ. You must complete Form 2106,viduals subject to “hours of service” limits in
Part II, Section C. In addition, unless you leasechapter 2), use 70% instead of 50% for mealsLimits on employee business expenses.your car, you must complete Section D to showwhile away from your tax home. Your employee business expenses may be sub-your depreciation deduction and any section ject to any of the three limits described next.179 deduction you can claim. They are figured in the following order on theReimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7If you are still using a car that is fully depreci- specified form.(you cannot use Form 2106-EZ) the amountsated, continue to complete Section C. Since youyour employer (or third party) reimbursed you1. Limit on meals and entertainment.Cer-have no depreciation deduction, enter zero on
that were not reported to you in box 1 of yourtain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-line 28. In this case, do not complete Section D.
Form W-2. This includes any amount reported ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, you
Car rentals. If you claim car rental ex- figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 ofunder code L in box 12 of Form W-2.penses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have to Form 2106-EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.)Allocating your reimbursement. If youreduce that expense by an inclusion amount as
2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-were reimbursed under an accountable plan anddescribed in chapter 4. If so, you can show your
tions. If you are an employee, deduct yourwant to deduct excess expenses that were notcar expenses and any inclusion amount as fol-
employee business expenses (as figured onreimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-lows.
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 20 of Schedule Abursement. This is necessary when your em-
(Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de-1. Compute the inclusion amount without tak-ployer pays your reimbursement in the followingductions, including employee business ex-ing into account your business use per-manner: penses, are subject to a 2%-of-adjusted-centage for the tax year.
gross-income limit. This limit is figured on line 25• Pays you a single amount that covers2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) on of Schedule A (Form 1040).meals and/or entertainment, as well asForm 2106, Part II, line 24b. other business expenses, and 3. Limit on total itemized deductions.If3. Report on line 24c the net amount of car your adjusted gross income (line 38 of Form• Does not clearly identify how much is forrental expenses (total car rental expenses 1040) is more than $145,950 ($72,975 if you aredeductible meals and/or entertainment.minus the inclusion amount computed in married filing separately), the total of certain(1)). You must allocate that single payment so thatitemized deductions, including employee busi-
you know how much to enter in Form 2106, ness expenses, may be limited. See your formThe net amount of car rental expenses will be
Column A and Column B of line 7. instructions for information on how to figure thisadjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect
limit.the percentage of business use for the tax year.
Example. Rob’s employer paid him an ex-
pense allowance of $5,000 this year under anTransportation expenses.Show your trans- Special Rulesaccountable plan. The $5,000 payment con-portation expenses that did not involve overnight
travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on sisted of $2,000 for airfare and $3,000 for enter-This section discusses special rules that apply
Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on thistainment and car expenses. The employer didonly to Armed Forces reservists, government
line business expenses you have for parkingnot clearly show how much of the $3,000 was forofficials who are paid on a fee basis, performing
fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper- artists, and disabled employees withthe cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-
ating your car or expenses of commuting be- impairment-related work expenses.ally spent $6,500 during the year ($2,000 for
tween your home and work. airfare, $2,000 for entertainment, and $2,500 for
car expenses).Employee business expenses other than Armed Forces Reservists TravelingSince the airfare allowance was clearly iden-meals and entertainment.Show your other More Than 100 Miles From Hometified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the paymentemployee business expenses on Form 2106,
goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. ToColumn A, lines 3 and 4, or Form 2106-EZ, lines If you are a member of a reserve component of
allocate the remaining $3,000, Rob uses the3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals and the Armed Forces of the United States and you
worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex- travel more than 100 miles away from home in
His completed worksheet follows.penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui- connection with your performance of services as
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a member of the reserves, you can deduct your Fee-basis officials are persons who are em- performing-arts-related expenses from Form
travel expenses as an adjustment to gross in- ployed by a state or local government and who2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the
come rather than as a miscellaneous itemized are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. Theytotal on Form 1040, line 24.
deduction. The amount of expenses you can can deduct their business expenses in perform-If you do not meet all of the above require-deduct as an adjustment to gross income is ing services in that job as an adjustment to grossments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-limited to the regular federal per diem rate (for income rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedpenses as an adjustment to gross income.lodging, meals, and incidental expenses) and deduction. Instead, you must complete Form 2106 orthe standard mileage rate (for car expenses)If you are a fee-basis official, include your2106-EZ and deduct your employee businessplus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. Seeemployee business expenses from Form 2106,expenses as an itemized deduction on SchedulePer Diem and Car Allowances earlier for moreline 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total onA (Form 1040), line 20.information. Any expenses in excess of theseForm 1040, line 24.
amounts can be claimed only as a miscellane-
ous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit. Impairment-Related WorkExpenses of Certain Expenses of Disabled EmployeesMember of a reserve component.You are a Performing Artists
member of a reserve component of the Armed If you are an employee with a physical or mentalIf you are a performing artist, you may qualify toForces of the United States if you are in the disability, your impairment-related work ex-deduct your employee business expenses as anArmy, Naval, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast
penses are not subject to theadjustment to gross income rather than as aGuard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that appliesmiscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,United States, the Air National Guard of the
to most other employee business expenses. Af-you must meet all of the following requirements.United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub-
ter you complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, enterlic Health Service.
1. During the tax year, you perform servicesyour impairment-related work expenses from
in the performing arts as an employee forHow to report. If you have reserve-related Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on
at least two employers.travel that takes you more than 100 miles from Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27, and identify
home, you should first complete Form 2106 or the type and amount of this expense on the2. You receive at least $200 each from anyForm 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for dotted line next to line 27. Enter your employeetwo of these employers.reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to business expenses that are unrelated to your3. Your related performing-arts business ex-the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or disability from Form 2106, line 10, or Formpenses are more than 10% of your grossForm 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040, 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),income from the performance of thoseline 24. Subtract this amount from the total on line 20.services.Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and Impairment-related work expenses are yourdeduct the balance as an itemized deduction on4. Your adjusted gross income is not moreallowable expenses for attendant care at yourSchedule A (Form 1040), line 20. than $16,000 before deducting these busi-workplace and other expenses in connectionYou cannot deduct expenses of travel thatness expenses. with your workplace that are necessary for youdoes not take you more than 100 miles from
to be able to work.home as an adjustment to gross income. In-
Special rules for married persons.If you arestead, you must complete Form 2106 or You are disabled if you have:married, you must file a joint return unless you2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an
lived apart from your spouse at all times during• A physical or mental disability (for exam-itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040),
the tax year. If you file a joint return, you mustline 20. ple, blindness or deafness) that function-
figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separatelyally limits your being employed, or
for both you and your spouse. However, require-
• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-ment (4) applies to your and your spouse’s com-Officials Paid on a Fee Basis ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatbined adjusted gross income.
substantially limits one or more of yourCertain fee-basis officials can claim their em-
major life activities, such as performingployee business expenses whether or not theyWhere to report.If you meet all of the above
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-itemize their other deductions on Schedule A requirements, you should first complete Form
ing, learning, or working.(Form 1040). 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your
Date
6/5/05
Table 6-2. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name:  David Pine
Destination
(City, Town, or Area)
Business
Purpose Start Stop
Miles
this trip
Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
Odometer Readings
6/6/05
6/7/05
6/8/05
6/9/05
6/10/05
6/11/05
Local
(St. Louis)
Indianapolis
Louisville
Return to
St. Louis
Local
(St. Louis)
Weekly
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Sales calls
Sales calls
See Bob Smith
(Pot. Client)
Sales calls
8,097
8,211
8,486
8,599
8,914
8,097
8,188
8,486
8,599
8,875
9,005
9,005
91
275
113
276
91
846
6,236
Gas
Parking
Gas/Repair
flat tire
Gas
$ 29.50
6.50
29.00
30.50
$ 150.50
$1,986.00
55.00
Expenses
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can deduct impairment-related expenses David’s total depreciation deduction would Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2002.
as business expenses if they are: normally be $3,430 ($24,500 (unadjusted basis) He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-
× 70% (business use) × 20% (from table 4-1)). pense purposes. He records his total mileage,• Necessary for you to do your work satis-However, it is limited in the first year to $2,072 business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for thefactorily, ($2,960 (from the Maximum Depreciation De- year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-
• For goods and services not required orduction for Cars table shown in chapter 4) × nent information in his Weekly Traveling Ex-
used, other than incidentally, in your per-70%). He enters these amounts in Part II, Sec-pense and Entertainment Record, shown in
sonal activities, and tion D. Table 6-3. He obtains receipts for his expenses
His other car expenses included $4,925 for for lodging and for any other expenses of $75 or• Not specifically covered under other in-gas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters this more.come tax laws. amount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it by During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000
the 70% business use. He adds this amount miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.
Example. You are blind. You must use a($3,448) to the depreciation deduction ($2,072) Bill drove 14,000 business miles from January 1
reader to do your work. You use the reader bothand reports the total ($5,520) on Part I, line 1. to August 31, and 6,000 miles from September 1
during your regular working hours at your placeHis other transportation expenses for park- through the end of the year. Following the in-
of work and outside your regular working hoursing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,190. He enters structions for Form 2106, Part II, he answers all
away from your place of work. The reader’sthis amount on Part I, line 2. David’s employer the questions and figures his car expense to be
services are only for your work. You can deductreimbursed him a total of $3,500 for his car and $8,580 (14,000 × 401/2 cents per mile ($5,670) +
your expenses for the reader as business ex-transportation expenses. This amount was paid 6,000 × 481/2 cents per mile ($2,910)).
penses. from an accountable plan and was not shown on His total employee business expenses are
David’s Form W-2. However, since he is claim- shown in the following table.
ing expenses that are more than his reimburse-
Illustrated Examples Type of Expense Amountments, he must show the entire reimbursement
The following examples illustrate the reporting ofamount on Part I, Column A, line 7. Since DavidParking fees and tolls........... $  3 2 5
travel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex-had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en-Car expenses................ 8,580
Meals ..................... 2,632penses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Businessters his excess deductible expenses ($3,210) on
Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning..... 8,975use of a car is shown using actual car expensesPart I, line 10. He can deduct these expenses
Entertainment................ 1,870in Example 1 and the standard mileage rate in(subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeGifts, education, etc............ 4 3 0Example 2. Sample records that prove some oflimit) on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20 if heTotal $22,812the claimed expenses are also shown. itemizes his deductions.
Bill received an allowance of $6,000 ($500
per month) to help offset his expenses. Bill didExample 1. David Pine purchased a new Example 2. Bill Wilson is an employee of
not have to account to his employer for thecar for $24,500 (including sales tax) on JanuaryFashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a
reimbursement and the $6,000 was included as3, 2005. In 2005, he used the car 70% for busi-typical week, Bill leaves his home on Long Is-
income in box 1 of his Form W-2.ness purposes. A sample page from David’sland on Monday morning and drives to Albany to
Because Bill’s reimbursement was includedlogbook is illustrated in Table 6-2. He records hisexhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospective
in his income and he is using the standard mile-business mileage (but not his personal miles)customers. Then he drives to Troy to show
age rate for his car expenses, he files Formand expenses daily. Fashion’s new line of merchandise to Town De-
2106-EZ with his tax return.David uses Form 2106 to claim actual carpartment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,
expenses. He completes Part II, Section A, ashe talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for
shown later on his illustrated form. He does notTown Department Store, to discuss the new line.
claim the section 179 deduction. He uses theHe later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to
MACRS double declining balance method dinner to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’s
(200% DB) to determine his depreciation deduc-new line of clothing.
tion.
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
David Pine 559 00 9559Sales
5,520
1,190
6,710
3,500
3,210
3,210
3,210
OMB No. 1545-0074Employee Business Expenses2106Form
/H17075See separate instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements
Column BColumn A
Step 1 Enter Your Expenses Meals and
Entertainment
Other Than Meals
and Entertainment
1
Vehicle expense from line 22c or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See
instructions.)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging,
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not
include meals and entertainment
4
4
5Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions)5
Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5
6
6
Note: If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8.
Step 2 Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see
instructions)
7
7
Step 3 Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040)
8
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if
line 7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as
income on Form 1040, line 7
8
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form 2106 to
your return.
9
910
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal
expenses incurred while away from home on business by 70% (.70)
instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. (Reservists, qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or
local government officials, and individuals with disabilities: See the instructions for special rules
on where to enter the total.)
/H1707510
Cat. No. 11700NFor Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Form 2106 (2005)
Part I
(99)
2005
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
/H12011
13 0 5
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
4,925
4,925
3,448
2,072
5,520
24,500
17,150
200DB 20%
3,430
3,430
2,960
2,072
2,072
/H12011
Page 2Form 2106 (2005)
Vehicle Expenses
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
//1111 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service
12 milesmiles12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2005
milesmiles1313 Business miles included on line 12
%%1414 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12
milesmiles1515 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance
milesmiles1616 Commuting miles included on line 12
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 milesmiles17
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?18 NoYes
NoYesWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?19
NoYes
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?21 NoYes
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?20
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or Section C.)
22a Multiply business miles driven before September 1, 2005 by 40.5¢ (.405) 22a
Section C—Actual Expenses (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle
insurance, etc.
23
23
24a24a Vehicle rentals
24bb Inclusion amount (see instructions)
24cc Subtract line 24b from line 24a
Value of employer-provided
vehicle (applies only if 100% of
annual lease value was included
on Form W-2—see instructions)
25
25
2626 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25
Multiply line 26 by the
percentage on line 14
27
27
28Depreciation (see instructions)28
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total
here and on line 1 29
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C for the vehicle.)
(a) Vehicle 1 (b) Vehicle 2
Enter cost or other basis (see
instructions)
30
30
Enter section 179 deduction
(see instructions)
31
31
Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see
instructions if you claimed the
section 179 deduction or
special allowance)
32
32
Enter depreciation method and
percentage (see instructions)
33
33
Multiply line 32 by the percentage
on line 33 (see instructions)
34
34
35Add lines 31 and 3435
Enter the applicable limit explained
in the line 36 instructions
36
36
Multiply line 36 by the
percentage on line 14
37
37
Enter the smaller of line 35
or line 37. If you skipped lines
36 and 37, enter the amount
from line 35. Also enter this
amount on line 28 above
38
38
Part II
//
Form 2106 (2005)
Multiply business miles driven after August 31, 2005 by 48.5¢ (.485)
Add lines 22a and 22b. Enter the result here and on line 1
22b
22c
b
c
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel and transportation expenses
Table 6-3. Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
From: August 7, 2005 To: August 13, 2005 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
Travel Expenses:
Airlines
1.
Excess baggage
Bus - Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Hotel and Motel
(Detail in Schedule B)
Entertainment
(Detail in Schedule C)
Other Expenses:
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s)
Trade Shows
2.
3.
4.
Car Expenses: (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
5.
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A - Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B - Lodging
Schedule C - Entertainment
Date
6.
Hotel
or
Motel
Name
City
August 11, 2005 Bar
Dinner
Item Place
John’s Steak House
Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
Troy
Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.15 00
35 00
Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern
Hotel
Albany Albany Albany Troy
57,600
57,445
155
155
57,620
57,600
20
57,650
57,620
57,660
57,650
57,840
57,660
30 10 395
170103020
180
385
40 0
87 25 120 00 117 75 111 50 19 50 456 00
10 0030 0 30 0
20 00 20 00
15 0015 00 30 00
40 00
15 0 10 0 25 0
50 00
22 00
97 5
50 00
18 25
10 00
67 5
50 00
17 50
92 5
60 0 52 5
82 5
45 00
50 00
70 0
85 0
25 00
45 75
195 00
57 75
50 00
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Other reimbursements
TOTAL
N/A
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
8,580
8,975
430
2,251
20,561
132 0 0 2
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
4,502
325
OMB No. 1545-0074
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and then go to line 1a below.1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1c through 3. Do not include meals and
entertainment
4
4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ × 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred
while away from home on business by 70% (.70) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1c through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
20. (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing
artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter
this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2005)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2005.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements for this purpose).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year)
/H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2005, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2005 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
2005
Mulitply business miles driven before September 1, 2005, by 40.5¢ (.405)
Add lines 1a and 1b
a
b
c
Mulitply business miles driven after August 31, 2005, by 48.5¢ (.485)
1c
1a
1b
5,670
2,910
Page 38 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 39 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Search publications online by topic or products available to print from a
keyword. CD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible
proofs. Also, some IRS offices and librar-• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)7. ies have the Internal Revenue Code, reg-published in the last few years.
ulations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and• Figure your withholding allowances using
Cumulative Bulletins available for re-our Form W-4 calculator.
search purposes.How To Get Tax • Sign up to receive local and national tax
• Services. You can walk in to your localnews by email.
Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-• Get information on starting and operatingHelp ness day for personal, face-to-face taxa small business. help. An employee can explain IRS let-
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, Phone. Many services are available ters, request adjustments to your tax ac-
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- by phone. count, or help you set up a payment plan.
tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- If you need to resolve a tax problem,
eral ways. By selecting the method that is best have questions about how the tax law
for you, you will have quick and easy access to• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-applies to your individual tax return, or
tax help. tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order you’re more comfortable talking with
current-year forms, instructions, and pub-someone in person, visit your local Tax-Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you lications and prior-year forms and instruc-payer Assistance Center where you canhave attempted to deal with an IRS problem tions. You should receive your order spread out your records and talk with anunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- within 10 days. IRS representative face-to-face. No ap-payer Advocate. pointment is necessary, but if you prefer,• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withThe Taxpayer Advocate independently rep- you can call your local Center and leaveyour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.resents your interests and concerns within the a message requesting an appointment to• Solving problems. You can getIRS by protecting your rights and resolving resolve a tax account issue. A represen-face-to-face help solving tax problemsproblems that have not been fixed through nor- tative will call you back within 2 businessevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As-mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can- days to schedule an in-person appoint-sistance Centers. An employee can ex-not change the tax law or make a technical tax ment at your convenience. To find theplain IRS letters, request adjustments todecision, they can clear up problems that re- number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontactsyour account, or help you set up a pay-sulted from previous contacts and ensure that or look in the phone book under Unitedment plan. Call your local Taxpayer As-your case is given a complete and impartial States Government, Internal Revenuesistance Center for an appointment. Toreview. Service.find the number, go toTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate: www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the Mail. You can send your order for• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at phone book under United States Govern- forms, instructions, and publications1-877-777-4778. ment, Internal Revenue Service. to the address below and receive a
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate response within 10 business days after your
to TTY/TDD equipment, calloffice in your area. request is received.
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a to order forms and publications. National Distribution CenterTTY/TDD user. • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 and P.O. Box 8903
• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. press 2 to listen to pre-recorded Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
messages covering various tax topics. CD-ROM for tax products. You canFor more information, see Publication 1546,• Refund information. If you would like to order Publication 1796, IRS TaxHow To Get Help With Unresolved Tax check the status of your 2005 refund, call Products CD-ROM, and obtain:Problems (now available in Chinese, Korean, 1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for auto-Russian, and Vietnamese, in addition to Englishmated refund information or calland Spanish). • A CD that is released twice so you have1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least the latest products. The first release6 weeks from the date you filed your re-Free tax services.To find out what services ships in late December and the final re-turn (3 weeks if you filed electronically).are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to lease ships in late February.Have your 2005 tax return available be-Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax • Current-year forms, instructions, andcause you will need to know your socialpublications and an index of tax topics. It also publications.security number, your filing status, anddescribes other free tax information services,the exact whole dollar amount of your • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publi-including tax education and assistance pro- refund. cations.grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
Internet. You can access the IRS finding aid.Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-
website 24 hours a day, 7 days a ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give• Tax law frequently asked questionsweek, at www.irs.gov to: accurate, courteous, and professional answers,(FAQs).
we use several methods to evaluate the quality• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-• E-file your return. Find out about com-of our telephone services. One method is for asponse system.mercial tax preparation and e-file serv- second IRS representative to sometimes listen• Fill-in, print, and save features for mostices available free to eligible taxpayers.in on or record telephone calls. Another is to asktax forms.some callers to complete a short survey at the• Check the status of your 2005 refund. • Internal Revenue Bulletins.end of the call.Click on Where’s My Refund. Be sure to
• Toll-free and email technical support.wait at least 6 weeks from the date you Walk-in. Many products and servicesfiled your return (3 weeks if you filed Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical Infor-are available on a walk-in basis.electronically). Have your 2005 tax return mation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders
available because you will need to know for $25 (no handling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767
your social security number, your filing toll free to buy the CD-ROM for $25 (plus a $5• Products. You can walk in to many poststatus, and the exact whole dollar handling fee).offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pickamount of your refund. CD-ROM for small businesses.up certain forms, instructions, and publi-• Download forms, instructions, and publi- Publication 3207, The Small Businesscations. Some IRS offices, libraries, gro-cations. Resource Guide CD-ROM for 2005,cery stores, copy centers, city and county
• Order IRS products online. has a new look and enhanced navigation fea-government offices, credit unions, and of-
• Research your tax questions online. fice supply stores have a collection of tures. This year’s CD includes:
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 39

Page 40 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Helpful information, such as how to pre- Appendices B-1 through B-3 show the lease
pare a business plan, find financing for inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifAppendices
your business, and much more. you leased a truck or van.
Appendices C-1 through C-6 show the lease• All the business tax forms, instructions,There are fifteen appendices.
inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifand publications needed to successfullyAppendices A-1 through A-6 show the lease
you leased an electric car.manage a business. inclusion amounts that you may need to report if
If any of these apply to you, use the appendixyou leased a car (other than a truck or van, or an• Tax law changes for 2005. for the year you first leased the car. (See chapterelectric car) for 30 days or more. The tables are• IRS Tax Map to help you find forms, in- 4.)numbered.structions, and publications by searching
on a keyword or topic.
• Web links to various government agen-
cies, business associations, and IRS or-
ganizations.
• “Rate the Product” survey—your oppor-
tunity to suggest changes for future edi-
tions.
An updated version of this CD is available each
year in early April. You can get a free copy by
calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting
www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
Page 40 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 41 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1996 through 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
14
25
36
47
62
80
99
117
136
154
173
191
209
228
255
292
329
366
403
439
477
513
550
587
624
661
697
735
771
808
845
882
919
955
992
1,028
1,066
1,102
1,140
1,176
1,213
1,250
1,286
1,324
1,360
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1996
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1997
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1998
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1999
5th and Later
21
32
42
53
67
84
102
119
136
154
171
189
207
225
250
286
320
355
390
425
460
495
531
565
600
635
670
705
740
775
810
844
880
915
950
985
1,020
1,054
1,089
1,125
1,159
1,195
1,230
1,264
1,299
For Lease Term
Beginning in
2000
10
21
32
44
58
77
95
114
132
151
169
187
205
224
252
288
326
362
399
435
473
509
546
583
620
657
693
731
767
804
841
878
915
951
989
1,026
1,062
1,098
1,136
1,172
1,209
1,246
1,282
1,320
1,356
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
2
1,398
1,434
1,471
1,508
1,544
1,582
1,619
1,674
1,747
1,821
1,894
1,968
2,042
2,115
2,189
1,334
1,370
1,404
1,440
1,474
1,509
1,544
1,597
1,667
1,737
1,807
1,876
1,947
2,016
2,086
1,394
1,430
1,467
1,504
1,540
1,578
1,615
1,670
1,743
1,817
1,890
1,964
2,038
2,112
2,186
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of th e lease.
For 1996, Revenue Procedure 96-25 (1996-1 CB 681)
For 1997, Revenue Procedure 97-20 (1997-1 CB 647)
For 1998, Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-1 CB 930)
For 1999, Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56)
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 274)
If you leased an electric car after August 5, 1987, use Appendix B.
15,500
$ 15,800$ 0$ 0$ 0$ 6$ 12$
14
23
32
41
53
68
82
96
111
126
140
155
169
183
206
235
264
293
322
351
380
410
439
468
497
527
556
585
614
643
672
702
731
760
789
819
848
877
906
935
 964
 993
1,023
1,052
1,081
1,110
1,140
1,169
1,198
1,227
1,256
1,285
1,329
1,387
1,446
1,504
1,563
1,621
1,679
1,738
23
34
45
57
72
91
109
128
147
166
185
204
222
241
269
306
345
381
419
457
494
532
570
607
645
683
720
757
795
833
870
908
946
983
1,021
1,058
1,095
1,133
1,171
1,208
1,246
1,284
1,321
1,359
1,396
1,433
1,471
1,508
1,546
1,584
1,621
1,659
1,715
1,790
1,865
1,941
2,016
2,092
2,166
2,241
1
2
Page 41

Page 42 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
22
27
9
16
24
33
41
10
20
30
39
48
11
22
33
44
56
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
53
59
67
75
83
91
100
108
116
124
132
140
149
157
165
173
181
189
198
206
214
222
230
238
247
255
263
271
279
287
296
304
312
320
328
336
345
353
361
373
390
406
422
439
455
471
488
504
520
549
590
631
671
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
97
106
115
129
147
165
183
201
218
236
254
272
290
308
326
343
361
379
397
415
433
451
469
487
505
523
540
558
576
594
612
630
648
666
684
702
720
738
755
773
791
818
854
890
926
961
997
1,033
1,068
1,104
1,140
1,203
1,292
1,382
1,472
51
64
78
91
104
117
131
144
158
171
190
217
243
270
296
324
350
377
403
430
456
482
510
536
563
590
616
642
669
695
722
748
775
802
828
855
881
908
935
961
987
1,014
1,040
1,067
1,093
1,120
1,147
1,173
1,213
1,266
1,319
1,372
1,426
1,479
1,532
1,585
1,638
1,692
1,784
1,917
2,049
2,182
61
77
92
109
125
141
156
173
188
204
229
260
292
324
356
387
419
451
483
515
547
579
610
643
674
705
738
770
801
833
865
897
929
961
993
1,024
1,057
1,088
1,119
1,151
1,184
1,215
1,248
1,279
1,311
1,343
1,375
1,407
1,455
1,518
1,582
1,645
1,709
1,772
1,836
1,901
1,964
2,027
2,139
2,298
70
89
107
125
143
162
181
199
217
236
263
300
337
373
410
447
484
520
557
594
631
667
705
741
778
815
851
888
925
962
998
1,036
1,072
1,108
1,145
1,183
1,219
1,256
1,293
1,330
1,366
1,403
1,439
1,476
1,514
1,550
1,586
1,624
1,678
1,752
1,825
1,900
1,972
2,047
2,120
2,193
2,267
2,341
2,469
2,653
2,837
3,020
2,458
2,617
$$ $$$$ $
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732).
Page 42

Page 43 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
2
3
4
6
7
5
9
14
18
23
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
9
11
14
16
18
21
23
25
28
30
33
38
43
47
52
57
61
66
71
75
80
85
89
94
99
103
108
112
117
122
126
131
136
140
145
150
154
159
164
168
173
177
182
187
191
196
201
205
212
222
231
240
250
259
268
277
287
296
312
335
359
382
29
37
44
52
60
67
75
82
90
97
108
123
139
154
169
185
199
214
230
245
260
276
290
305
321
336
351
366
381
396
411
426
441
457
472
487
502
517
532
548
904
934
964
1,017
1,092
1,169
1,245
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
3
7
10
13
16
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
56
60
66
74
84
94
104
114
124
135
145
155
165
175
185
196
206
216
226
236
247
257
267
278
288
298
308
318
328
339
349
359
369
379
390
400
410
420
430
440
451
466
486
507
527
547
568
589
609
629
650
686
737
787
838
6
11
17
22
29
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
98
108
117
130
149
166
185
203
220
239
258
275
294
312
329
348
367
384
403
421
439
457
475
493
512
530
548
566
584
602
620
639
657
675
693
711
729
747
766
784
802
829
866
902
938
974
1.011
1,047
1,083
1,120
1,156
1,219
1,311
1,401
1,491
6
13
19
26
31
40
50
61
72
82
93
103
114
123
134
150
171
192
213
234
255
276
296
318
338
360
381
402
422
443
464
485
506
527
549
570
590
611
632
653
674
695
717
737
758
779
800
821
842
863
883
905
925
957
999
1,041
1,083
1,125
1,166
1,208
1,250
1,292
1,334
1,408
1,512
1,617
1,722100,000
2
$$$$ $
563
578
593
608
624
639
654
669
692
722
752
783
813
843
873
Page 43

Page 44 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
10
12
14
15
17
33
39
44
50
56
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
19
21
22
25
28
32
35
39
42
46
49
52
56
59
63
66
70
73
77
80
83
87
90
94
97
101
104
108
111
115
118
121
125
128
132
135
139
142
146
149
152
158
165
171
178
185
192
199
206
213
220
232
249
266
284
61
66
72
81
92
103
115
125
137
148
159
171
182
194
204
215
227
238
249
260
272
283
294
306
317
328
339
351
362
374
385
396
407
418
430
441
452
463
474
486
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
22
26
30
34
37
41
45
49
54
62
70
77
85
92
100
108
115
123
130
138
146
153
161
168
176
184
191
199
206
214
221
229
236
244
251
259
267
274
282
289
297
304
312
320
327
335
346
361
377
392
407
422
437
452
467
483
509
547
585
623
40
46
53
59
66
73
80
87
97
110
123
137
151
165
178
191
205
218
231
245
259
272
285
299
313
326
340
353
366
380
394
407
420
434
447
460
474
488
502
515
528
542
556
569
582
596
616
642
670
697
724
751
778
804
832
859
906
973
1.041
1,108
45
53
61
69
77
85
92
100
111
127
143
158
174
189
204
221
236
251
267
283
298
314
330
346
361
376
391
407
423
438
454
470
486
501
516
532
548
563
578
594
610
626
641
656
672
688
711
743
773
805
835
867
898
930
960
991
1,046
1,124
1,202
1,280
$$$$ $
497
514
537
559
581
604
626
649
672
694
716
756
812
868
924
100,000
2
Page 44

Page 45 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
$$$$ $11 23 33 42 48
13 26 40 49 56
14 31 46 55 65
16 35 51 63 73
18 39 57 70 81
20 43 63 77 89
22 47 69 84 97
23 51 75 91 106
25 55 81 98 114
28 61 90 109 126
32 69 102 123 142
35 77 114 137 159
39 85 126 151 176
43 93 137 166 192
46 101 149 180 209
50 109 161 194 225
54 116 174 208 242
57 125 185 223 257
61 133 197 237 274
64 141 209 251 291
68 149 221 265 307
72 157 232 280 323
75 165 244 294 340
79 173 256 308 357
83 181 268 322 373
86 189 280 337 389
90 197 292 351 405
94 204 304 365 423
97 213 316 379 438
101 221 327 394 455
105 228 340 408 471
108 237 351 422 488
112 245 363 436 504
115 253 375 451 520
119 261 387 464 538
123 269 398 479 554
126 277 411 493 570
130 285 422 508 586
134 292 435 522 603
137 301 446 536 619
141 309 458 550 636
145 316 471 564 652
148 325 482 578 669
152 333 493 593 685
155 341 506 607 701
159 349 517 622 718
163 357 529 636 734
168 369 547 657 759
176 384 571 686 792
183 401 594 714 825
190 417 618 743 857
197 433 642 771 890
205 448 666 800 923
212 465 689 828 956
219 481 713 856 990
227 496 738 884 1,022
234 513 760 914 1,055
247 540 803 963 1,112
265 580 862 1,035 1,194
283 621 921 1,105 1,277
301 661 980 1,177 1,359
17,500 18,000
18,000 18,500
18,500 19,000
19,000 19,500
19,500 20,000
20,000 20,500
20,500 21,000
21,000 21,500
21,500 22,000
22,000 23,000
23,000 24,000
24,000 25,000
25,000 26,000
26,000 27,000
27,000 28,000
28,000 29,000
29,000 30,000
30,000 31,000
31,000 32,000
32,000 33,000
33,000 34,000
34,000 35,000
35,000 36,000
36,000 37,000
37,000 38,000
38,000 39,000
39,000 40,000
40,000 41,000
41,000 42,000
42,000 43,000
43,000 44,000
44,000 45,000
45,000 46,000
46,000 47,000
47,000 48,000
48,000 49,000
49,000 50,000
50,000 51,000
51,000 52,000
52,000 53,000
53,000 54,000
54,000 55,000
55,000 56,000
56,000 57,000
57,000 58,000
58,000 59,000
59,000 60,000
60,000 62,000
62,000 64,000
64,000 66,000
66,000 68,000
68,000 70,000
70,000 72,000
72,000 74,000
74,000 76,000
76,000 78,000
78,000 80,000
80,000 85,000
85,000 90,000
90,000 95,000
95,000 100,000
2
1
2
Page 45

Page 46 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-2 IRB 759).
$$ $ $$15,200
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
1
2
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
267
276
285
294
310
3
4
5
7
8
9
11
14
16
18
20
23
25
27
30
32
35
40
44
49
54
58
63
67
72
77
81
86
90
95
99
104
109
113
118
122
127
132
136
141
145
150
154
159
164
168
173
177
182
186
191
196
200
205
212
221
230
239
248
258
586
606
626
646
682
6
9
12
15
18
21
25
30
35
40
46
50
55
61
65
70
78
88
98
108
118
128
138
149
159
168
179
189
199
209
219
229
239
249
259
269
279
289
299
309
320
329
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
465
485
506
526
546
566
 869
 899
 930
 960
1,011
9
13
18
22
27
32
38
45
52
60
67
75
82
89
97
105
116
131
146
161
175
191
205
220
234
250
265
279
295
309
325
339
354
370
384
400
414
429
444
459
473
489
504
518
533
548
563
578
593
609
623
638
653
668
691
721
750
780
810
839
1,044
1,079
1,114
1,150
1,213
11
17
22
27
32
38
45
54
63
72
80
90
99
108
117
125
139
156
175
192
211
228
247
264
283
300
318
336
354
372
389
408
426
443
462
479
497
515
533
551
569
587
604
623
640
659
676
694
712
729
748
766
784
802
828
 864
 900
 935
 971
1,008
1,204
1,247
1,288
1,329
1,402
13
19
26
32
39
44
52
63
73
83
94
104
115
125
135
146
161
182
202
223
244
265
285
306
326
348
367
389
409
430
451
471
491
512
533
554
575
595
616
636
657
678
699
719
740
760
781
802
823
844
864
884
905
925
957
998
1,039
1,081
1,123
1,163
85,000
90,000
95,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
333
356
379
732
782
832
1,086
1,161
1,236
1,303
1,392
1,481
1,504
1,608
1,712
2
Page 46

Page 47 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
7
8
10
12
14
22
27
33
38
44
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
15
17
20
23
27
30
33
37
40
44
47
51
54
58
61
65
68
71
75
78
82
85
89
92
96
99
102
106
109
113
116
120
123
127
130
134
137
140
144
147
152
159
166
173
180
187
194
201
208
215
227
244
261
278
49
55
63
74
86
97
109
119
130
142
153
165
176
187
198
210
221
232
243
254
266
277
289
300
311
322
333
345
356
368
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
14
18
22
26
29
34
37
43
51
58
66
73
81
89
96
104
111
119
126
134
141
149
157
164
172
179
187
194
202
209
217
225
232
240
247
255
263
270
278
285
293
301
308
316
323
335
350
365
380
395
410
426
441
456
471
497
535
573
611
24
32
38
45
52
59
66
76
89
102
116
129
143
157
170
183
196
210
224
238
251
264
278
292
305
318
332
345
358
373
386
400
413
426
439
29
36
44
52
60
67
75
86
102
118
133
149
165
180
196
212
227
242
258
273
289
305
320
336
352
367
383
398
414
429
445
460
476
492
507
$$$$ $
100,000
2
379
389
401
412
434
445
457
468
480
496
519
542
564
587
609
631
654
676
699
739
795
851
907
453
467
480
493
507
521
534
548
561
575
595
622
648
676
702
730
757
783
811
837
885
952
1,020
1,088
424
523
538
554
570
585
601
617
632
647
663
687
717
749
780
811
842
873
905
935
967
1,021
1,099
1,177
1,254
Page 47

Page 48 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
$$$$ $
1
2
18,000 18,500 7 15 21 26 30
18,500 19,000 9 18 28 33 38
19,000 19,500 11 22 34 40 47
19,500 20,000 13 26 39 48 55
20,000 20,500 14 31 45 54 63
20,500 21,000 16 35 51 61 72
21,000 21,500 18 38 58 68 80
21,500 22,000 20 42 63 76 88
22,000 23,000 23 48 72 87 100
23,000 24,000 26 57 83 101 117
24,000 25,000 30 64 96 115 133
25,000 26,000 34 72 108 129 149
26,000 27,000 37 81 119 143 166
27,000 28,000 41 88 132 157 183
28,000 29,000 44 97 143 172 198
29,000 30,000 48 104 155 187 215
30,000 31,000 52 112 167 201 231
31,000 32,000 55 121 178 215 248
32,000 33,000 59 128 191 229 264
33,000 34,000 63 136 203 243 281
34,000 35,000 66 145 214 257 298
35,000 36,000 70 152 227 271 314
36,000 37,000 74 160 238 286 330
37,000 38,000 77 169 249 301 346
38,000 39,000 81 176 262 314 364
39,000 40,000 84 185 273 329 379
40,000 41,000 88 192 286 343 396
41,000 42,000 92 200 298 357 412
42,000 43,000 95 209 309 371 429
43,000 44,000 99 216 322 385 445
44,000 45,000 103 224 333 400 462
45,000 46,000 106 233 345 413 479
46,000 47,000 110 240 357 428 495
47,000 48,000 114 248 369 442 511
48,000 49,000 117 257 380 457 527
49,000 50,000 121 264 393 471 544
50,000 51,000 125 272 404 486 560
51,000 52,000 128 280 417 499 577
52,000 53,000 132 288 428 514 593
53,000 54,000 135 297 440 527 610
54,000 55,000 139 304 452 542 626
55,000 56,000 143 312 464 556 643
56,000 57,000 146 321 475 571 659
57,000 58,000 150 328 488 585 675
58,000 59,000 154 336 499 600 691
59,000 60,000 157 345 511 613 708
60,000 62,000 163 356 529 635 733
62,000 64,000 170 372 553 663 766
64,000 66,000 177 389 576 692 798
66,000 68,000 185 404 600 720 832
68,000 70,000 192 420 624 749 864
70,000 72,000 199 436 648 777 897
72,000 74,000 206 453 671 805 931
74,000 76,000 214 468 695 834 963
76,000 78,000 221 484 719 863 996
78,000 80,000 228 501 742 891 1,029
80,000 85,000 241 528 785 940 1,087
85,000 90,000 259 568 844 1,012 1,168
90,000 95,000 277 609 902 1,084 1,250
95,000 100,000
2 296 648 962 1,155 1,333
Page 48

Page 49 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans first Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-2 IRB 759).
$$ $ $$16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
1
2
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
326
349
372
3
4
7
9
11
14
16
18
20
23
25
28
33
38
42
47
51
56
60
65
70
74
79
83
88
93
97
102
106
111
115
120
125
129
134
138
143
148
152
157
161
166
170
175
180
184
189
193
198
205
214
223
232
241
251
260
269
278
287
303
717
767
817
6
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
63
73
83
93
103
113
123
133
143
153
163
173
184
193
203
214
223
234
244
254
264
274
284
294
304
314
324
334
344
355
364
375
385
394
405
415
425
435
450
470
490
510
531
550
571
591
611
631
666
1,063
1,137
1,212
8
14
21
29
37
44
51
59
67
74
81
92
107
122
137
152
167
182
197
212
227
242
257
271
287
302
316
332
346
361
376
391
406
421
436
451
466
481
496
511
525
541
555
570
586
600
615
630
645
667
697
727
757
786
817
846
876
906
936
989
1,274
1,365
1,454
10
17
26
35
43
52
62
71
79
88
98
111
129
147
165
183
201
218
237
254
272
290
308
326
344
361
380
397
415
433
451
469
487
505
523
541
558
576
594
612
630
648
666
684
701
720
737
755
773
800
836
872
908
944
979
1,015
1,051
1,087
1,123
1,185
1,472
1,575
1,678
11
20
30
40
51
61
71
81
92
103
113
129
149
169
190
210
231
253
272
294
314
335
355
376
397
418
438
459
480
500
521
542
562
583
603
624
645
666
687
707
728
748
769
789
811
830
852
873
893
924
966
1,007
1,048
1,089
1,131
1,172
1,213
1,254
1,296
1,368
2
Page 49

Page 50 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1997 through 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
47,000
48,100
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,500
55,000
56,500
57,000
58,500
59,000
60,500
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,500
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
23
60
96
134
171
207
244
281
318
355
391
428
465
520
594
668
741
815
888
962
1,035
1,109
1,183
1,312
1,496
1,681
1,865
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1997
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1998
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1999
$$
5th and Later
11
48
84
122
159
195
232
269
306
342
379
417
453
508
582
656
730
803
876
950
1,023
1,097
1,171
1,300
1,484
1,669
1,853
For Lease Term
Beginning in
2000
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 1997, Revenue Procedure 98-24 (1998-10 IRB 31).
For 1998, Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
For 1999, Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 274).
30
59
88
118
147
177
205
253
264
292
322
351
380
424
483
541
600
658
716
775
 833
 891
 949
1,052
1,198
1,343
1,489
36
66
95
124
153
183
211
240
270
299
328
357
387
430
489
547
606
664
723
781
 838
 897
 955
1,058
1,204
1,350
1,495
2
$$$ $
2
1
Page 50

Page 51 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
9
17
25
33
42
50
58
66
74
82
91
99
107
119
136
152
168
185
201
217
234
250
266
295
336
377
417
21
39
57
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
200
218
236
263
298
334
370
406
442
478
513
549
585
648
737
826
916
33
60
86
113
139
165
192
218
245
272
299
325
352
391
445
498
551
604
657
710
764
817
870
962
1,095
1,229
1,361
40
71
104
135
167
199
231
263
295
326
358
390
422
470
533
597
661
724
788
852
915
979
1,043
1,155
1,314
1,472
1,632
46
83
119
157
193
230
266
304
340
377
414
451
487
543
616
690
763
837
910
984
1,057
1,131
1,204
1,332
1,517
1,701
1,885
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732).
Appendix C-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
3
7
12
17
21
26
31
35
40
45
49
54
59
63
70
79
89
98
107
117
126
135
145
154
170
193
217
240
6
16
26
36
47
57
67
77
87
98
108
118
128
139
154
276
297
317
337
373
424
475
526
10
26
41
56
71
86
101
117
132
146
161
177
192
206
229
260
290
320
350
381
411
441
472
502
555
631
706
782
102
120
138
156
174
193
211
229
248
275
311
347
384
420
456
493
529
564
602
665
756
847
937
117
138
159
180
201
222
242
264
284
316
358
400
442
484
525
567
609
652
693
767
871
976
1,081
174
195
215
236
256
11
29
47
66
83
12
33
54
74
96
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
Page 51

Page 52 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-4. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$ $$$$ $
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-19 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
28
31
35
38
42
45
49
54
61
68
75
81
88
95
102
109
116
128
145
162
180
60
68
76
83
91
98
106
117
132
147
163
178
193
208
223
239
254
280
318
356
394
90
101
112
124
134
146
157
174
197
219
241
264
287
309
332
353
376
416
472
528
584
108
121
134
148
162
175
188
209
235
263
290
317
343
371
397
425
452
499
566
634
701
124
140
156
171
187
203
218
241
273
304
334
366
397
428
460
491
521
576
655
732
810
Appendix C-5. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$ $$$$ $
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642).
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
33 72 106 127 147
37 79 118 142 164
40 88 130 155 180
44 96 141 170 197
48 103 154 184 213
51 112 165 199 229
55 120 177 213 245
60 132 195 234 270
68 147 219 263 303
75 164 242 291 336
82 180 266 320 369
90 195 290 348 402
97 211 314 377 435
104 228 337 405 468
111 244 361 434 500
119 259 385 462 534
126 275 409 491 566
139 303 451 540 624
157 343 510 612 706
175 384 569 682 788
193 424 628 754 870
2
1
3
Page 52

Page 53 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-6. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease 1
$$
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-2 IRB 759).
$ $$$ $
1
2
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
5
10
14
19
23
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
23
28
33
37
42
46
51
55
60
65
69
76
85
94
104
113
122
131
140
159
175
197
220
243
11
21
31
41
52
61
71
82
92
102
112
122
132
142
152
69
76
85
94
104
113
122
131
140
159
175
197
220
243
18
33
48
63
77
93
108
122
137
152
167
182
197
212
227
250
280
309
339
369
398
428
458
489
518
571
645
720
795
21
39
57
75
93
111
129
147
164
183
200
218
236
254
272
298
334
370
406
442
478
514
550
585
621
683
773
863
952
25
45
66
86
107
127
148
169
190
210
231
252
272
293
314
345
386
427
469
510
551
593
634
675
717
789
892
995
1,099
2
Page 53

Page 54 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Casualty and theft losses: Luxury private boxes atF
entertainment events...... 1 0Cars....................... 1 650% limit on meals........... 5 Fair market value of car..... 2 3
Depreciation............. 2 4 Luxury water travel........... 8Farmers:
Charitable organizations: Form 1040, Schedule F..... 2 7A Benefit events for.......... 1 0Federal crime investigations orMAccountable plans.......28-31 Sports events to benefit..... 1 3 prosecutions: MACRS (Modified AcceleratedAccounting to employer..... 2 8Clean-fuel cars.............. 2 0 Federal employees engaged Cost RecoveryAdequate accounting........ 2 8Club dues .................... 9 i n ........................ 4System) ................... 1 9Independent contractors.... 3 1 Comments on publication.... 2 Federal rate for per diem.....5 , 2005 chart (Table 4-1)...... 2 0Adequate records........... 2 4 28Commuting expenses ....... 1 4 Main place of business orAdvertising: Fee-basis officials........... 3 3Conventions ..............8 ,  1 1 work ....................... 3Car display................ 1 4 Fees you pay................ 1 4Country clubs................ 9 Married taxpayers:Expenses .................. 1 2 Fixed and variable rate (FAVR)Cruise ships................. 9 Performing artists.......... 3 3Signs, display racks, or allowance ................. 2 9Meal expenses ............... 5promotional material to be Form 1040, Schedule C...... 2 7 50% limit................... 1 2used on recipient’s businessD Form 1040, Schedule F...... 2 7 Determination of applicabilitypremises ................ 1 3Daily business mileage and Form 2106 .........17, 27, 31-34 (Figure A).........11, 12Airline clubs................. 9 expense log (Table Exceptions............... 1 2Form 2106-EZ ...........31, 34Allocating costs....... 4 ,  10, 26 6-2)....................... 3 4 Actual cost method.......... 5Form 4562 ................... 2 7Allowance (See Depreciation of car: (See also Form 2106 ................. 3 2Form 4797 ................... 2 3Reimbursements) Section 179 deductions).... 1 6 Major cities with higherForm W-2:Armed forces: Adjustment for using standard allowances............... 6Employer-providedAssigned overseas.......... 3 mileage rate............. 2 4 Standard meal allowance....5 ,vehicles................. 2 7Assistance (See Tax help) Basis...................... 1 7 29Reimbursement of personalAssociated Sales taxes.............. 1 6 Meals,expenses ................ 2 7entertainment............. 1 1 Unrecovered basis....... 2 2 entertainment-related..... 1 0Statutory employees........ 2 7Athletic clubs................ 9 Casualty or theft, effect..... 2 4 Mileage rate (See StandardFree tax services............ 3 9Deduction..............16, 24 mileage rate)
Excess depreciation........ 2 3 Military (See Armed forces)B Modified Accelerated Cost Missing children, photographsGBasis of car: (See also Recovery System of .......................... 2Gifts......................9 ,  1 3Depreciation of car)........ 1 7 (MACRS) ................ 1 9 Modified Accelerated Cost$25 limit................... 1 3Bona fide business Section 179 deduction...... 2 2 Recovery Systempurpose .................... 4 Combining for recordkeepingTrade-in, effect.........18, 24 (MACRS) .................. 1 9purposes ................ 2 6Box seats at entertainment Trucks and vans........... 2 0 2005 chart (Table 4-1)...... 2 0Reporting requirements..... 2 7events .................... 1 0Directly-related More information (See Tax help)Golf clubs.................... 9Business travel.............. 6 entertainment............. 1 0
Outside U.S................. 7Disabled employees:
Business use of car......... 1 6 Impairment-related work NHMore-than-50%-use expenses ................ 3 3 Nonaccountable plans ...... 3 1Hauling tools................ 1 4test...................... 1 8Documentary evidence ...... 2 4Help (See Tax help)Qualified business use...... 1 8
High-low rate method....... 2 9O
Home office................. 1 4E Office in the home........... 1 4C Hotel clubs................... 9Electric cars................. 1 6 Officials paid on feeCanceled checks: Employer-provided basis ...................... 3 3As evidence of business vehicles................... 1 6 Overseas travel:expenses ................ 2 5 IReporting requirements..... 2 7 Conventions................ 9Car expenses ............15-24 Impairment-related work Meal allowance............. 6EntertainmentActual expenses........... 1 6 expenses ................. 3 3Part of trip outside U.S....... 6expenses ............9-13, 13Allowances for..........28-30 Incidental expenses:50% limit................... 1 2Business and personal Defined..................... 5Determination of applicabilityu s e...................... 1 6 PGifts....................... 1 3(Figure A).........11, 12Combining expenses....... 2 5 Parking fees.............14, 16No meals, incidentalsAssociated test............. 1 1Depreciation (See Depreciation Per diem allowances.....28-30only...................... 5Deductible..............10-11of car) Defined.................... 2 8Summary (Table 2-1)..... 1 0Income-producingDisposition of car........... 2 4 Federal rate for............. 2 8Directly-related test......... 1 0 property................... 2 7Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) Performing artists........... 3 3Entertainment, defined...... 1 0Incomplete records.......... 2 5allowance................ 2 9
Personal property taxes..... 1 6Form 2106 ................. 3 2Indefinite job assignment.... 4Form 2106 ................. 3 1
Tickets (See Tickets) Personal trips................ 6Leasing a car...........23-24 Independent contractors.... 3 1
Outside U.S................. 8Entertainment facilities:Mileage rate (See Standard Interest on car loans........ 1 6
Expenses for use of......... 9 Placed in service, cars...... 1 7mileage rate) Itinerants..................... 3
Estimates of expenses...... 2 4Taxes paid on car.......... 1 6 Probationary work period.... 4
Traffic tickets............... 1 6Exceptions to the 50% Proving business
Limit...................... 1 2Car pools ................... 1 4 L purpose ................... 2 5
Excess reimbursements (SeeCar rentals...............23-24 Lavish or extravagant Public transportation:
Reimbursements)Form 2106 ................. 3 2 expenses ...............5 ,  1 0Outside of U.S. travel........ 6
Extravagant expenses.....5 ,  1 0Car, defined................. 1 6 Leasing a car.............23-24 Publications (See Tax help)
Page 54

Page 55 of 55 of Publication 463 16:08 -  1-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Returning excess Transportation expenses, Deductible ................ 4 - 9R
reimbursements ........... 3 0 determination of deductibility Summary of (TableRecordkeeping
(Figure B)................ 1 3 1-1).................... 4Rural mail carriers.......... 1 5requirements...........24-26
Travel expenses, determination Defined..................... 3Adequate records.......... 2 4
of deductibility (Table Going home on days off ..... 4Daily business mileage and S 1-1)...................... 4 I n  U.S....................... 6expense log (Table Section 179 deduction: Weekly travel expense and Lodging ..................... 56-2)..................... 3 4Amended return............ 1 7 entertainment record (Table Luxury water travel.......... 8Destroyed records.......... 2 5 Deduction.................. 1 6 6-3)..................... 3 4Outside U.S................. 7How to prove expenses (Table Limits...................... 1 7 Travel to family home........ 3Tax help..................... 3 95-1)..................... 2 4Self-employed persons...... 1 2 Trucks and vans:Incomplete records......... 2 5 Tax home, determinationReporting requirements..... 2 7 Depreciation............... 2 0Reimbursed expenses...... 2 6 of .......................... 3Skyboxes ................... 1 0 Transportation workers..... 1 3Sampling to prove Taxpayer Advocate.......... 3 9Spouse, expenses for.....4 ,  1 1 Transportation workers’expenses ................ 2 5 Temporary jobStandard meal allowance.....5 , expenses ................. 6Separating and combining assignments ............... 429expenses ............25, 26 TTY/TDD information........ 3 9Temporary work location.... 1 3Standard mileage rate.... 2 ,  1 5 ,Three-year period of Two places of work.......... 1 4Tickets..................10, 1329retention................. 2 6 Season or series tickets.... 2 5Depreciation adjustment forWeekly travel expense and Traffic violations............ 1 6Uusing.................... 2 4entertainment record (Table Tools: UnclaimedForm 2106 ................. 3 26-3)..................... 3 4 Hauling tools............... 1 4 reimbursements ........... 2 7Statutory employees........ 2 7Reimbursements .........27-31 Trade association Unions:Accountable plans.......... 2 8Suggestions for meetings .................. 1 0Trips from union hall to place ofExcess ................30, 31 publication................. 2Trade-in of car..........18, 24 work..................... 1 4Form 2106 ................. 3 2
Traffic tickets............... 1 6Unrecovered basis of car.... 2 2Nonaccountable plans...... 3 1T Transients.................... 3Nondeductible expenses.... 2 8 Tables and figures: TransportationPersonal expenses......... 2 7 V50% limit determination (Figureexpenses ..............13-24Recordkeeping............. 2 6 Volunteers................... 2A ) ...................11, 12 Car expenses...........15-24Reporting (Table 6-1)....... 3 0 Daily business mileage and Deductible (Figure B)....... 1 3Unclaimed ................. 2 7 expense log (Table Wfive or more cars........... 1 5Reporting 6-2)..................... 3 4 Weekly travel expense andForm 2106 ................. 3 2requirements...........27-34 Entertainment expenses, entertainment record (TableTransportation workers......6 ,Per diem or car determination of deductibility 6-3)....................... 3 413allowance................ 2 9 (Table 2-1)............... 1 0Reimbursements ........27-31 Travel advance: (See also ■Modified Accelerated Cost Reimbursements)......28, 30Reservists: Recovery System (MACRS)Transportation Travel expenses............ 2 - 92005 chart (Table 4-1).... 2 0expenses ................ 1 4 Another individualProving expenses (TableTraveling more than 100 miles accompanying5-1)..................... 2 4from home............... 3 2 taxpayer.................. 4Reporting reimbursements Away from home .......... 3 - 4(Table 6-1)............... 3 0
Page 55