Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 29  10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Publication 504
Cat. No. 15006I
Divorced
or Separated
Individuals
For use in preparing
2012 Returns
Get forms and other Information
faster and easier by:
Internet IRS.gov
Contents
Future Developments ....................... 1
Reminders ............................... 1
Introduction .............................. 2
Filing Status .............................. 2
Exemptions .............................. 6
Alimony ................................ 12
Qualified Domestic Relations Order ........... 17
Individual Retirement Arrangements .......... 18
Property Settlements ...................... 18
Costs of Getting a Divorce .................. 22
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ........... 22
Community Property ...................... 23
How To Get Tax Help ...................... 25
Index .................................. 27
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Publication 504, such as legislation enacted after this 
publication was published, go to www.irs.gov/pub504.
Reminders
Relief from joint liability.  In some cases, one spouse 
may be relieved of joint liability for tax, interest, and penal-
ties on a joint tax return. For more information, see Relief 
from joint liability under Married Filing Jointly.
Social security numbers for dependents. You must in-
clude on your tax return the taxpayer identification number 
(generally the social security number) of every person for 
whom you claim an exemption. See Exemptions for De­
pendents under Exemptions, later.
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).  The 
IRS will issue an ITIN to a nonresident or resident alien 
who does not have and is not eligible to get a social secur-
ity number (SSN). To apply for an ITIN, file Form W-7, Ap-
plication for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Num-
ber, with the IRS. It takes about 6 to 10 weeks to get an 
ITIN. The ITIN is entered wherever an SSN is requested 
on a tax return. If you are required to include another per-
son's SSN on your return and that person does not have 
and cannot get an SSN, enter that person's ITIN.
Change of address. If you change your mailing address, 
be sure to notify the Internal Revenue Service. You can 
use Form 8822, Change of Address. Mail it to the Internal 
Revenue Service Center for your old address. (Addresses 
for the Service Centers are on the back of the form.)
Jan 09, 2013

Page 2 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Change of name.  If you change your name, be sure to 
notify the Social Security Administration using Form SS-5, 
Application for a Social Security Card.
Change of withholding.  If you have been claiming a 
withholding exemption for your spouse, and you divorce 
or legally separate, you must give your employer a new 
Form W-4, Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate, 
within 10 days after the divorce or separation showing the 
correct number of exemptions.
Photographs of missing children.  The Internal Reve-
nue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for 
Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing 
children selected by the Center may appear in this publi-
cation on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can 
help bring these children home by looking at the photo-
graphs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843-5678) if 
you recognize a child.
Introduction
This publication explains tax rules that apply if you are di-
vorced or separated from your spouse. It covers general 
filing information and can help you choose your filing sta-
tus. It also can help you decide which exemptions you are 
entitled to claim, including exemptions for dependents.
The publication also discusses payments and transfers 
of property that often occur as a result of divorce and how 
you must treat them on your tax return. Examples include 
alimony, child support, other court-ordered payments, 
property settlements, and transfers of individual retire-
ment arrangements. In addition, this publication also ex-
plains deductions allowed for some of the costs of obtain-
ing a divorce and how to handle tax withholding and 
estimated tax payments.
The last part of the publication explains special rules 
that may apply to persons who live in community property 
states.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and your suggestions for fu-
ture editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Individual and Specialty Forms and Publications 
Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it 
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone 
number, including the area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at taxforms@irs.gov. Please put 
“Publications Comment” on the subject line. You can also 
send us comments from www.irs.gov/formspubs/. Select 
“Comment on Tax Forms and Publications” under “More 
Information.”
Although we cannot respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments as we revise our tax products.
Ordering forms and publications. Visit www.irs.gov/
formspubs/ to download forms and publications, call 
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or write to the ad-
dress below and receive a response within 10 days after 
your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
Tax questions. If you have a tax question, check the 
information available on IRS.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. 
We cannot answer tax questions sent to either of the 
above addresses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publications
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and Filing 
Information
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Community Property
Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
Innocent Spouse Relief
Form (and Instructions)
Release/Revocation of Release of Claim to 
Exemption for Child by Custodial Parent
Injured Spouse Allocation
Request for Innocent Spouse Relief
See How To Get Tax Help near the end of this publication 
for information about getting publications and forms.
Filing Status
Your filing status is used in determining whether you must 
file a return, your standard deduction, and the correct tax. 
It may also be used in determining whether you can claim 
certain other deductions and credits. The filing status you 
can choose depends partly on your marital status on the 
last day of your tax year.
Marital status. If you are unmarried, your filing status is 
single or, if you meet certain requirements, head of house-
hold or qualifying widow(er). If you are married, your filing 
status is either married filing a joint return or married filing 
a separate return. For information about the single and 
qualifying widow(er) filing statuses, see Publication 501.
For federal tax purposes, a marriage means only a le-
gal union between a man and a woman as husband and 
wife. The word “spouse” means a person of the opposite 
sex who is a husband or a wife.
  501
  544 
  555 
  590
  971
  8332
  8379
  8857
Page 2 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 3 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Unmarried persons. You are unmarried for the whole 
year if either of the following applies.
You have obtained a final decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance by the last day of your tax year. You 
must follow your state law to determine if you are di-
vorced or legally separated.
 Exception. If you and your spouse obtain a di-
vorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing tax re-
turns as unmarried individuals, and at the time of di-
vorce you intend to remarry each other and do so in 
the next tax year, you and your spouse must file as 
married individuals. 
You have obtained a decree of annulment, which 
holds that no valid marriage ever existed. You must 
file amended returns (Form 1040X, Amended U.S. In-
dividual Income Tax Return) for all tax years affected 
by the annulment that are not closed by the statute of 
limitations. The statute of limitations generally does 
not end until 3 years (including extensions) after the 
date you file your original return or within 2 years after 
the date you pay the tax. On the amended return you 
will change your filing status to single, or if you meet 
certain requirements, head of household. 
Married persons. You are married for the whole year 
if you are separated but you have not obtained a final de-
cree of divorce or separate maintenance by the last day of 
your tax year. An interlocutory decree is not a final decree.
Exception. If you live apart from your spouse, under 
certain circumstances, you may be considered unmarried 
and can file as head of household. See Head of House­
hold, later.
Married Filing Jointly
If you are married, you and your spouse can choose to file 
a joint return. If you file jointly, you both must include all 
your income, exemptions, deductions, and credits on that 
return. You can file a joint return even if one of you had no 
income or deductions.
If both you and your spouse have income, you 
should usually figure your tax on both a joint re­
turn and separate returns (using the filing status 
of married filing separately) to see which gives the two of 
you the lower combined tax.
Nonresident alien. To file a joint return, at least one of 
you must be a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of 
the tax year. If either of you was a nonresident alien at any 
time during the tax year, you can file a joint return only if 
you agree to treat the nonresident spouse as a resident of 
the United States. This means that your combined world-
wide incomes are subject to U.S. income tax. These rules 
are explained in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Ali-
ens.
Signing a joint return. Both you and your spouse gener-
ally must sign the return, or it will not be considered a joint 
return.
TIP
Joint and individual liability. Both you and your spouse 
may be held responsible, jointly and individually, for the 
tax and any interest or penalty due on your joint return. 
This means that one spouse may be held liable for all the 
tax due even if all the income was earned by the other 
spouse.
Divorced taxpayers.  If you are divorced, you are 
jointly and individually responsible for any tax, interest, 
and penalties due on a joint return for a tax year ending 
before your divorce. This responsibility applies even if 
your divorce decree states that your former spouse will be 
responsible for any amounts due on previously filed joint 
returns.
Relief from joint liability.  In some cases, a spouse 
may be relieved of the tax, interest, and penalties on a 
joint return. You can ask for relief no matter how small the 
liability.
There are three types of relief available.
Innocent spouse relief.
Separation of liability, which applies to joint filers who 
are divorced, widowed, legally separated, or who 
have not lived together for the 12 months ending on 
the date election of this relief is filed.
Equitable relief.
Married persons who live in community property states, 
but who did not file joint returns, may also qualify for relief 
from liability arising from community property law or for 
equitable relief. See Relief from liability arising from com­
munity property law, later, under Community Property.
Each kind of relief has different requirements. You must 
file Form 8857 to request relief under any of these catego-
ries. Publication 971 explains these kinds of relief and 
who may qualify for them. You can also find information 
on our website at IRS.gov.
Tax refund applied to spouse's debts.  The overpay-
ment shown on your joint return may be used to pay the 
past-due amount of your spouse's debts. This includes 
your spouse's federal tax, state income tax, child or 
spousal support payments, or a federal nontax debt, such 
as a student loan. You can get a refund of your share of 
the overpayment if you qualify as an injured spouse.
Injured spouse. You are an injured spouse if you file 
a joint return and all or part of your share of the overpay-
ment was, or is expected to be, applied against your 
spouse's past-due debts. An injured spouse can get a re-
fund for his or her share of the overpayment that would 
otherwise be used to pay the past-due amount.
To be considered an injured spouse, you must:
1. Have made and reported tax payments (such as fed-
eral income tax withheld from wages or estimated tax 
payments), or claimed a refundable tax credit, such 
as the earned income credit or additional child tax 
credit on the joint return, and
2. Not be legally obligated to pay the past-due amount.
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 3

Page 4 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. If the injured spouse's permanent home is in a 
community property state, then the injured spouse must 
only meet (2). For more information, see Publication 555.
Refunds that involve community property states 
must be divided according to local law. If you live 
in a community property state in which all com­
munity property is subject to the debts of either spouse, 
your entire refund is generally used to pay those debts. 
If you are an injured spouse, you must file Form 8379 to 
have your portion of the overpayment refunded to you. 
Follow the instructions for the form.
If you have not filed your joint return and you know that 
your joint refund will be offset, file Form 8379 with your re-
turn. You should receive your refund within 14 weeks from 
the date the paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from 
the date the return is filed electronically.
If you filed your joint return and your joint refund was 
offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When filed after offset, it 
can take up to 8 weeks to receive your refund. Do not at-
tach the previously filed tax return, but do include copies 
of all Forms W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, and W-2G, 
Certain Gambling Winnings, for both spouses and any 
Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld.
An injured spouse claim is different from an inno­
cent spouse relief request. An injured spouse 
uses Form 8379 to request an allocation of the 
tax overpayment attributed to each spouse. An innocent 
spouse uses Form 8857 to request relief from joint liability 
for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return for items of 
the other spouse (or former spouse) that were incorrectly 
reported on or omitted from the joint return. For informa­
tion on innocent spouses, see Relief from joint liability , 
earlier.
Married Filing Separately
If you and your spouse file separate returns, you should 
each report only your own income, exemptions, deduc-
tions, and credits on your individual return. You can file a 
separate return even if only one of you had income. For in-
formation on exemptions you can claim on your separate 
return, see Exemptions, later.
Community or separate income.  If you live in a com-
munity property state and file a separate return, your in-
come may be separate income or community income for 
income tax purposes. For more information, see Com­
munity Income under Community Property, later.
Separate liability. If you and your spouse file separately, 
you each are responsible only for the tax due on your own 
return.
Itemized deductions. If you and your spouse file sepa-
rate returns and one of you itemizes deductions, the other 
spouse cannot use the standard deduction and should 
also itemize deductions.
Dividing itemized deductions.  You may be able to 
claim itemized deductions on a separate return for certain 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
expenses that you paid separately or jointly with your 
spouse. See Table 1, later.
Separate returns may give you a higher tax.  Some 
married couples file separate returns because each wants 
to be responsible only for his or her own tax. There is no 
joint liability. But in almost all instances, if you file separate 
returns, you will pay more combined federal tax than you 
would with a joint return. This is because the following 
special rules apply if you file a separate return.
1. Your tax rate generally will be higher than it would be 
on a joint return.
2. Your exemption amount for figuring the alternative 
minimum tax will be half of that allowed a joint return 
filer.
3. You cannot take the credit for child and dependent 
care expenses in most cases.
4. You cannot take the earned income credit.
5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit for adoption 
expenses in most instances.
6. You cannot take the credit for higher education ex-
penses (American opportunity and lifetime learning 
credits), the deduction for student loan interest, or the 
tuition and fees deduction.
7. You cannot exclude the interest from qualified sav-
ings bonds that you used for higher education expen-
ses.
8. If you lived with your spouse at any time during the tax 
year:
a. You cannot claim the credit for the elderly or the 
disabled, and
b. You will have to include in income more (up to 
85%) of any social security or equivalent railroad 
retirement benefits you received.
9. Your income limits that reduce the child tax credit and 
the retirement savings contributions credit are half of 
the limits for a joint return filer.
10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 (instead of 
$3,000 on a joint return).
11. Your basic standard deduction, if allowable, is half of 
that allowed a joint return filer. See Itemized deduc­
tions, earlier.
Joint return after separate returns. If either you or your 
spouse (or both of you) file a separate return, you gener-
ally can change to a joint return within 3 years from the 
date (not including extensions) the separate return or re-
turns were filed. This applies to a return either of you filed 
claiming married filing separately, single, or head of 
household filing status. Use Form 1040X to change your 
filing status.
Separate returns after joint return.  After the due date 
of your return, you and your spouse cannot file separate 
returns if you previously filed a joint return.
Page 4 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 5 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception. A personal representative for a decedent 
can change from a joint return elected by the surviving 
spouse to a separate return for the decedent. The per-
sonal representative has 1 year from the due date (includ-
ing extensions) of the joint return to make the change.
Head of Household
Filing as head of household has the following advantages.
You can claim the standard deduction even if your 
spouse files a separate return and itemizes deduc-
tions.
Your standard deduction is higher than is allowed if 
you claim a filing status of single or married filing sep-
arately.
Your tax rate usually will be lower than it is if you claim 
a filing status of single or married filing separately.
You may be able to claim certain credits (such as the 
dependent care credit and the earned income credit) 
you cannot claim if your filing status is married filing 
separately.
Income limits that reduce your child tax credit and re-
tirement savings contributions credit are higher than 
the income limits if you claim a filing status of married 
filing separately.
Requirements. You may be able to file as head of 
household if you meet all the following requirements.
You are unmarried or “considered unmarried” on the 
last day of the year.
You paid more than half the cost of keeping up a 
home for the year.
A “qualifying person” lived with you in the home for 
more than half the year (except for temporary absen-
ces, such as school). However, if the “qualifying per-
son” is your dependent parent, he or she does not 
have to live with you. See Special rule for parent, later, 
under Qualifying person.
Itemized Deductions on Separate Returns
This table shows itemized deductions you can claim on your married filing separate return whether you paid the 
expenses separately with your own funds or jointly with your spouse.
Caution: If you live in a community property state, these rules do not apply. See Community Property.
IF you paid ... AND you ...
THEN you can deduct on your separate 
federal return...
medical expenses paid with funds deposited in a joint checking 
account in which you and your spouse have 
an equal interest
half of the total medical expenses, 
subject to certain limits, unless you can 
show that you alone paid the expenses. 
state income tax file a separate state income tax return the state income tax you alone paid 
during the year. 
file a joint state income tax return and you 
and your spouse are jointly and individually 
liable for the full amount of the state income 
tax
the state income tax you alone paid 
during the year. 
file a joint state income tax return and you 
are liable for only your own share of state 
income tax
the smaller of:
the state income tax you alone paid 
during the year, or
the total state income tax you and 
your spouse paid during the year 
multiplied by the following fraction. 
The numerator is your gross 
income and the denominator 
is your combined gross income.
property tax paid the tax on property held as tenants by 
the entirety
the property tax you alone paid. 
mortgage interest paid the interest on a qualified home1 held 
as tenants by the entirety
the mortgage interest you alone paid. 
casualty loss have a casualty loss on a home you own 
as tenants by the entirety
half of the loss, subject to the 
deduction limits. Neither spouse may 
report the total casualty loss. 
1 For more information on a qualified home and deductible mortgage interest, see Publication 936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction.
Table 1. 
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 5

Page 6 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Considered unmarried.  You are considered unmarried 
on the last day of the tax year if you meet all the following 
tests.
You file a separate return. A separate return includes 
a return claiming married filing separately, single, or 
head of household filing status.
You paid more than half the cost of keeping up your 
home for the tax year.
Your spouse did not live in your home during the last 6 
months of the tax year. Your spouse is considered to 
live in your home even if he or she is temporarily ab-
sent due to special circumstances. See Temporary 
absences, later.
Your home was the main home of your child, step-
child, or foster child for more than half the year. (See 
Qualifying person, below, for rules applying to a child's 
birth, death, or temporary absence during the year.)
You must be able to claim an exemption for the child. 
However, you meet this test if you cannot claim the 
exemption only because the noncustodial parent can 
claim the child using the rule described later in Special 
rule for divorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart) under Exemptions for Dependents. The 
general rules for claiming an exemption for a depend-
ent are shown later in Table 3.
If you were considered married for part of the 
year and lived in a community property state (one 
of the states listed later under Community Prop-
erty), special rules may apply in determining your income 
and expenses. See Publication 555 for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse was a non-
resident alien at any time during the tax year, and you 
have not chosen to treat your spouse as a resident alien, 
you are considered unmarried for head of household pur-
poses. However, your spouse is not a qualifying person 
for head of household purposes. You must have another 
qualifying person and meet the other requirements to file 
as head of household.
Keeping up a home.  You are keeping up a home only if 
you pay more than half the cost of its upkeep for the year. 
This includes rent, mortgage interest, real estate taxes, in-
surance on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in 
the home. This does not include the cost of clothing, edu-
cation, medical treatment, vacations, life insurance, or 
transportation for any member of the household.
Qualifying person. Table 2 , later, shows who can be a 
qualifying person. Any person not described in Table 2 is 
not a qualifying person.
Generally, the qualifying person must live with you for 
more than half of the year.
Special rule for parent.  If your qualifying person is 
your father or mother, you may be eligible to file as head 
of household even if your father or mother does not live 
with you. However, you must be able to claim an exemp-
tion for your father or mother. Also, you must pay more 
than half the cost of keeping up a home that was the main 
CAUTION
!
home for the entire year for your father or mother. You are 
keeping up a main home for your father or mother if you 
pay more than half the cost of keeping your parent in a 
rest home or home for the elderly.
Death or birth.  You may be eligible to file as head of 
household if the individual who qualifies you for this filing 
status is born or dies during the year. You must have pro-
vided more than half of the cost of keeping up a home that 
was the individual's main home for more than half of the 
year, or, if less, the period during which the individual 
lived.
Example. You are unmarried. Your mother, for whom 
you can claim an exemption, lived in an apartment by her-
self. She died on September 2. The cost of the upkeep of 
her apartment for the year until her death was $6,000. You 
paid $4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your brother 
made no other payments towards your mother's support. 
Your mother had no income. Because you paid more than 
half of the cost of keeping up your mother's apartment 
from January 1 until her death, and you can claim an ex-
emption for her, you can file as a head of household.
Temporary absences.  You and your qualifying per-
son are considered to live together even if one or both of 
you are temporarily absent from your home due to special 
circumstances such as illness, education, business, vaca-
tion, or military service. It must be reasonable to assume 
that the absent person will return to the home after the 
temporary absence. You must continue to keep up the 
home during the absence.
Kidnapped child. You may be eligible to file as head 
of household even if the child who is your qualifying per-
son has been kidnapped. You can claim head of house-
hold filing status if all the following statements are true.
The child must be presumed by law enforcement au-
thorities to have been kidnapped by someone who is 
not a member of your family or the child's family.
In the year of the kidnapping, the child lived with you 
for more than half the part of the year before the kid-
napping.
You would have qualified for head of household filing 
status if the child had not been kidnapped.
This treatment applies for all years until the child is re-
turned. However, the last year this treatment can apply is 
the earlier of:
The year there is a determination that the child is 
dead, or
The year the child would have reached age 18.
More information.  For more information on filing as 
head of household, see Publication 501.
Exemptions
You can deduct $3,800 for each exemption you claim in 
2012.
Page 6 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 7 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
There are two types of exemptions: personal exemp-
tions and exemptions for dependents. If you are entitled to 
claim an exemption for a dependent (such as your child), 
that dependent cannot claim his or her personal exemp-
tion on his or her own tax return.
Personal Exemptions
You can claim your own exemption unless someone else 
can claim it. If you are married, you may be able to take an 
exemption for your spouse. These are called personal ex-
emptions.
Exemption for Your Spouse
Your spouse is never considered your dependent.
Joint return. On a joint return, you can claim one exemp-
tion for yourself and one for your spouse.
If your spouse had any gross income, you can claim his 
or her exemption only if you file a joint return.
Separate return.  If you file a separate return, you can 
take an exemption for your spouse only if your spouse 
had no gross income, is not filing a return, and was not the 
Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing 
status.
IF the person is your ... AND ... THEN that person is ...
qualifying child (such as a son, 
daughter, or grandchild who 
lived with you more than half the 
year and meets certain other 
tests)2
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not 
you can claim an exemption for the 
person.
he or she is married and you can claim an 
exemption for him or her
a qualifying person.
he or she is married and you cannot claim an 
exemption for him or her
not a qualifying person.3
qualifying relative4 who is your 
father or mother
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6
you cannot claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
qualifying relative4 other than 
your father or mother (such as a 
grandparent, brother, or sister 
who meets certain tests)
he or she lived with you more than half the 
year, and he or she is related to you in one of 
the ways listed under Relatives who do not 
have to live with you in Publication 501 and 
you can claim an exemption for him or her5
a qualifying person.
he or she did not live with you more than half 
the year
not a qualifying person.
he or she is not related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who do not have 
to live with you in Publication 501 and is your 
qualifying relative only because he or she 
lived with you all year as a member of your 
household
not a qualifying person.
you cannot claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
1 A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2 See Table 3, later, for the tests that must be met to be a qualifying child. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head 
of household filing status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described under 
Children of Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart) under Exemptions for Dependents, later. If you are the custodial parent 
and those rules apply, the child is generally your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child is not a qualifying child 
for whom you can claim an exemption.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you cannot claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone else's 
return.
4 See Table 3, later, for the tests that must be met to be a qualifying relative.
5 If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple 
Support Agreement in Publication 501.
6 See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
Table 2. 
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 7

Page 8 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dependent of another taxpayer. If your spouse is the de-
pendent of another taxpayer, you cannot claim an exemp-
tion for your spouse even if the other taxpayer does not 
actually claim your spouse's exemption.
Alimony paid. If you paid alimony to your spouse, you 
cannot take an exemption for your spouse. This is be-
cause alimony is gross income to the spouse who re-
ceived it.
Divorced or separated spouse.  If you obtained a final 
decree of divorce or separate maintenance during the 
year, you cannot take your former spouse's exemption. 
This rule applies even if you provided all of your former 
spouse's support.
Exemptions for Dependents
You are allowed one exemption for each person you can 
claim as a dependent. You can claim an exemption for a 
dependent even if your dependent files a return.
The term “dependent” means:
A qualifying child, or
A qualifying relative.
Table 3 shows the tests that must be met to be either a 
qualifying child or qualifying relative, plus the additional 
requirements for claiming an exemption for a dependent. 
For detailed information, see Publication 501.
Dependent not allowed a personal exemp­
tion. If you can claim an exemption for your de­
pendent, the dependent cannot claim his or her 
own exemption on his or her own tax return. This is true 
even if you do not claim the dependent's exemption on 
your return.
You may be entitled to a child tax credit for each 
qualifying child who was under age 17 at the end 
of the year if you claimed an exemption for that 
child. For more information, see the instructions for the tax 
form you file (Form 1040, 1040A, or 1040EZ).
Children of Divorced or Separated Parents 
(or Parents Who Live Apart)
In most cases, because of the residency test (see item 3 
under Tests To Be a Qualifying Child in Table 3), a child of 
divorced or separated parents is the qualifying child of the 
custodial parent. However, the child will be treated as the 
qualifying child of the noncustodial parent if the special 
rule (discussed next) applies.
Special rule for divorced or separated parents (or 
parents who live apart).  A child will be treated as the 
qualifying child of his or her noncustodial parent if all four 
of the following statements are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree 
of divorce or separate maintenance,
CAUTION
!
TIP
b. Are separated under a written separation agree-
ment, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of 
the year, whether or not they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her support for 
the year from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for 
more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following applies.
a. The custodial parent signs a written declaration, 
discussed later, that he or she will not claim the 
child as a dependent for the year, and the noncus-
todial parent attaches this written declaration to 
his or her return. (If the decree or agreement went 
into effect after 1984, see Divorce decree or sepa­
ration agreement that went into effect after 1984 
and before 2009, later.
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or separate mainte-
nance or written separation agreement that ap-
plies to 2012 states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, the decree or 
agreement was not changed after 1984 to say the 
noncustodial parent cannot claim the child as a 
dependent, and the noncustodial parent provides 
at least $600 for the child's support during 2012. 
See Child support under pre­1985 agreement, 
later.
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.  The 
custodial parent is the parent with whom the child lived for 
the greater number of nights during the year. The other 
parent is the noncustodial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during the year 
and the child lived with both parents before the separa-
tion, the custodial parent is the one with whom the child 
lived for the greater number of nights during the rest of the 
year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a night if the 
child sleeps:
At that parent's home, whether or not the parent is 
present, or
In the company of the parent, when the child does not 
sleep at a parent's home (for example, the parent and 
child are on vacation together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived with each 
parent for an equal number of nights during the year, the 
custodial parent is the parent with the higher adjusted 
gross income.
December 31. The night of December 31 is treated as 
part of the year in which it begins. For example, Decem-
ber 31, 2012, is treated as part of 2012.
Emancipated child.  If a child is emancipated under 
state law, the child is treated as not living with either pa-
rent. See Examples 5 and 6 .
Page 8 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 9 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Absences. If a child was not with either parent on a 
particular night (because, for example, the child was stay-
ing at a friend's house), the child is treated as living with 
the parent with whom the child normally would have lived 
for that night, except for the absence. But if it cannot be 
determined with which parent the child normally would 
have lived or if the child would not have lived with either 
parent that night, the child is treated as not living with ei-
ther parent that night.
Parent works at night.  If, due to a parent's nighttime 
work schedule, a child lives for a greater number of days 
but not nights with the parent who works at night, that pa-
rent is treated as the custodial parent. On a school day, 
the child is treated as living at the primary residence regis-
tered with the school.
Example 1 – child lived with one parent greater 
number of nights. You and your child’s other parent are 
divorced. In 2012, your child lived with you 210 nights and 
with the other parent 156 nights. You are the custodial pa-
rent.
Example 2 – child is away at camp.  In 2012, your 
daughter lives with each parent for alternate weeks. In the 
summer, she spends 6 weeks at summer camp. During 
the time she is at camp, she is treated as living with you 
for 3 weeks and with her other parent, your ex-spouse, for 
3 weeks because this is how long she would have lived 
with each parent if she had not attended summer camp.
Example 3 – child lived same number of days with 
each parent.  Your son lived with you 180 nights during 
the year and lived the same number of nights with his 
other parent, your ex-spouse. Your adjusted gross income 
Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see Publication 501.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer. 
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund and 
there would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns. 
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident 
of Canada or Mexico, for some part of the year.1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1.
 
 
 
2.
 
 
 
 
 
3.
 
 
4.
 
 
5.
 
The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 
child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, 
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them. 
 
The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year 
and younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), (b) 
under age 24 at the end of the year, a full-time student, 
and younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), or 
(c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. 
 
The child must have lived with you for more than half of 
the year.2
 
The child must not have provided more than half of his or 
her own support for the year. 
 
The child is not filing a joint return for the year (unless that 
joint return is filed only as a claim for refund).
1.
 
 
2.
 
 
 
 
 
3.
 
 
4.
The person cannot be your qualifying child or the qualifying 
child of anyone else. 
 
The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with you 
in Publication 501 or (b) must live with you all year as a 
member of your household 2(and your relationship must not 
violate local law).
 
The person's gross income for the year must be less than 
$3,800.3
 
You must provide more than half of the person's total 
support for the year.4
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than 
one person, only one person can actually treat the child as a 
qualifying child. See Special Rule for Qualifying Child of More 
Than One Person, later, to find out which person is the person 
entitled to claim the child as a qualifying child.  
1 Exception exists for certain adopted children.
2 Exceptions exist for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), and kidnapped children. 
3 Exception exists for persons who are disabled and have income from a sheltered workshop.
4 Exceptions exist for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), and kidnapped children. 
See Publication 501.
Table 3. 
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 9

Page 10 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is $40,000. Your ex-spouse's adjusted gross income is 
$25,000. You are treated as your son's custodial parent 
because you have the higher adjusted gross income.
Example 4 – child is at parent’s home but with 
other parent.  Your son normally lives with you during 
the week and with his other parent, your ex-spouse, every 
other weekend. You become ill and are hospitalized. The 
other parent lives in your home with your son for 10 con-
secutive days while you are in the hospital. Your son is 
treated as living with you during this 10-day period be-
cause he was living in your home.
Example 5 – child emancipated in May.  When your 
son turned age 18 in May 2012, he became emancipated 
under the law of the state where he lives. As a result, he is 
not considered in the custody of his parents for more than 
half of the year. The special rule for children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart) does not ap-
ply.
Example 6 – child emancipated in August.  Your 
daughter lives with you from January 1, 2012, until May 
31, 2012, and lives with her other parent, your ex-spouse, 
from June 1, 2012, through the end of the year. She turns 
18 and is emancipated under state law on August 1, 2012. 
Because she is treated as not living with either parent be-
ginning on August 1, she is treated as living with you the 
greater number of nights in 2012. You are the custodial 
parent.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent must use 
either Form 8332 or a similar statement (containing the 
same information required by the form) to make the writ-
ten declaration to release the exemption to the noncusto-
dial parent. The noncustodial parent must attach a copy of 
the form or statement to his or her tax return.
The exemption can be released for 1 year, for a num-
ber of specified years (for example, alternate years), or for 
all future years, as specified in the declaration.
Divorce decree or separation agreement that went 
into effect after 1984 and before 2009.  If the divorce 
decree or separation agreement went into effect after 
1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent may be 
able to attach certain pages from the decree or agreement 
instead of Form 8332. To be able to do this, the decree or 
agreement must state all three of the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the child as a de-
pendent without regard to any condition, such as pay-
ment of support.
2. The custodial parent will not claim the child as a de-
pendent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial parent, rather 
than the custodial parent, can claim the child as a de-
pendent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of the following 
pages of the decree or agreement to his or her return.
The cover page (write the other parent's social secur-
ity number on this page).
The pages that include all of the information identified 
in items (1) through (3) above.
The signature page with the other parent's signature 
and the date of the agreement.
The noncustodial parent must attach the required 
information even if it was filed with a return in an 
earlier year.
Post­2008 divorce decree or separation agree­
ment. If the decree or agreement went into effect after 
2008, a noncustodial parent claiming an exemption for a 
child cannot attach pages from a divorce decree or sepa-
ration agreement instead of Form 8332. The custodial pa-
rent must sign either a Form 8332 or a similar statement. 
The only purpose of this statement must be to release the 
custodial parent's claim to the child's exemption. The non-
custodial parent must attach a copy to his or her return. 
The form or statement must release the custodial parent's 
claim to the child without any conditions. For example, the 
release must not depend on the noncustodial parent pay-
ing support.
The noncustodial parent must attach the required infor-
mation even if it was filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an exemption.  
The custodial parent can revoke a release of claim to ex-
emption that he or she previously released to the noncus-
todial parent on Form 8332 or a similar statement. In order 
for the revocation to be effective for 2012, the custodial 
parent must have given (or made reasonable efforts to 
give) written notice of the revocation to the noncustodial 
parent in 2011 or earlier. The custodial parent can use 
Part III of Form 8332 for this purpose and must attach a 
copy of the revocation to his or her return for each tax year 
he or she claims the child as a dependent as a result of 
the revocation.
Remarried parent.  If you remarry, the support provi-
ded by your new spouse is treated as provided by you.
Child support under pre­1985 agreement.  All child 
support payments actually received from the noncustodial 
parent under a pre-1985 agreement are considered used 
for the support of the child, even if such amounts are not 
actually spent for child support.
Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, the noncusto-
dial parent provides $1,200 for the child's support. This 
amount is considered support provided by the noncusto-
dial parent even if the $1,200 was actually spent on things 
other than support.
Parents who never married.  The special rule for di-
vorced or separated parents also applies to parents who 
never married and lived apart at all times during the last 6 
months of the year.
Alimony. Payments to your spouse that are includible 
in his or her gross income as either alimony, separate 
maintenance payments, or similar payments from an es-
tate or trust, are not treated as a payment for the support 
of a dependent.
CAUTION
!
Page 10 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 11 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Special Rule for Qualifying Child of More 
Than One Person
If your qualifying child is not a qualifying child of 
anyone else, this special rule does not apply to 
you and you do not need to read about it. This is 
also true if your qualifying child is not a qualifying child of 
anyone else except your spouse with whom you file a joint 
return.
If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the 
noncustodial parent under the Special rule for di-
vorced or separated parents (or parents who live 
apart), earlier, see Applying this special rule to divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart), later.
Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, age, resi-
dency, support, and joint return tests to be a qualifying 
child of more than one person. (For a description of these 
tests, see list items 1 through 5 under Tests To Be a Qual­
ifying Child in Table 3). Although the child meets the con-
ditions to be a qualifying child of each of these persons, 
only one person can actually use the child as a qualifying 
child to take all of the following tax benefits (provided the 
person is eligible for each benefit).
1. The exemption for the child.
2. The child tax credit.
3. Head of household filing status.
4. The credit for child and dependent care expenses.
5. The exclusion from income for dependent care bene-
fits.
6. The earned income credit.
The other person cannot take any of these benefits 
based on this qualifying child. In other words, you and the 
other person cannot agree to divide these tax benefits be-
tween you. The other person cannot take any of these tax 
benefits unless he or she has a different qualifying child.
Tiebreaker rules.  To determine which person can treat 
the child as a qualifying child to claim these six tax bene-
fits, the following tiebreaker rules apply.
If only one of the persons is the child's parent, the 
child is treated as the qualifying child of the parent.
If the parents do not file a joint return together but both 
parents claim the child as a qualifying child, the IRS 
will treat the child as the qualifying child of the parent 
with whom the child lived for the longer period of time 
during the year. If the child lived with each parent for 
the same amount of time, the IRS will treat the child as 
the qualifying child of the parent who had the higher 
adjusted gross income (AGI) for the year.
If no parent can claim the child as a qualifying child, 
the child is treated as the qualifying child of the person 
who had the highest AGI for the year.
If a parent can claim the child as a qualifying child but 
no parent does so claim the child, the child is treated 
TIP
CAUTION
!
as the qualifying child of the person who had the high-
est AGI for the year, but only if that person's AGI is 
higher than the highest AGI of any of the child's pa-
rents who can claim the child. If the child's parents file 
a joint return with each other, this rule can be applied 
by dividing the parents' total AGI evenly between 
them; see Pub. 501 for details.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and the other 
person may be able to choose which of you claims the 
child as a qualifying child.
Example 1—separated parents. You, your husband, 
and your 10-year-old son lived together until August 1, 
2012, when your husband moved out of the household. In 
August and September, your son lived with you. For the 
rest of the year, your son lived with your husband, the 
boy's father. Your son is a qualifying child of both you and 
your husband because your son lived with each of you for 
more than half the year and because he met the relation-
ship, age, support, and joint return tests for both of you. At 
the end of the year, you and your husband still were not 
divorced, legally separated, or separated under a written 
separation agreement, so the special rule for divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart) does not ap-
ply.
You and your husband will file separate returns. Your 
husband agrees to let you treat your son as a qualifying 
child. This means, if your husband does not claim your 
son as a qualifying child, you can claim your son as a de-
pendent and treat him as a qualifying child for the child tax 
credit and exclusion for dependent care benefits, if you 
qualify for each of those tax benefits. However, you can-
not claim head of household filing status because you and 
your husband did not live apart the last 6 months of the 
year. As a result, your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, so you cannot claim the earned income credit or 
the credit for child and dependent care expenses.
Example 2—separated parents claim same child. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1 except that you 
and your husband both claim your son as a qualifying 
child. In this case, only your husband will be allowed to 
treat your son as a qualifying child. This is because, dur-
ing 2012, the boy lived with him longer than with you. If 
you claimed an exemption, the child tax credit, or the ex-
clusion for dependent care benefits for your son, the IRS 
will disallow your claim to all these tax benefits, unless you 
have another qualifying child. In addition, because you 
and your husband did not live apart the last 6 months of 
the year, your husband cannot claim head of household 
filing status. As a result, his filing status is married filing 
separately, so he cannot claim the earned income credit 
or the credit for child and dependent care expenses.
Applying this special rule to divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart). If a child is treated 
as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent under 
the special rule for divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart) described earlier, only the noncusto-
dial parent can claim an exemption and the child tax credit 
for the child. However, the noncustodial parent cannot 
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 11

Page 12 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
claim the child as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status, the credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses, the exclusion for dependent care benefits, and 
the earned income credit. Only the custodial parent, if eli-
gible, or another eligible taxpayer can claim the child as a 
qualifying child for those four tax benefits. If the child is the 
qualifying child of more than one person for those tax ben-
efits, the tiebreaker rules determine which person can 
treat the child as a qualifying child.
Example 1. You and your 5-year-old son lived all year 
with your mother, who paid the entire cost of keeping up 
the home. Your AGI is $10,000. Your mother's AGI is 
$25,000. Your son's father does not live with you or your 
son. Under the rules for children of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart), your son is treated as 
the qualifying child of his father, who can claim an exemp-
tion and the child tax credit for the child if he meets all the 
requirements to do so. Because of this, you cannot claim 
an exemption or the child tax credit for your son. However, 
your son's father cannot claim your son as a qualifying 
child for head of household filing status, the credit for child 
and dependent care expenses, the exclusion for depend-
ent care benefits, or the earned income credit.
You and your mother did not have any child care ex-
penses or dependent care benefits, but the boy is a quali-
fying child of both you and your mother for head of house-
hold filing status and the earned income credit because 
he meets the relationship, age, residency, support, and 
joint return tests for both you and your mother. (Note: The 
support test does not apply for the earned income credit.) 
However, you agree to let your mother claim your son. 
This means she can claim him for head of household filing 
status and the earned income credit if she qualifies for 
each and if you do not claim him as a qualifying child for 
the earned income credit. (You cannot claim head of 
household filing status because your mother paid the en-
tire cost of keeping up the home.)
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except that your AGI is $25,000 and your mother's AGI is 
$21,000. Your mother cannot claim your son as a qualify-
ing child for any purpose because her AGI is not higher 
than yours.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except that you and your mother both claim your son as a 
qualifying child for the earned income credit. Your mother 
also claims him as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status. You as the child's parent will be the only one 
allowed to claim your son as a qualifying child for the 
earned income credit. The IRS will disallow your mother's 
claim to the earned income credit and head of household 
filing status unless she has another qualifying child.
Alimony
Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or former spouse 
under a divorce or separation instrument. It does not 
include voluntary payments that are not made under a di-
vorce or separation instrument.
Alimony is deductible by the payer and must be inclu-
ded in the spouse's or former spouse's income. Although 
this discussion is generally written for the payer of the ali-
mony, the recipient can use the information to determine 
whether an amount received is alimony.
To be alimony, a payment must meet certain require-
ments. Different requirements generally apply to pay-
ments under instruments executed after 1984 and to pay-
ments under instruments executed before 1985. The 
requirements that apply to payments under post-1984 in-
struments are discussed later.
Spouse or former spouse. Unless otherwise stated, the 
term “spouse” includes former spouse.
Divorce or separation instrument. The term “divorce or 
separation instrument” means:
A decree of divorce or separate maintenance or a writ-
ten instrument incident to that decree,
A written separation agreement, or
A decree or any type of court order requiring a spouse 
to make payments for the support or maintenance of 
the other spouse. This includes a temporary decree, 
an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a decree of ali-
mony pendente lite (while awaiting action on the final 
decree or agreement).
Invalid decree. Payments under a divorce decree can 
be alimony even if the decree's validity is in question. A di-
vorce decree is valid for tax purposes until a court having 
proper jurisdiction holds it invalid.
Amended instrument.  An amendment to a divorce 
decree may change the nature of your payments. Amend-
ments are not ordinarily retroactive for federal tax purpo-
ses. However, a retroactive amendment to a divorce de-
cree correcting a clerical error to reflect the original intent 
of the court will generally be effective retroactively for fed-
eral tax purposes.
Example 1.  A court order retroactively corrected a 
mathematical error under your divorce decree to express 
the original intent to spread the payments over more than 
10 years. This change also is effective retroactively for 
federal tax purposes.
Example 2.  Your original divorce decree did not fix 
any part of the payment as child support. To reflect the 
true intention of the court, a court order retroactively cor-
rected the error by designating a part of the payment as 
child support. The amended order is effective retroactively 
for federal tax purposes.
Deducting alimony paid.  You can deduct alimony you 
paid, whether or not you itemize deductions on your re-
turn. You must file Form 1040. You cannot use Form 
1040A, 1040EZ, or 1040NR.
Page 12 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 13 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Enter the amount of alimony you paid on Form 1040, 
line 31a. In the space provided on line 31b, enter your 
spouse's social security number.
If you paid alimony to more than one person, enter the 
social security number of one of the recipients. Show the 
social security number and amount paid to each other re-
cipient on an attached statement. Enter your total pay-
ments on line 31a.
If you do not provide your spouse's social secur­
ity number, you may have to pay a $50 penalty 
and your deduction may be disallowed.
Reporting alimony received.  Report alimony you re-
ceived as income on Form 1040, line 11, or on Sched-
ule NEC (Form 1040NR), line 12. You cannot use Form 
1040A, 1040EZ, or 1040NR-EZ.
You must give the person who paid the alimony 
your social security number. If you do not, you 
may have to pay a $50 penalty.
Withholding on nonresident aliens.  If you are a U.S. 
citizen or resident alien and you pay alimony to a nonresi-
dent alien spouse, you may have to withhold income tax 
at a rate of 30% on each payment. However, many tax 
treaties provide for an exemption from withholding for ali-
mony payments. For more information, see Publication 
515, Withholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and For-
eign Entities.
General Rules
The following rules apply to alimony regardless of when 
the divorce or separation instrument was executed.
Payments not alimony.  Not all payments under a di-
vorce or separation instrument are alimony. Alimony does 
not include:
Child support,
Noncash property settlements,
Payments that are your spouse's part of community in­
come, as explained later under Community Property,
Payments to keep up the payer's property, or
Use of the payer's property.
Example. Under your written separation agreement, 
your spouse lives rent-free in a home you own and you 
must pay the mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance, re-
pairs, and utilities for the home. Because you own the 
home and the debts are yours, your payments for the 
mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance, and repairs are 
not alimony. Neither is the value of your spouse's use of 
the home.
If they otherwise qualify, you can deduct the payments 
for utilities as alimony. Your spouse must report them as 
income. If you itemize deductions, you can deduct the real 
estate taxes and, if the home is a qualified home, you can 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
also include the interest on the mortgage in figuring your 
deductible interest. However, if your spouse owned the 
home, see Example 2  under Payments to a third party , 
later. If you owned the home jointly with your spouse, see 
Table 4. For more information on a qualified home and de-
ductible mortgage interest, see Publication 936, Home 
Mortgage Interest Deduction.
Child support.  To determine whether a payment is 
child support, see the discussion under Instruments Exe­
cuted After 1984 , later. If your divorce or separation 
agreement was executed before 1985, see the 2004 revi-
sion of Publication 504 available at www.irs.gov/
formspubs.
Underpayment. If both alimony and child support pay-
ments are called for by your divorce or separation instru-
ment, and you pay less than the total required, the pay-
ments apply first to child support and then to alimony.
Example. Your divorce decree calls for you to pay 
your former spouse $200 a month ($2,400 ($200 x 12) a 
year) as child support and $150 a month ($1,800 ($150 x 
12) a year) as alimony. If you pay the full amount of 
$4,200 ($2,400 + $1,800) during the year, you can deduct 
$1,800 as alimony and your former spouse must report 
$1,800 as alimony received. If you pay only $3,600 during 
the year, $2,400 is child support. You can deduct only 
$1,200 ($3,600 – $2,400) as alimony and your former 
spouse must report $1,200 as alimony received.
Payments to a third party.  Cash payments, checks, or 
money orders to a third party on behalf of your spouse un-
der the terms of your divorce or separation instrument can 
be alimony, if they otherwise qualify. These include pay-
ments for your spouse's medical expenses, housing costs 
(rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition, etc. The payments are 
treated as received by your spouse and then paid to the 
third party.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you must pay 
your former spouse's medical and dental expenses. If the 
payments otherwise qualify, you can deduct them as ali-
mony on your return. Your former spouse must report 
them as alimony received and can include them in figuring 
deductible medical expenses.
Example 2.  Under your separation agreement, you 
must pay the real estate taxes, mortgage payments, and 
insurance premiums on a home owned by your spouse. If 
they otherwise qualify, you can deduct the payments as 
alimony on your return, and your spouse must report them 
as alimony received. If itemizing deductions, your spouse 
can deduct the real estate taxes and, if the home is a 
qualified home, also include the interest on the mortgage 
in figuring deductible interest. However, if you owned the 
home, see the example under Payments not alimony, ear-
lier. If you owned the home jointly with your spouse, see 
Table 4.
Life insurance premiums.  Alimony includes premiums 
you must pay under your divorce or separation instrument 
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 13

Page 14 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for insurance on your life to the extent your spouse owns 
the policy.
Payments for jointly-owned home.  If your divorce or 
separation instrument states that you must pay expenses 
for a home owned by you and your spouse or former 
spouse, some of your payments may be alimony. See Ta­
ble 4.
However, if your spouse owned the home, see Exam­
ple 2 under Payments to a third party, earlier. If you owned 
the home, see the example under Payments not alimony , 
earlier.
Instruments Executed After 1984
The following rules for alimony apply to payments under 
divorce or separation instruments executed after 1984.
Exception for instruments executed before 1985. 
There are two situations where the rules for instruments 
executed after 1984 apply to instruments executed before 
1985.
1. A divorce or separation instrument executed before 
1985 and then modified after 1984 to specify that the 
after-1984 rules will apply.
2. A temporary divorce or separation instrument execu-
ted before 1985 and incorporated into, or adopted by, 
a final decree executed after 1984 that:
a. Changes the amount or period of payment, or
b. Adds or deletes any contingency or condition.
For the rules for alimony payments under pre-1985 in-
struments not meeting these exceptions, see the 2004 re-
vision of Publication 504 available at www.irs.gov/
formspubs.
Example 1.  In November 1984, you and your former 
spouse executed a written separation agreement. In Feb-
ruary 1985, a decree of divorce was substituted for the 
written separation agreement. The decree of divorce did 
not change the terms for the alimony you pay your former 
spouse. The decree of divorce is treated as executed be-
fore 1985. Alimony payments under this decree are not 
subject to the rules for payments under instruments exe-
cuted after 1984.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except that the decree of divorce changed the amount of 
the alimony. In this example, the decree of divorce is not 
treated as executed before 1985. The alimony payments 
are subject to the rules for payments under instruments 
executed after 1984.
Alimony Requirements
A payment to or for a spouse under a divorce or separa-
tion instrument is alimony if the spouses do not file a joint 
return with each other and all the following requirements 
are met.
The payment is in cash.
The instrument does not designate the payment as 
not alimony.
The spouses are not members of the same household 
at the time the payments are made. This requirement 
applies only if the spouses are legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate maintenance.
There is no liability to make any payment (in cash or 
property) after the death of the recipient spouse.
The payment is not treated as child support.
Each of these requirements is discussed below.
Expenses for a Jointly-Owned Home
Use the table below to find how much of your payment is alimony and how much you can claim as an itemized deduction.
IF you must pay 
all of the ...
AND your home 
is ...
THEN you can deduct 
and your spouse (or 
former spouse) must 
include as alimony ...
AND you can claim as an itemized 
deduction ...
mortgage 
payments 
(principal and 
interest)
jointly owned half of the total payments half of the interest as interest expense (if 
the home is a qualified home).1
real estate 
taxes and 
home 
insurance
held as tenants in 
common
half of the total payments half of the real estate taxes2 and none of the 
home insurance.
held as tenants 
by the entirety or 
in joint tenancy
none of the payments all of the real estate taxes and none of the 
home insurance.
1 Your spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other half of the interest if the home is a qualified home.
2 Your spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other half of the real estate taxes.
Table 4. 
Page 14 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 15 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cash payment requirement.  Only cash payments, in-
cluding checks and money orders, qualify as alimony. The 
following do not qualify as alimony.
Transfers of services or property (including a debt in-
strument of a third party or an annuity contract).
Execution of a debt instrument by the payer.
The use of the payer's property.
Payments to a third party.  Cash payments to a third 
party under the terms of your divorce or separation instru-
ment can qualify as cash payments to your spouse. See 
Payments to a third party under General Rules, earlier.
Also, cash payments made to a third party at the written 
request of your spouse may qualify as alimony if all the fol-
lowing requirements are met.
The payments are in lieu of payments of alimony di-
rectly to your spouse.
The written request states that both spouses intend 
the payments to be treated as alimony.
You receive the written request from your spouse be-
fore you file your return for the year you made the pay-
ments.
Payments designated as not alimony.  You and your 
spouse can designate that otherwise qualifying payments 
are not alimony. You do this by including a provision in 
your divorce or separation instrument that states the pay-
ments are not deductible as alimony by you and are ex-
cludable from your spouse's income. For this purpose, 
any instrument (written statement) signed by both of you 
that makes this designation and that refers to a previous 
written separation agreement is treated as a written sepa-
ration agreement (and therefore a divorce or separation 
instrument). If you are subject to temporary support or-
ders, the designation must be made in the original or a 
later temporary support order.
Your spouse can exclude the payments from income 
only if he or she attaches a copy of the instrument desig-
nating them as not alimony to his or her return. The copy 
must be attached each year the designation applies.
Spouses cannot be members of the same house-
hold. Payments to your spouse while you are members 
of the same household are not alimony if you are legally 
separated under a decree of divorce or separate mainte-
nance. A home you formerly shared is considered one 
household, even if you physically separate yourselves in 
the home.
You are not treated as members of the same house-
hold if one of you is preparing to leave the household and 
does leave no later than 1 month after the date of the pay-
ment.
Exception. If you are not legally separated under a 
decree of divorce or separate maintenance, a payment 
under a written separation agreement, support decree, or 
other court order may qualify as alimony even if you are 
members of the same household when the payment is 
made.
Liability for payments after death of recipient 
spouse. If any part of payments you make must continue 
to be made for any period after your spouse's death, that 
part of your payments is not alimony whether made before 
or after the death. If all of the payments would continue, 
then none of the payments made before or after the death 
are alimony.
The divorce or separation instrument does not have to 
expressly state that the payments cease upon the death 
of your spouse if, for example, the liability for continued 
payments would end under state law.
Example. You must pay your former spouse $10,000 
in cash each year for 10 years. Your divorce decree states 
that the payments will end upon your former spouse's 
death. You must also pay your former spouse or your for-
mer spouse's estate $20,000 in cash each year for 10 
years. The death of your spouse would not end these pay-
ments under state law.
The $10,000 annual payments may qualify as alimony. 
The $20,000 annual payments that do not end upon your 
former spouse's death are not alimony.
Substitute payments.  If you must make any pay-
ments in cash or property after your spouse's death as a 
substitute for continuing otherwise qualifying payments 
before the death, the otherwise qualifying payments are 
not alimony. To the extent that your payments begin, ac-
celerate, or increase because of the death of your spouse, 
otherwise qualifying payments you made may be treated 
as payments that were not alimony. Whether or not such 
payments will be treated as not alimony depends on all 
the facts and circumstances.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you must pay 
your former spouse $30,000 annually. The payments will 
stop at the end of 6 years or upon your former spouse's 
death, if earlier.
Your former spouse has custody of your minor children. 
The decree provides that if any child is still a minor at your 
spouse's death, you must pay $10,000 annually to a trust 
until the youngest child reaches the age of majority. The 
trust income and corpus (principal) are to be used for your 
children's benefit.
These facts indicate that the payments to be made af-
ter your former spouse's death are a substitute for 
$10,000 of the $30,000 annual payments. Of each of the 
$30,000 annual payments, $10,000 is not alimony.
Example 2. Under your divorce decree, you must pay 
your former spouse $30,000 annually. The payments will 
stop at the end of 15 years or upon your former spouse's 
death, if earlier. The decree provides that if your former 
spouse dies before the end of the 15-year period, you 
must pay the estate the difference between $450,000 
($30,000 × 15) and the total amount paid up to that time. 
For example, if your spouse dies at the end of the tenth 
year, you must pay the estate $150,000 ($450,000 − 
$300,000).
These facts indicate that the lump-sum payment to be 
made after your former spouse's death is a substitute for 
the full amount of the $30,000 annual payments. None of 
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 15

Page 16 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the annual payments are alimony. The result would be the 
same if the payment required at death were to be discoun-
ted by an appropriate interest factor to account for the pre-
payment.
Child support. A payment that is specifically designated 
as child support or treated as specifically designated as 
child support under your divorce or separation instrument 
is not alimony. The amount of child support may vary over 
time. Child support payments are not deductible by the 
payer and are not taxable to the payee.
Specifically designated as child support.  A pay-
ment will be treated as specifically designated as child 
support to the extent that the payment is reduced either:
On the happening of a contingency relating to your 
child, or
At a time that can be clearly associated with the con-
tingency.
A payment may be treated as specifically designated as 
child support even if other separate payments are specifi-
cally designated as child support.
Contingency relating to your child.  A contingency 
relates to your child if it depends on any event relating to 
that child. It does not matter whether the event is certain 
or likely to occur. Events relating to your child include the 
child's:
Becoming employed,
Dying,
Leaving the household,
Leaving school,
Marrying, or
Reaching a specified age or income level.
Clearly associated with a contingency.  Payments 
that would otherwise qualify as alimony are presumed to 
be reduced at a time clearly associated with the happen-
ing of a contingency relating to your child only in the fol-
lowing situations.
1. The payments are to be reduced not more than 6 
months before or after the date the child will reach 18, 
21, or local age of majority.
2. The payments are to be reduced on two or more oc-
casions that occur not more than 1 year before or af-
ter a different one of your children reaches a certain 
age from 18 to 24. This certain age must be the same 
for each child, but need not be a whole number of 
years.
In all other situations, reductions in payments are not trea-
ted as clearly associated with the happening of a contin-
gency relating to your child.
Either you or the IRS can overcome the presumption in 
the two situations above. This is done by showing that the 
time at which the payments are to be reduced was 
determined independently of any contingencies relating to 
your children. For example, if you can show that the pe-
riod of alimony payments is customary in the local jurisdic-
tion, such as a period equal to one-half of the duration of 
the marriage, you can overcome the presumption and 
may be able to treat the amount as alimony.
Recapture of Alimony
If your alimony payments decrease or end during the first 
3 calendar years, you may be subject to the recapture 
rule. If you are subject to this rule, you have to include in 
income in the third year part of the alimony payments you 
previously deducted. Your spouse can deduct in the third 
year part of the alimony payments he or she previously in-
cluded in income.
The 3-year period starts with the first calendar year you 
make a payment qualifying as alimony under a decree of 
divorce or separate maintenance or a written separation 
agreement. Do not include any time in which payments 
were being made under temporary support orders. The 
second and third years are the next 2 calendar years, 
whether or not payments are made during those years.
The reasons for a reduction or end of alimony pay-
ments that can require a recapture include:
A change in your divorce or separation instrument,
A failure to make timely payments,
A reduction in your ability to provide support, or
A reduction in your spouse's support needs.
When to apply the recapture rule.  You are subject to 
the recapture rule in the third year if the alimony you pay in 
the third year decreases by more than $15,000 from the 
second year or the alimony you pay in the second and 
third years decreases significantly from the alimony you 
pay in the first year.
When you figure a decrease in alimony, do not include 
the following amounts.
Payments made under a temporary support order.
Payments required over a period of at least 3 calendar 
years that vary because they are a fixed part of your 
income from a business or property, or from compen-
sation for employment or self-employment.
Payments that decrease because of the death of ei-
ther spouse or the remarriage of the spouse receiving 
the payments before the end of the third year.
How to figure and report the recapture.  Both you and 
your spouse can use Worksheet 1 to figure recaptured ali-
mony.
Including the recapture in income.  If you must in-
clude a recapture amount in income, show it on Form 
1040, line 11 (“Alimony received”). Cross out “received” 
and enter “recapture.” On the dotted line next to the 
amount, enter your spouse's last name and social security 
number.
Page 16 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 17 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deducting the recapture.  If you can deduct a recap-
ture amount, show it on Form 1040, line 31a (“Alimony 
paid”). Cross out “paid” and enter “recapture.” In the 
space provided, enter your spouse's social security num-
ber.
Example. You pay your former spouse $50,000 ali-
mony the first year, $39,000 the second year, and 
$28,000 the third year. You complete Worksheet 1, illus-
trated later. In the third year, you report $1,500 as income 
on Form 1040, line 11, and your former spouse reports 
$1,500 as a deduction on Form 1040, line 31a.
Instruments Executed Before 1985
Information on pre-1985 instruments was included in this 
publication through 2004. If you need the 2004 revision, 
please visit www.irs.gov/formspubs.
Qualified Domestic
Relations Order
A qualified domestic relations order (QDRO) is a judg-
ment, decree, or court order (including an approved prop-
erty settlement agreement) issued under a state's domes-
tic relations law that:
Recognizes someone other than a participant as hav-
ing a right to receive benefits from a qualified 
retirement plan (such as most pension and profit-shar-
ing plans) or a tax-sheltered annuity,
Relates to payment of child support, alimony, or mari-
tal property rights to a spouse, former spouse, child, 
or other dependent of the participant, and
Specifies certain information, including the amount or 
part of the participant's benefits to be paid to the par-
ticipant's spouse, former spouse, child, or other de-
pendent.
Benefits paid to a child or other dependent.  Benefits 
paid under a QDRO to the plan participant's child or other 
dependent are treated as paid to the participant. For infor-
mation about the tax treatment of benefits from retirement 
plans, see Publication 575, Pension and Annuity Income.
Benefits paid to a spouse or former spouse.  Benefits 
paid under a QDRO to the plan participant's spouse or for-
mer spouse generally must be included in the spouse's or 
former spouse's income. If the participant contributed to 
the retirement plan, a prorated share of the participant's 
cost (investment in the contract) is used to figure the taxa-
ble amount.
The spouse or former spouse can use the special rules 
for lump-sum distributions if the benefits would have been 
treated as a lump-sum distribution had the participant re-
ceived them. For this purpose, consider only the balance 
to the spouse's or former spouse's credit in determining 
whether the distribution is a total distribution. See 
Worksheet 1. Recapture of Alimony Keep for Your Records
Note. Do not enter less than ­0­ on any line.
1. Alimony paid in 2nd year ............................................ 1.  
2. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................... 2.  
3. Floor ........................................... 3. $15,000
4. Add lines 2 and 3 ................................................... 4.  
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1 .............................................................. 5.  
6. Alimony paid in 1st year ............................................. 6.  
7. Adjusted alimony paid in 2nd year
(line 1 minus line 5) ............................... 7.  
8. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................... 8.  
9. Add lines 7 and 8 ................................. 9.  
10. Divide line 9 by 2 ................................. 10.  
11. Floor ........................................... 11. $15,000
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ................................................. 12.  
13. Subtract line 12 from line 6 ............................................................. 13.  
14. Recaptured alimony. Add lines 5 and 13 ................................................. *14.  
*If you deducted alimony paid, report this amount as income on Form 1040, line 11. 
  If you reported alimony received, deduct this amount on Form 1040, line 31a.
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 17

Page 18 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Lump­Sum Distributions in Publication 575 for information 
about the special rules.
Rollovers. If you receive an eligible rollover distribu-
tion under a QDRO as the plan participant's spouse or for-
mer spouse, you may be able to roll it over tax free into a 
traditional individual retirement arrangement (IRA) or an-
other qualified retirement plan.
For more information on the tax treatment of eligible 
rollover distributions, see Publication 575.
Individual Retirement
Arrangements
The following discussions explain some of the effects of 
divorce or separation on traditional individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs). Traditional IRAs are IRAs other than 
Roth or SIMPLE IRAs.
Spousal IRA. If you get a final decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance by the end of your tax year, you cannot 
deduct contributions you make to your former spouse's 
traditional IRA. You can deduct only contributions to your 
own traditional IRA.
IRA transferred as a result of divorce.  The transfer of 
all or part of your interest in a traditional IRA to your 
spouse or former spouse, under a decree of divorce or 
separate maintenance or a written instrument incident to 
the decree, is not considered a taxable transfer. Starting 
from the date of the transfer, the traditional IRA interest 
transferred is treated as your spouse's or former spouse's 
traditional IRA.
IRA contribution and deduction limits.  All taxable ali-
mony you receive under a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance is treated as compensation for the contribu-
tion and deduction limits for traditional IRAs.
More information. For more information about IRAs, in-
cluding Roth IRAs, see Publication 590.
Property Settlements
Generally, there is no recognized gain or loss on the 
transfer of property between spouses, or between former 
spouses if the transfer is because of a divorce. You may, 
however, have to report the transaction on a gift tax re-
turn. See Gift Tax on Property Settlements , later. If you 
sell property that you own jointly to split the proceeds as 
part of your property settlement, see Sale of 
Jointly­Owned Property, later.
Worksheet 1. Recapture of Alimony—Illustrated
Note. Do not enter less than ­0­ on any line.
1. Alimony paid in 2nd year .......................................... 1. $39,000
2. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................ 2. 28,000
3. Floor ........................................... 3. $15,000
4. Add lines 2 and 3 ................................................. 4. 43,000
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1 ............................................................ 5. ­0­
6. Alimony paid in 1st year ........................................... 6. 50,000
7. Adjusted alimony paid in 2nd year
(line 1 minus line 5) .............................. 7. 39,000
8. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................ 8. 28,000
9. Add lines 7 and 8 ............................... 9. 67,000
10. Divide line 9 by 2 ................................ 10. 33,500
11. Floor ........................................... 11. $15,000
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ............................................... 12. 48,500
13. Subtract line 12 from line 6 ........................................................... 13. 1,500
14. Recaptured alimony. Add lines 5 and 13 ............................................. *14. 1,500
*If you deducted alimony paid, report this amount as income on Form 1040, line 11. 
  If you reported alimony received, deduct this amount on Form 1040, line 31a.
Page 18 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 19 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Transfer Between Spouses
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a transfer of 
property from you to (or in trust for the benefit of):
Your spouse, or
Your former spouse, but only if the transfer is incident 
to your divorce.
This rule applies even if the transfer was in exchange for 
cash, the release of marital rights, the assumption of liabil-
ities, or other consideration.
Exceptions to nonrecognition rule.  This rule does not 
apply in the following situations.
Your spouse or former spouse is a nonresident alien.
Certain transfers in trust, discussed later.
Certain stock redemptions under a divorce or separa-
tion instrument or a valid written agreement that are 
taxable under applicable tax law, as discussed in Reg-
ulations section 1.1041-2.
Property subject to nonrecognition rule.  The term 
“property” includes all property whether real or personal, 
tangible or intangible, or separate or community. It in-
cludes property acquired after the end of your marriage 
and transferred to your former spouse. It does not include 
services.
Health savings account (HSA).  If you transfer your in-
terest in an HSA to your spouse or former spouse under a 
divorce or separation instrument, it is not considered a 
taxable transfer. After the transfer, the interest is treated 
as your spouse's HSA.
Archer medical savings account (MSA). If you transfer 
your interest in an Archer MSA to your spouse or former 
spouse under a divorce or separation instrument, it is not 
considered a taxable transfer. After the transfer, the inter-
est is treated as your spouse's Archer MSA.
Individual retirement arrangement (IRA).  The treat-
ment of the transfer of an interest in an IRA as a result of 
divorce is similar to that just described for the transfer of 
an interest in an HSA and an Archer MSA. See IRA trans­
ferred as a result of divorce , earlier, under Individual Re­
tirement Arrangements.
Incident to divorce.  A property transfer is incident to 
your divorce if the transfer:
Occurs within 1 year after the date your marriage 
ends, or
Is related to the ending of your marriage.
A divorce, for this purpose, includes the ending of your 
marriage by annulment or due to violations of state laws.
Related to the ending of marriage. A property trans-
fer is related to the ending of your marriage if both of the 
following conditions apply.
The transfer is made under your original or modified 
divorce or separation instrument.
The transfer occurs within 6 years after the date your 
marriage ends.
Unless these conditions are met, the transfer is pre-
sumed not to be related to the ending of your marriage. 
However, this presumption will not apply if you can show 
that the transfer was made to carry out the division of 
property owned by you and your spouse at the time your 
marriage ended. For example, the presumption will not 
apply if you can show that the transfer was made more 
than 6 years after the end of your marriage because of 
business or legal factors which prevented earlier transfer 
of the property and the transfer was made promptly after 
those factors were taken care of.
Transfers to third parties.  If you transfer property to a 
third party on behalf of your spouse (or former spouse, if 
incident to your divorce), the transfer is treated as two 
transfers.
A transfer of the property from you to your spouse or 
former spouse.
An immediate transfer of the property from your 
spouse or former spouse to the third party.
You do not recognize gain or loss on the first transfer. In-
stead, your spouse or former spouse may have to recog-
nize gain or loss on the second transfer.
For this treatment to apply, the transfer from you to the 
third party must be one of the following.
Required by your divorce or separation instrument.
Requested in writing by your spouse or former 
spouse.
Consented to in writing by your spouse or former 
spouse. The consent must state that both you and 
your spouse or former spouse intend the transfer to be 
treated as a transfer from you to your spouse or for-
mer spouse subject to the rules of Internal Revenue 
Code section 1041. You must receive the consent be-
fore filing your tax return for the year you transfer the 
property.
This treatment does not apply to transfers to 
which Regulations section 1.1041­2 (certain 
stock redemptions) applies.
Transfers in trust.  If you make a transfer of property in 
trust for the benefit of your spouse (or former spouse, if in-
cident to your divorce), you generally do not recognize 
any gain or loss.
However, you must recognize gain or loss if, incident to 
your divorce, you transfer an installment obligation in trust 
for the benefit of your former spouse. For information on 
the disposition of an installment obligation, see Publica-
tion 537, Installment Sales.
CAUTION
!
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 19

Page 20 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You also must recognize as gain on the transfer of 
property in trust the amount by which the liabilities as-
sumed by the trust, plus the liabilities to which the prop-
erty is subject, exceed the total of your adjusted basis in 
the transferred property.
Example. You own property with a fair market value of 
$12,000 and an adjusted basis of $1,000. You transfer the 
property in trust for the benefit of your spouse. The trust 
did not assume any liabilities. The property is subject to a 
$5,000 liability. Your recognized gain is $4,000 ($5,000 − 
$1,000).
Reporting income from property. You should report in-
come from property transferred to your spouse or former 
spouse as shown in Table 5.
For information on the treatment of interest on transfer-
red U.S. savings bonds, see chapter 1 of Publication 550, 
Investment Income and Expenses.
When you transfer property to your spouse (or 
former spouse, if incident to your divorce), you 
must give your spouse sufficient records to deter-
mine the adjusted basis and holding period of the property 
on the date of the transfer. If you transfer investment 
credit property with recapture potential, you also must pro-
vide sufficient records to determine the amount and pe-
riod of the recapture.
Tax treatment of property received.  Property you re-
ceive from your spouse (or former spouse, if the transfer is 
incident to your divorce) is treated as acquired by gift for 
income tax purposes. Its value is not taxable to you.
Basis of property received.  Your basis in property re-
ceived from your spouse (or former spouse, if incident to 
your divorce) is the same as your spouse's adjusted ba-
sis. This applies for determining either gain or loss when 
you later dispose of the property. It applies whether the 
property's adjusted basis is less than, equal to, or greater 
than either its value at the time of the transfer or any con-
sideration you paid. It also applies even if the property's li-
abilities are more than its adjusted basis.
This rule generally applies to all property received after 
July 18, 1984, under a divorce or separation instrument in 
effect after that date. It also applies to all other property 
received after 1983 for which you and your spouse (or for-
mer spouse) made a “section 1041 election”  to apply this 
rule. For information about how to make that election, see 
Temporary Regulations section 1.1041-1T(g).
Example. Karen and Don owned their home jointly. 
Karen transferred her interest in the home to Don as part 
of their property settlement when they divorced last year. 
Don's basis in the interest received from Karen is her ad-
justed basis in the home. His total basis in the home is 
their joint adjusted basis.
Property received before July 19, 1984.  Your basis 
in property received in settlement of marital support rights 
before July 19, 1984, or under an instrument in effect be-
fore that date (other than property for which you and your 
RECORDS
spouse (or former spouse) made a “section 1041 
election”) is its fair market value when you received it.
Example. Larry and Gina owned their home jointly be-
fore their divorce in 1983. That year, Gina received Larry's 
interest in the home in settlement of her marital support 
rights. Gina's basis in the interest received from Larry is 
the part of the home's fair market value proportionate to 
that interest. Her total basis in the home is that part of the 
fair market value plus her adjusted basis in her own inter-
est.
Property transferred in trust.  If the transferor recog-
nizes gain on property transferred in trust, as described 
earlier under Transfers in trust , the trust's basis in the 
property is increased by the recognized gain.
Example. Your spouse transfers property in trust, rec-
ognizing a $4,000 gain. Your spouse's adjusted basis in 
the property was $1,000. The trust's basis in the property 
is $5,000 ($1,000 + $4,000).
Gift Tax on Property Settlements
The federal gift tax does not apply to most transfers of 
property between spouses, or between former spouses 
because of divorce. The transfers usually qualify for one 
or more of the exceptions explained in this discussion. 
However, if your transfer of property does not qualify for 
an exception, or qualifies only in part, you must report it on 
a gift tax return. See Gift Tax Return, later.
For more information about the federal gift tax, see 
Publication 950, Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes, and 
Form 709 and its instructions.
Exceptions
Your transfer of property to your spouse or former spouse 
is not subject to gift tax if it meets any of the following ex-
ceptions.
It is made in settlement of marital support rights.
It qualifies for the marital deduction.
It is made under a divorce decree.
It is made under a written agreement, and you are di-
vorced within a specified period.
It qualifies for the annual exclusion.
Settlement of marital support rights.  A transfer in set-
tlement of marital support rights is not subject to gift tax to 
the extent the value of the property transferred is not more 
than the value of those rights. This exception does not ap-
ply to a transfer in settlement of dower, curtesy, or other 
material property rights.
Marital deduction. A transfer of property to your spouse 
before receiving a final decree of divorce or separate 
Page 20 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 21 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
maintenance is not subject to gift tax. However, this ex-
ception does not apply to:
Transfers of certain terminable interests, or
Transfers to your spouse if your spouse is not a U.S. 
citizen.
Transfer under divorce decree.  A transfer of property 
under the decree of a divorce court having the power to 
prescribe a property settlement is not subject to gift tax. 
This exception also applies to a property settlement 
agreed on before the divorce if it was made part of or ap-
proved by the decree.
Transfer under written agreement.  A transfer of prop-
erty under a written agreement in settlement of marital 
rights or to provide a reasonable child support allowance 
is not subject to gift tax if you are divorced within the 
3-year period beginning 1 year before and ending 2 years 
after the date of the agreement. This exception applies 
whether or not the agreement is part of or approved by the 
divorce decree.
Annual exclusion.  The first $13,000 of gifts of present 
interests to each person during 2012 is not subject to gift 
tax. The annual exclusion is $139,000 for transfers to a 
spouse who is not a U.S. citizen provided the gift would 
otherwise qualify for the gift tax marital deduction if the do-
nee were a U.S. citizen.
Present interest. A gift is considered a present inter-
est if the donee has unrestricted rights to the immediate 
use, possession, and enjoyment of the property or income 
from the property.
Gift Tax Return
Report a transfer of property subject to gift tax on Form 
709. Generally, Form 709 is due April 15 following the 
year of the transfer.
Transfer under written agreement.  If a property trans-
fer would be subject to gift tax except that it is made under 
a written agreement, and you do not receive a final decree 
of divorce by the due date for filing the gift tax return, you 
must report the transfer on Form 709 and attach a copy of 
your written agreement. The transfer will be treated as not 
subject to the gift tax until the final decree of divorce is 
granted, but no longer than 2 years after the effective date 
of the written agreement.
Property Transferred Pursuant to Divorce
The tax treatment of items of property transferred from you to your spouse or former spouse pursuant to your divorce is 
shown below.
IF you transfer ... THEN you ...
AND your spouse or 
former spouse ...
FOR more information, 
see ...
income-producing 
property (such as an 
interest in a business, 
rental property, 
stocks, or bonds)
include on your tax return 
any profit or loss, rental 
income or loss, 
dividends, or interest 
generated or derived 
from the property during 
the year until the property 
is transferred 
reports any income or 
loss generated or 
derived after the 
property is transferred. 
Publication 550, 
Investment Income and 
Expenses. (See 
Ownership transferred 
under U. S. Savings 
Bonds in chapter 1.)
interest in a passive 
activity with unused 
passive activity losses
cannot deduct your 
accumulated unused 
passive activity losses 
allocable to the interest
increases the adjusted 
basis of the transferred 
interest by the amount 
of the unused losses. 
Publication 925, Passive 
Activity and At-Risk 
Rules.
investment credit 
property with 
recapture potential
do not have to recapture 
any part of the credit
may have to recapture 
part of the credit if he or 
she disposes of the 
property or changes its 
use before the end of 
the recapture period. 
Form 4255, Recapture of 
Investment Credit.
interests in 
nonstatutory stock 
options and 
nonqualified deferred 
compensation
do not include any 
amount in gross income 
upon the transfer
includes an amount in 
gross income when he 
or she exercises the 
stock options or when 
the deferred 
compensation is paid or 
made available to him 
or her. 
Table 5. 
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 21

Page 22 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Within 60 days after you receive a final decree of di-
vorce, send a certified copy of the decree to the IRS office 
where you filed Form 709.
Sale of Jointly-Owned Property
If you sell property that you and your spouse own jointly, 
you must report your share of the recognized gain or loss 
on your income tax return for the year of the sale. Your 
share of the gain or loss is determined by your state law 
governing ownership of property. For information on re-
porting gain or loss, see Publication 544.
Sale of home.  If you sold your main home, you may be 
able to exclude up to $250,000 (up to $500,000 if you and 
your spouse file a joint return) of gain on the sale. For 
more information, including special rules that apply to sep-
arated and divorced individuals selling a main home, see 
Publication 523, Selling Your Home.
Costs of Getting a Divorce
You cannot deduct legal fees and court costs for getting a 
divorce. But you may be able to deduct legal fees paid for 
tax advice in connection with a divorce and legal fees to 
get alimony. In addition, you may be able to deduct fees 
you pay to appraisers, actuaries, and accountants for 
services in determining your correct tax or in helping to 
get alimony.
Fees you pay may include charges that are de­
ductible and charges that are not deductible. You 
should request a breakdown showing the amount 
charged for each service performed.
 
You can claim deductible fees only if you itemize de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Claim them as mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2%-of-ad-
justed-gross-income limit. For more information, see 
Publication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
Fees for tax advice.  You can deduct fees for advice on 
federal, state, and local taxes of all types, including in-
come, estate, gift, inheritance, and property taxes.
If a fee is also for other services, you must determine 
and prove the expense for tax advice. The following ex-
amples show how you can meet this requirement.
Example 1. The lawyer handling your divorce consults 
another law firm, which handles only tax matters, to get in-
formation on how the divorce will affect your taxes. You 
can deduct the part of the fee paid over to the second firm 
and separately stated on your bill, subject to the 2% limit.
Example 2. The lawyer handling your divorce uses the 
firm's tax department for tax matters related to your di-
vorce. Your statement from the firm shows the part of the 
total fee for tax matters. This is based on the time re-
quired, the difficulty of the tax questions, and the amount 
TIP
of tax involved. You can deduct this part of your bill, sub-
ject to the 2% limit.
Example 3.  The lawyer handling your divorce also 
works on the tax matters. The fee for tax advice and the 
fee for other services are shown on the lawyer's state-
ment. They are based on the time spent on each service 
and the fees charged locally for similar services. You can 
deduct the fee charged for tax advice, subject to the 2% 
limit.
Fees for getting alimony.  Because you must include 
alimony you receive in your gross income, you can deduct 
fees you pay to get or collect alimony.
Example. You pay your attorney a fee for handling 
your divorce and an additional fee that is for services in 
getting and collecting alimony. You can deduct the fee for 
getting and collecting alimony, subject to the 2% limit, if it 
is separately stated on your attorney's bill.
Nondeductible expenses. You cannot deduct the costs 
of personal advice, counseling, or legal action in a di-
vorce. These costs are not deductible, even if they are 
paid, in part, to arrive at a financial settlement or to protect 
income-producing property.
However, you can add certain legal fees you pay spe-
cifically for a property settlement to the basis of the prop-
erty you receive. For example, you can add the cost of 
preparing and filing a deed to put title to your house in 
your name alone to the basis of the house.
You cannot deduct fees you pay for your spouse or for-
mer spouse, unless your payments qualify as alimony. 
(See Payments to a third party  under General Rules, ear-
lier.) If you have no legal responsibility arising from the di-
vorce settlement or decree to pay your spouse's legal 
fees, your payments are gifts and may be subject to the 
gift tax.
Tax Withholding
and Estimated Tax
When you become divorced or separated, you will usually 
have to file a new Form W-4 with your employer to claim 
your proper withholding allowances. If you receive ali-
mony, you may have to make estimated tax payments.
If you do not pay enough tax either through with­
holding or by making estimated tax payments, 
you will have an underpayment of estimated tax 
and you may have to pay a penalty. If you do not pay 
enough tax by the due date of each payment, you may 
have to pay a penalty even if you are due a refund when 
you file your tax return.
 
For more information, see Publication 505, Tax With-
holding and Estimated Tax.
Joint estimated tax payments.  If you and your spouse 
made joint estimated tax payments for 2012 but file 
CAUTION
!
Page 22 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 23 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
separate returns, either of you can claim all of your pay-
ments, or you can divide them in any way on which you 
both agree. If you cannot agree, the estimated tax you can 
claim equals the total estimated tax paid times the tax 
shown on your separate return for 2012, divided by the to-
tal of the tax shown on your 2012 return and your spou-
se's 2012 return. You may want to attach an explanation 
of how you and your spouse divided the payments.
If you claim any of the payments on your tax return, en-
ter your spouse's or former spouse's social security num-
ber in the space provided on the front of Form 1040 or 
Form 1040A. If you were divorced and remarried in 2012, 
enter your present spouse's social security number in that 
space and enter your former spouse's social security 
number, followed by “DIV” to the left of Form 1040, 
line 63, or Form 1040A, line 37.
Community Property
If you are married and your domicile (permanent legal 
home) is in a community property state, special rules de-
termine your income. Some of these rules are explained in 
the following discussions. For more information, see Pub-
lication 555.
Community property states.  The community property 
states are:
Arizona,
California,
Idaho,
Louisiana,
Nevada,
New Mexico,
Texas,
 
Washington, and
Wisconsin.
Community Income
If your domicile is in a community property state during 
any part of your tax year, you may have community in-
come. Your state law determines whether your income is 
separate or community income. If you and your spouse 
file separate returns, you must report half of any income 
described by state law as community income and all of 
your separate income, and your spouse must report the 
other half of any community income plus all of his or her 
separate income. Each of you can claim credit for half the 
income tax withheld from community income.
Community Property Laws Disregarded
The following discussions are situations where special 
rules apply to community property.
Certain community income not treated as community 
income by one spouse.  Community property laws may 
not apply to an item of community income that you re-
ceived but did not treat as community income. You will be 
responsible for reporting all of it if:
You treat the item as if only you are entitled to the in-
come, and
You do not notify your spouse of the nature and 
amount of the income by the due date for filing the re-
turn (including extensions).
Relief from liability arising from community property 
law. You are not responsible for the tax on an item of 
community income if all five of the following conditions ex-
ist.
1. You did not file a joint return for the tax year.
2. You did not include an item of community income in 
gross income on your separate return.
3. The item of community income you did not include is 
one of the following.
a. Wages, salaries, and other compensation your 
spouse (or former spouse) received for services 
he or she performed as an employee.
b. Income your spouse (or former spouse) derived 
from a trade or business he or she operated as a 
sole proprietor.
c. Your spouse's (or former spouse's) distributive 
share of partnership income.
d. Income from your spouse's (or former spouse's) 
separate property (other than income described in 
(a), (b), or (c)). Use the appropriate community 
property law to determine what is separate prop-
erty.
e. Any other income that belongs to your spouse (or 
former spouse) under community property law.
4. You establish that you did not know of, and had no 
reason to know of, that community income.
5. Under all facts and circumstances, it would not be fair 
to include the item of community income in your gross 
income.
Requesting relief. For information on how and when 
to request relief from liabilities arising from community 
property laws, see Community Property Laws  in Publica-
tion 971.
Spousal agreements.  In some states a husband and 
wife may enter into an agreement that affects the status of 
property or income as community or separate property. 
Check your state law to determine how it affects you.
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 23

Page 24 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Spouses living apart all year.  If you are married at any 
time during the calendar year, special rules apply for re-
porting certain community income. You must meet all the 
following conditions for these special rules to apply.
1. You and your spouse lived apart all year.
2. You and your spouse did not file a joint return for a tax 
year beginning or ending in the calendar year.
3. You and/or your spouse had earned income for the 
calendar year that is community income.
4. You and your spouse have not transferred, directly or 
indirectly, any of the earned income in (3) between 
yourselves before the end of the year. Do not take 
into account transfers satisfying child support obliga-
tions or transfers of very small amounts or value.
If all these conditions exist, you and your spouse must 
report your community income as explained in the follow-
ing discussions. See also Certain community income not 
treated as community income by one spouse, earlier.
Earned income. Treat earned income that is not trade 
or business or partnership income as the income of the 
spouse who performed the services to earn the income. 
Earned income is wages, salaries, professional fees, and 
other pay for personal services.
Earned income does not include amounts paid by a 
corporation that are a distribution of earnings and profits 
rather than a reasonable allowance for personal services 
rendered.
Trade or business income. Treat income and related 
deductions from a trade or business that is not a partner-
ship as those of the spouse carrying on the trade or busi-
ness.
Partnership income or loss.  Treat income or loss 
from a trade or business carried on by a partnership as 
the income or loss of the spouse who is the partner.
Separate property income.  Treat income from the 
separate property of one spouse as the income of that 
spouse.
Social security benefits.  Treat social security and 
equivalent railroad retirement benefits as the income of 
the spouse who receives the benefits. 
Other income.  Treat all other community income, 
such as dividends, interest, rents, royalties, or gains, as 
provided under your state's community property law.
Example. George and Sharon were married through-
out the year but did not live together at any time during the 
year. Both domiciles were in a community property state. 
They did not file a joint return or transfer any of their 
earned income between themselves. During the year their 
incomes were as follows:
George Sharon 
Wages ..................... $20,000 $22,000 
Consulting business ........... 5,000 
Partnership .................. 10,000 
Dividends from separate 
property .....................
1,000 2,000 
Interest from community 
property .....................
500 500 
Totals $26,500 $34,500 
Under the community property law of their state, all the 
income is considered community income. (Some states 
treat income from separate property as separate in-
come—check your state law.) Sharon did not take part in 
George's consulting business.
Ordinarily, on their separate returns they would each 
report $30,500, half the total community income of 
$61,000 ($26,500 + $34,500). But because they meet the 
four conditions listed earlier under Spouses living apart all 
year, they must disregard community property law in re-
porting all their income (except the interest income) from 
community property. They each report on their returns 
only their own earnings and other income, and their share 
of the interest income from community property. George 
reports $26,500 and Sharon reports $34,500.
Other separated spouses.  If you and your spouse are 
separated but do not meet the four conditions discussed 
earlier under Spouses living apart all year , you must treat 
your income according to the laws of your state. In some 
states, income earned after separation but before a de-
cree of divorce continues to be community income. In 
other states it is separate income.
Ending the Marital Community
When the marital community ends as a result of divorce or 
separation, the community assets (money and property) 
are divided between the spouses. Each spouse is taxed 
on half the community income for the part of the year be-
fore the community ends. However, see Spouses living 
apart all year, earlier. Income received after the commun-
ity ended is separate income, taxable only to the spouse 
to whom it belongs.
An absolute decree of divorce or annulment ends the 
marital community in all community property states. A de-
cree of annulment, even though it holds that no valid mar-
riage ever existed, usually does not nullify community 
property rights arising during the “marriage.” However, 
you should check your state law for exceptions.
A decree of legal separation or of separate mainte-
nance may or may not end the marital community. The 
court issuing the decree may terminate the marital com-
munity and divide the property between the spouses.
A separation agreement may divide the community 
property between you and your spouse. It may provide 
that this property, along with future earnings and property 
Page 24 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 25 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
acquired, will be separate property. This agreement may 
end the community.
In some states, the marital community ends when the 
spouses permanently separate, even if there is no formal 
agreement. Check your state law.
Alimony (Community Income)
Payments that may otherwise qualify as alimony are not 
deductible by the payer if they are the recipient spouse's 
part of community income. They are deductible by the 
payer as alimony and taxable to the recipient spouse only 
to the extent they are more than that spouse's part of com-
munity income.
Example. You live in a community property state. You 
are separated but the special rules explained earlier under 
Spouses living apart all year  do not apply. Under a written 
agreement, you pay your spouse $12,000 of your $20,000 
total yearly community income. Your spouse receives no 
other community income. Under your state law, earnings 
of a spouse living separately and apart from the other 
spouse continue as community property.
On your separate returns, each of you must report 
$10,000 of the total community income. In addition, your 
spouse must report $2,000 as alimony received. You can 
deduct $2,000 as alimony paid.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free 
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get infor-
mation from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the 
method that is best for you, you will have quick and easy 
access to tax help.
Free help with your tax return.  Free help in preparing 
your return is available nationwide from IRS-certified vol-
unteers. The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) 
program is designed to help low-moderate income, eld-
erly, disabled, and limited English proficient taxpayers. 
The Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) program is de-
signed to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their tax 
returns. Most VITA and TCE sites offer free electronic fil-
ing and all volunteers will let you know about credits and 
deductions you may be entitled to claim. Some VITA and 
TCE sites provide taxpayers the opportunity to prepare 
their return with the assistance of an IRS-certified volun-
teer. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, visit IRS.gov or 
call 1-800-906-9887 or 1-800-829-1040.
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the Tax-Aide 
counseling program. To find the nearest AARP Tax-Aide 
site, visit AARP's website at www.aarp.org/money/taxaide 
or call 1-888-227-7669.
For more information on these programs, go to IRS.gov 
and enter “VITA” in the search box.
Internet. You can access the IRS website at 
IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:
E­file your return. Find out about commercial tax prep-
aration and e­file services available free to eligible tax-
payers.
Check the status of your 2012 refund. Go to IRS.gov 
and click on Where’s My Refund. Information about 
your return will generally be available within 24 hours 
after the IRS receives your e-filed return, or 4 weeks 
after you mail your paper return. If you filed Form 8379 
with your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed 
electronically). Have your 2012 tax return handy so 
you can provide your social security number, your fil-
ing status, and the exact whole dollar amount of your 
refund.
Where's My Refund? has a new look this year! The 
tool will include a tracker that displays progress 
through three stages: (1) return received, (2) refund 
approved, and (3) refund sent. Where's My Refund? 
will provide an actual personalized refund date as 
soon as the IRS processes your tax return and appro-
ves your refund. So in a change from previous filing 
seasons, you won't get an estimated refund date right 
away. Where's My Refund? includes information for 
the most recent return filed in the current year and 
does not include information about amended returns.
You can obtain a free transcript online at IRS.gov by 
clicking on Order a Return or Account Transcript un-
der “Tools.” For a transcript by phone, call 
1-800-908-9946 and follow the prompts in the recor-
ded message. You will be prompted to provide your 
SSN or Individual Taxpayer Identification Number 
(ITIN), date of birth, street address and ZIP code.
Download forms, including talking tax forms, instruc-
tions, and publications.
Order IRS products.
Research your tax questions.
Search publications by topic or keyword.
Use the Internal Revenue Code, regulations, or other 
official guidance.
View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published in 
the last few years.
Figure your withholding allowances using the IRS 
Withholding Calculator at www.irs.gov/individuals.
Determine if Form 6251 (Alternative Minimum Tax— 
Individuals), must be filed by using our Alternative 
Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant available at IRS.gov by 
typing Alternative Minimum Tax Assistant in the 
search box.
Sign up to receive local and national tax news by 
email.
Get information on starting and operating a small busi-
ness.
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 25

Page 26 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Phone. Many services are available by phone.
Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call 
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) to order cur-
rent-year forms, instructions, and publications, and 
prior-year forms and instructions (limited to 5 years). 
You should receive your order within 10 days.
Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax ques-
tions at 1-800-829-1040.
Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help solv-
ing tax problems most business days in IRS Taxpayer 
Assistance Centers (TAC). An employee can explain 
IRS letters, request adjustments to your account, or 
help you set up a payment plan. Call your local Tax-
payer Assistance Center for an appointment. To find 
the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in 
the phone book under United States Government, In­
ternal Revenue Service.
TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/TDD 
equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions 
or to order forms and publications. The TTY/TDD tele-
phone number is for individuals who are deaf, hard of 
hearing, or have a speech disability. These individuals 
can also access the IRS through relay services such 
as the Federal Relay Service at www.gsa.gov/
fedrelay.
TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to 
pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
Checking the status of your 2012 refund. To check the 
status of your 2012 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 or 
1-800-829-4477 (automated Where's My Refund? in-
formation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week). Information 
about your return will generally be available within 24 
hours after the IRS receives your e-filed return, or 4 
weeks after you mail your paper return. If you filed 
Form 8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks 
if you filed electronically). Have your 2012 tax return 
handy so you can provide your social security num-
ber, your filing status, and the exact whole dollar 
amount of your refund. Where's My Refund? will pro-
vide an actual personalized refund date as soon as 
the IRS processes your tax return and approves your 
refund. Where's My Refund? includes information for 
the most recent return filed in the current year and 
does not include information about amended returns.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To 
ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and 
professional answers, we use several methods to evalu-
ate the quality of our telephone services. One method is 
for a second IRS representative to listen in on or record 
random telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to 
complete a short survey at the end of the call.
Walk-in. Some products and services are availa-
ble on a walk-in basis.
Products. You can walk in to some post offices, libra-
ries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms, instruc-
tions, and publications. Some IRS offices, libraries, 
and city and county government offices have a collec-
tion of products available to photocopy from reprodu-
cible proofs. Also, some IRS offices and libraries have 
the Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Rev-
enue Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for 
research purposes.
Services. You can walk in to your local TAC most 
business days for personal, face-to-face tax help. An 
employee can explain IRS letters, request adjust-
ments to your tax account, or help you set up a pay-
ment plan. If you need to resolve a tax problem, have 
questions about how the tax law applies to your indi-
vidual tax return, or you are more comfortable talking 
with someone in person, visit your local TAC where 
you can talk with an IRS representative face-to-face. 
No appointment is necessary—just walk in. Before 
visiting, check www.irs.gov/localcontacts for hours of 
operation and services provided. If you have an ongo-
ing, complex tax account problem or a special need, 
such as a disability, an appointment can be requested 
by calling your local TAC. You can leave a message 
and a representative will call you back within 2 busi-
ness days. All other issues will be handled without an 
appointment. To call your local TAC, go to
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone book 
under United States Government, Internal Revenue 
Service.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
tions, and publications to the address below. You 
should receive a response within 10 days after 
your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
Taxpayer Advocate Service.  The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) is your voice at the IRS. Its job is to ensure 
that every taxpayer is treated fairly, and that you know and 
understand your rights. TAS offers free help to guide you 
through the often-confusing process of resolving tax prob-
lems that you haven’t been able to solve on your own. Re-
member, the worst thing you can do is nothing at all.
TAS can help if you can’t resolve your problem with the 
IRS and:
Your problem is causing financial difficulties for you, 
your family, or your business.
You face (or your business is facing) an immediate 
threat of adverse action.
You have tried repeatedly to contact the IRS but no 
one has responded, or the IRS has not responded to 
you by the date promised.
If you qualify for help, they will do everything they can 
to get your problem resolved. You will be assigned to one 
Page 26 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 27 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
advocate who will be with you at every turn. TAS has offi-
ces in every state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto 
Rico. Although TAS is independent within the IRS, their 
advocates know how to work with the IRS to get your 
problems resolved. And its services are always free.
As a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS must abide 
by in its dealings with you. The TAS tax toolkit at 
www.TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov can help you understand 
these rights.
If you think TAS might be able to help you, call your lo-
cal advocate, whose number is in your phone book and on 
our website at www.irs.gov/advocate. You can also call 
the toll-free number at 1-877-777-4778. Deaf and hard of 
hearing individuals who have access to TTY/TDD equip-
ment can call 1-800-829-4059. These individuals can also 
access the IRS through relay services such as the Federal 
Relay Service at www.gsa.gov/fedrelay.
TAS also handles large-scale or systemic problems 
that affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of these 
broad issues, please report it through the Systemic Advo-
cacy Management System at www.irs.gov/advocate.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).  Low Income 
Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are independent from the IRS. 
Some clinics serve individuals whose income is below a 
certain level and who need to resolve a tax problem. 
These clinics provide professional representation before 
the IRS or in court on audits, appeals, tax collection dis-
putes, and other issues for free or for a small fee. Some 
clinics can provide information about taxpayer rights and 
responsibilities in many different languages for individuals 
who speak English as a second language. For more infor-
mation and to find a clinic near you, see the LITC page on 
www.irs.gov/advocate or IRS Publication 4134, Low In­
come Taxpayer Clinic List . This publication is also availa-
ble by calling 1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) or at 
your local IRS office.
Free tax services.  Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free 
Tax Services, is your guide to IRS services and resour-
ces. Learn about free tax information from the IRS, includ-
ing publications, services, and education and assistance 
programs. The publication also has an index of over 100 
TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you can listen to 
on the telephone. The majority of the information and 
services listed in this publication are available to you free 
of charge. If there is a fee associated with a resource or 
service, it is listed in the publication.
Accessible versions of IRS published products are 
available on request in a variety of alternative formats for 
people with disabilities.
DVD for tax products. You can order Publica-
tion 1796, IRS Tax Products DVD, and obtain:
Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.
Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.
Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
Tax law frequently asked questions.
Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response system.
Internal Revenue Code—Title 26 of the U.S. Code.
Links to other Internet-based tax research materials.
Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Toll-free and email technical support.
Two releases during the year.
– The first release will ship the beginning of January 
2013.
– The final release will ship the beginning of March 
2013.
Purchase the DVD from National Technical Information 
Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no han-
dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD 
for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
A
Absence, temporary ......... ......... 6
Address, change of ......... .......... 1
Aliens (See Nonresident aliens)
Alimony ............ ........... 10, 12, 17
Community income ........ ........ 25
Fees paid for getting ........ ....... 22
No exemption for spouse ..... ...... 8
Annual exclusion, gift tax .... ..... 21
Annulment decrees:
Absolute decree .......... .......... 24
Amended return required ..... ...... 3
Considered unmarried ....... ....... 3
Archer MSA .............. .............. 19
Assistance (See Tax help)
B
Basis:
Property received in 
settlement ............ ............ 20
Benefits paid under QDROs ... ... 17
Birth of dependent ........... ........... 6
C
Change of address .......... .......... 1
Change of name ............ ............ 2
Change of withholding ....... ........ 2
Child custody ............. .............. 8
Children:
Birth of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as ........ ........ 6
Claiming parent, when child is head 
of household ........... ............ 6
Custody of .............. ............... 8
Death of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as ........ ........ 6
Photographs of missing 
children ............... ............... 2
Child support:
Alimony, difference from ..... ..... 13
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 27

Page 28 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Clearly associated with 
contingency ........... ........... 16
Contingency relating to child ... .. 16
Payment specifically designated 
as .................. ................. 16
Child support under pre-1985 
agreement ............. ............. 10
Child tax credit ............. ............. 8
Community income ....... ...... 23, 25
Community property (See 
also Community income) .. .. 23, 25
Ending the marital community .... 24
Laws disregarded ......... ......... 23
States ................. ................. 23
Costs of getting divorce ...... ...... 22
Fees for tax advice ......... ........ 22
Nondeductible expenses .......... 22
Custody of child ............ ............ 8
D
Death of dependent ......... .......... 6
Death of recipient spouse. .... .... 14
Debts of spouse:
Refund applied to .......... .......... 3
Deductions:
Alimony paid ............. ............ 12
Alimony recapture ......... ......... 17
Limits on IRAs ............ ........... 18
Marital ................. ................ 20
Dependents:
Exemption for .......... .......... 8, 12
Qualifying child ............ ............ 8
Qualifying child (Table 3) ..... ...... 9
Qualifying relative .......... .......... 8
Qualifying relative (Table 3) .... .... 9
Social security numbers ...... ...... 1
Divorce decrees:
Absolute decree .......... .......... 24
Amended ............... .............. 12
Costs of getting ........... ........... 22
Defined for purposes of 
alimony .............. .............. 12
Invalid ................. ................. 12
Unmarried persons .......... ......... 3
Divorced parents ............ ............ 8
Child custody ............. ............. 8
Domestic relations 
orders (See Qualified domestic 
relations orders (QDROs))
Domicile ................. ................ 23
E
Earned income ............ ............ 24
Equitable relief (See Relief from joint 
liability)
Estimated tax ............. ............. 22
Joint payments ........... ........... 22
Exemptions ............ ............. 6, 12
Dependents ............ ........... 8, 12
Personal ................ ................ 7
Spouse ................ ................. 7
F
Fees for tax advice ......... ......... 22
Filing status .............. .............. 2, 6
Change to:
Separate returns after joint 
return ............... ............... 6
Head of household .......... .......... 5
Form 1040:
Deducting alimony paid ...... ...... 12
Reporting alimony received ... ... 13
Form 1040X:
Annulment, decree of ........ ........ 3
Form 8332:
Release of exemption to 
noncustodial parent ...... ...... 10
Form 8379:
Injured spouse ............ ............ 3
Form 8857:
Innocent spouse relief ....... ........ 3
Former spouse:
Defined for purposes of 
alimony .............. .............. 12
Form W-4:
Withholding ............. ............. 22
Form W-7:
Individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN) ........... ........... 1
Free tax services ........... .......... 25
G
Gift tax ............... ............... 20, 21
H
Head of household .......... .......... 5
Health savings accounts 
(HSAs) ............... ................ 19
Help (See Tax help)
Home owned jointly:
Alimony payments for ...... ....... 14
Expenses for, as alimony 
(Table 4) ............. ............. 14
Sale of ................ ................ 22
HSAs (Health savings 
accounts) ............. .............. 19
I
Identification number ......... ......... 1
Income (See also Community 
income) ................ ............... 23
Alimony received .......... .......... 13
Individual retirement arrangements 
(IRAs) ................ ................ 18
Individual taxpayer identification 
numbers (ITINs) ........... .......... 1
Injured spouse ............. ............. 3
Innocent spouse relief ....... ........ 3
Insurance premiums ........ ........ 13
Invalid decree ............. ............. 12
IRAs (Individual retirement 
arrangements) ........... .......... 18
Itemized deductions on separate 
returns ................ ................. 4
ITINs (Individual taxpayer 
identification numbers) ...... ..... 1
J
Joint liability:
Relief from ............. ............. 1, 3
Jointly-owned home:
Alimony payments for ...... ....... 14
Expenses for, as alimony 
(Table 4) ............. ............. 14
Sale of ................ ................ 22
Joint returns ............... ............... 3
Change from separate return ... ... 4
Change to separate return ..... ..... 4
Divorced taxpayers ......... ......... 3
Exemption for spouse ....... ........ 7
Joint and individual liability .... ..... 3
Relief from joint liability ....... ....... 3
Signing ................. ................. 3
K
Kidnapped child:
Head of household status and ...... 6
L
Liability for taxes (See Relief from 
joint liability)
Life insurance premiums as 
alimony ............... ............... 13
M
Marital community, ending ... .... 24
Marital status .............. .............. 2
Married persons ............ ............ 3
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs) ................ ................ 19
Missing children, photographs 
of ..................... ..................... 2
More information (See Tax help)
Mortgage payments as 
alimony ............... ............... 14
MSAs (Medical savings 
accounts) ............. .............. 19
N
Name, change of ........... ............ 2
Nondeductible expenses ..... ..... 22
Nonresident aliens:
Joint returns ............. .............. 3
Withholding ............. ............. 13
Page 28 Publication 504 (2012)

Page 29 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P504/2012/A/XML/Cycle02/source 10:08 - 9-Jan-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
P
Parent:
Head of household, claim for ... ... 6
Parents, divorced or 
separated .............. ............... 8
Personal exemptions ........ ......... 7
Property settlements ..... ..... 18, 22
Publications (See Tax help)
Q
Qualified domestic relations orders 
(QDROs) ............... .............. 17
Qualifying child, exemption for .. .. 8
Qualifying child, exemption for 
(Table 3) ................ ................ 9
Qualifying person, head of 
household .............. .............. 6
Table 2 ................. ................. 7
Qualifying relative, exemption 
for ................... .................... 8
Qualifying relative, exemption for 
(Table 3) ................ ................ 9
R
Recapture of alimony ........ ....... 16
Refunds:
Injured spouse, community 
property .............. ............... 4
Spouse's debts, applied to .... ..... 3
Release of exemption to 
noncustodial parent ....... ....... 10
Revocation .............. ............. 10
Relief from joint liability ........... 1, 3
Relief from separate return liability:
Community income ........ ........ 23
Reporting requirements:
Alimony received .......... .......... 13
Returns:
Amended return required ..... ...... 3
Joint (See Joint returns)
Separate (See Separate returns)
Rollovers ............... ................ 18
S
Sales of jointly-owned 
property .............. ............... 22
Section 1041 election ........ ....... 20
Separated parents ........... ........... 8
Separate maintenance 
decrees ........... ........... 3, 12, 24
Separate returns ........... ............ 4
Change to or from joint return ... ... 4
Community or separate 
income ............... ............... 4
Exemption for spouse ....... ........ 7
Itemized deductions ........ ......... 4
Relief from liability ......... ......... 23
Separate liability ........... ........... 4
Tax consequences .......... .......... 4
Separation agreements ...... ...... 24
Defined for purposes of 
alimony .............. .............. 12
Separation of liability (See Relief 
from joint liability)
Settlement of 
property (See Property 
settlements)
Social security benefits ...... ...... 24
Social security numbers (SSNs):
Alimony recipient's number 
required .............. .............. 13
Dependents .............. .............. 1
Spousal IRA .............. .............. 18
Spouse:
Defined for purposes of 
alimony .............. .............. 12
Refund applied to debts ....... ...... 3
Statute of limitations:
Amended return ........... ........... 3
Injured spouse allocation ..... ...... 4
T
Tables and figures:
Exemption for dependents 
(Table 3) .............. .............. 9
Itemized deductions on separate 
returns (Table 1) ......... ......... 5
Jointly-owned home, expenses for, 
as alimony (Table 4) ...... ...... 14
Property transferred pursuant to 
divorce (Table 5) ........ ........ 21
Qualifying person for head of 
household (Table 2) ....... ....... 7
Tax advice fees ............ ............ 22
Tax help ................. ................ 25
Taxpayer Advocate ......... ......... 26
Taxpayer identification 
numbers ................ ................ 1
Tax withholding (See Withholding)
Third parties:
Alimony payments to .......... 13, 15
Property settlements, transfers 
to ................. .................. 19
Tiebreaker rules ........... ........... 11
TTY/TDD information ....... ........ 25
U
Underpayment of alimony ..... .... 13
Unmarried persons .......... .......... 3
W
Withholding:
Change of ............. ............. 2, 22
Nonresident aliens ......... ......... 13
Worksheets:
Recapture of alimony (Worksheet 
1) .................. .................. 16
Publication 504 (2012)   Page 29