Contents
Important Changes ............................................1
Introduction ........................................................1
What Is the Definition of Medical Care? ........2
What Expenses Can You Include This Year? 2
How Much of the Expense Can You Deduct? 2
Whose Medical Expenses Can You Include?. 3
What Medical Expenses Are Deductible?.......4
What Expenses Are Not Deductible?..............12
How Do You Deduct Impairment-Related Work
Expenses? ...................................................13
How Do You Treat Reimbursements? ............13
How Do You Report the Deduction on Your
Tax Return? .................................................15
Sale of Medical Property...................................16
Settlement of Damage Suit...............................16
How To Get Tax Help.........................................17
Index ....................................................................19
Important Changes
Photographs of missing children.The Internal Rev-
enue Service is a proud partner with the National Cen-
ter for Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of
missing children selected by the Center may appear in
this publication on pages that would otherwise be blank.
You can help bring these children home by looking at
the photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST
(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child.
Medical conferences.  You can include in medical
expenses amounts paid for admission and transporta-
tion to a medical conference if the medical conference
concerns the chronic illness of you, your spouse, or
your dependent. The costs of the medical conference
must be primarily for and necessary to the medical care
of you, your spouse, or your dependent. You must
spend the majority of your time at the conference at-
tending sessions on medical information. The cost of
meals and lodging while attending the conference are
not deductible as medical expenses.
Introduction
This publication defines medical and dental care ex-
penses. It contains an alphabetical list of items that you
can or cannot include in figuring your deduction. It ex-
plains how to treat insurance reimbursements and other
reimbursements you may receive for medical care. It
also explains how to claim your medical and dental
expense deduction.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Publication 502
Cat. No. 15002Q
Medical and
Dental
Expenses
For use in preparing
2000 Returns


See How To Get Tax Help near the end of this pub-
lication for information about getting publications and
forms.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your
comments about this publication and your suggestions
for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web site at
www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore,
it would be helpful if you would include your daytime
phone number, including the area code, in your corre-
spondence.
What Is the Definition of
Medical Care?
Medical care means amounts paid for the diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease,
and for treatments affecting any part or function of the
body. The medical care expenses must be primarily to
alleviate or prevent a physical or mental defect or ill-
ness.
Medical care expenses include the premiums you
pay for insurance that covers the expenses of medical
care, and the amounts you pay for transportation to get
medical care. Medical care expenses also include lim-
ited amounts paid for any qualified long-term care in-
surance contract.
What Expenses Can You
Include This Year?
You can include only the medical and dental expenses
you paid this year, regardless of when the services
were provided. (But see Decedent under Whose
Medical Expenses Can You Include, later, for an ex-
ception.) If you pay medical expenses by check, the day
you mail or deliver the check generally is the date of
payment. If you use a “pay-by-phone” or “on-line” ac-
count to pay your medical expenses, the date reported
on the statement of the financial institution showing
when payment was made is the date of payment. You
can include medical expenses you charge to your credit
card in the year the charge is made. It does not matter
when you actually pay the amount charged.
If you did not claim a medical or dental expense that
would have been deductible in an earlier year, you can
file Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
Return,  for the year in which you overlooked the ex-
pense. Do not claim the expense on this year's return.
Generally, an amended return must be filed within 3
years from the date the original return was filed or within
2 years from the time the tax was paid, whichever is
later.
You cannot include medical expenses that were paid
by an insurance company or other sources. This is true
whether the payments were made directly to you, to the
patient, or to the provider of the medical services.
When do you include a decedent's medical ex-
penses? Medical expenses for a decedent that are
paid from his or her estate are treated as paid at the
time the medical services were provided if they are paid
within the one-year period beginning with the day after
the date of death. See Decedent under Whose Medical
Expenses Can You Include, later.
Medical expenses paid before death by the decedent
are included in figuring any deduction for medical and
dental expenses on the decedent's final income tax re-
turn. This includes expenses for the decedent's spouse
and dependents as well as for the decedent.
CAUTION
!
Qualified medical expenses paid before death
by the decedent are not deductible if paid with
a tax-free distribution from any medical savings
account or Medicare+Choice savings account.
How Much of the Expense Can
You Deduct?
You can deduct only the amount of your medical and
dental expenses that is more than 7.5% of your ad-
justed gross income (line 34, Form 1040).
In this publication, the term “7.5% limit” is used to
refer to 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. The
phrase “subject to the 7.5% limit” is also used. This
phrase means that you must subtract 7.5% (.075) of
your adjusted gross income from your medical ex-
penses to figure your medical expense deduction.
Example. Your adjusted gross income is $20,000,
7.5% of which is $1,500. You paid medical expenses
of $800. You cannot deduct any of your medical ex-
penses because they are not more than 7.5% of your
adjusted gross income.
Separate returns.If you and your spouse live in a
noncommunity property state and file separate returns,
each of you can include only the medical expenses
each actually paid. Any medical expenses paid out of
a joint checking account in which you and your spouse
have the same interest are considered to have been
paid equally by each of you, unless you can show oth-
erwise.
Community property states. If you and your
spouse live in a community property state and file
separate returns, any medical expenses paid out of
community funds are divided equally. Each of you
should include half the expenses. If medical expenses
are paid out of the separate funds of one spouse, only
the spouse who paid the medical expenses can include
them. If you live in a community property state, are
married, and file a separate return, see Publication 555,
Community Property.
Page 2

Whose Medical Expenses
Can You Include?
You can include medical expenses you pay for yourself
and for the individuals discussed in this section.
Spouse. You can include medical expenses you paid
for your spouse. To claim these expenses, you must
have been married either at the time your spouse re-
ceived the medical services or at the time you paid the
medical expenses.
Example 1. Mary received medical treatment before
she married Bill. Bill paid for the treatment after they
married. Bill can include these expenses in figuring his
medical expense deduction even if Bill and Mary file
separate returns.
If Mary had paid the expenses before she and Bill
married, Bill could not include Mary's expenses in his
separate return. Mary would include the amounts she
paid during the year in her separate return. If they filed
a joint return, the medical expenses both paid during
the year would be used to figure their medical expense
deduction.
Example 2. This year, John paid medical expenses
for his wife Louise who died last year. John married
Belle this year and they file a joint return. Because John
was married to Louise when she incurred the medical
expenses, he can include those expenses in figuring
his medical deduction for this year.
Dependent. You can include medical expenses you
paid for your dependent. To claim these expenses, the
person must have been your dependent either at the
time the medical services were provided or at the time
you paid the expenses. A person generally qualifies as
your dependent for purposes of the medical expense
deduction if:
1) That person lived with you for the entire year as a
member of your household or is related to you,
2) That person was a U.S. citizen or resident, or a
resident of Canada or Mexico for some part of the
calendar year in which your tax year began, and
3) You provided over half of that person's total support
for the calendar year.
You can include the medical expenses of any person
who is your dependent even if you cannot claim an
exemption for him or her on your return.
Example. Last year your son was your dependent.
This year he no longer qualifies as your dependent.
However, you paid $800 this year for medical expenses
your son incurred last year, when he was your de-
pendent. You can include the $800 in figuring this year's
medical expense deduction. You cannot include this
amount on last year's return.
Adopted child. You can include medical expenses
that you paid for a child before adoption, if the child
qualified as your dependent when the medical services
were provided or when the expenses were paid. If you
pay back an adoption agency or other persons for
medical expenses they paid under an agreement with
you, you are treated as having paid those expenses
provided you clearly substantiate that the payment is
directly attributable to the medical care of the child. But
if you pay back medical expenses incurred and paid
before adoption negotiations began, you cannot include
them as medical expenses.
TIP
You may be able to take a credit or exclusion
for other expenses related to adoption. See
Publication 968, Tax Benefits for Adoption, for
more information.
Child of divorced or separated parents.If either
parent can claim a child as a dependent under the rules
for divorced or separated parents, each parent can in-
clude the medical expenses he or she pays for the child
even if an exemption for the child is claimed by the
other parent.
Support claimed under a multiple support agree-
ment. A multiple support agreement is used when two
or more people provide more than half of a person's
support, but no one alone provides more than half. If
you are considered to have provided more than half of
a person's support under such an agreement, you can
include medical expenses you pay, even if you cannot
claim the person as a dependent.
Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you
in the agreement cannot be included as medical ex-
penses by anyone. However, you can include the entire
unreimbursed amount you paid for medical expenses.
Example. You and your three brothers each provide
one-fourth of your mother's total support. Under a mul-
tiple support agreement, you claim your mother as a
dependent. You paid all of her medical expenses. Your
brothers repaid you for three-fourths of these expenses.
In figuring your medical expense deduction, you can
include only one-fourth of your mother's medical ex-
penses. Your brothers cannot include any part of the
expenses. However, if you and your brothers share the
nonmedical support items and you separately pay all
of your mother's medical expenses, you can include the
amount you paid for her medical expenses in your
medical expenses.
Decedent. The survivor or personal representative of
a decedent can choose to treat certain expenses paid
by the decedent's estate for the decedent's medical
care as paid by the decedent at the time the medical
services were provided. The expenses must be paid
within the one-year period beginning with the day after
the date of death. If you are the survivor or personal
representative making this choice, you must attach a
statement to the decedent's Form 1040 (or the dece-
dent's amended return, Form 1040X) saying that the
expenses have not been and will not be claimed on the
estate tax return.
Page 3

CAUTION
!
Qualified medical expenses paid before death
by the decedent are not deductible if paid with
a tax-free distribution from any medical savings
account or Medicare+Choice savings account.
What if the decedent's return had been filed and
the medical expenses were not included? Form
1040X can be filed for the year or years the expenses
are treated as paid, unless the period for filing an
amended return for that year has passed. Generally,
an amended return must be filed within 3 years of the
date the original return was filed, or within 2 years from
the time the tax was paid, whichever date is later.
Example. John properly filed last year's income tax
return. He died this year with unpaid medical expenses
of $1,500 from last year and $2,000 from this year. His
survivor or personal representative can file an amended
return for last year claiming the $1,500 medical ex-
penses. The $2,000 of medical expenses from this year
can be included on this year's return, which will be the
decedent's final return.
What if you pay medical expenses of a deceased
spouse or dependent? If you paid medical expenses
for your deceased spouse or dependent, include them
as medical expenses on your Form 1040 in the year
paid, whether they are paid before or after the dece-
dent's death. The expenses can be included if the per-
son was your spouse or dependent either at the time
the medical services were provided or at the time you
paid the expenses.
What Medical Expenses Are
Deductible?
Following is a list of items that you can include in fig-
uring your medical expense deduction. The items are
listed in alphabetical order.
Abortion
You can include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for a legal abortion.
Acupuncture
You can include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for acupuncture.
Alcoholism
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for
alcohol addiction. This includes meals and lodging
provided by the center during treatment.
You can also include in medical expenses transpor-
tation costs you pay to attend meetings of an Alcoholics
Anonymous Club in your community if your attendance
is pursuant to medical advice that membership in the
Alcoholics Anonymous Club is necessary for the treat-
ment of a disease involving the excessive use of alco-
holic liquors.
Ambulance
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for ambulance service.
Artificial Limb
You can include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for an artificial limb.
Artificial Teeth
You can include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for artificial teeth.
Autoette
See Wheelchair, later.
Birth Control Pills
You can include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor.
Braille Books and Magazines
You can include in medical expenses the part of the
cost of Braille books and magazines for use by a
visually-impaired person that is more than the cost of
regular printed editions.
Capital Expenses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for special equipment installed in your home, or for im-
provements, if their main purpose is medical care for
you, your spouse, or a dependent. The cost of perma-
nent improvements that increase the value of the
property may be partly included as a medical expense.
The cost of the improvement is reduced by the increase
in the value of the property. The difference is a medical
expense. If the value of the property is not increased
by the improvement, the entire cost is included as a
medical expense.
Certain improvements made to accommodate your
home to your disabled condition, or that of your spouse
or your dependents who live with you, do not usually
increase the value of the home and the cost can be
included in full as medical expenses. These improve-
ments include, but are not limited to, the following items.
 Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.
 Widening doorways at entrances or exits to your
home.
 Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and in-
terior doorways.
 Installing railings, support bars, or other modifica-
tions to bathrooms.
 Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-
ment.
 Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures.
 Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts but
generally not elevators.
 Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and other
warning systems.
Page 4

 Modifying stairways.
 Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether
or not in bathrooms).
 Modifying hardware on doors.
 Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit
doorways.
 Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-
dence.
Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to
a disabled condition are considered medical care. Ad-
ditional costs for personal motives, such as for archi-
tectural or aesthetic reasons, are not medical expenses.
Capital expense work chart.Use the following chart
to figure the amount of your capital expense to include
in your medical expenses.
Example. You have a heart ailment. On your doc-
tor's advice, you install an elevator in your home so that
you will not have to climb stairs. The elevator costs
$8,000. An appraisal shows that the elevator increases
the value of your home by $4,400. You figure your
medical expense like this:
Operation and upkeep. Amounts you pay for opera-
tion and upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical
expenses, as long as the main reason for them is
medical care. This is so even if none or only part of the
original cost of the capital asset qualified as a medical
care expense.
Example. If, in the previous example, the elevator
increased the value of your home by $8,000, you would
have no medical expense for the cost of the elevator.
However, the cost of electricity to operate the elevator
and any costs to maintain it are medical expenses as
long as the medical reason for the elevator exists.
Improvements to property rented by a person with
a disability.Amounts paid by a person with a disability
to buy and install special plumbing fixtures, mainly for
medical reasons, in a rented house are medical ex-
penses.
Example. John has arthritis and a heart condition.
He cannot climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On his
doctor's advice, he installs a bathroom with a shower
stall on the first floor of his two-story rented house. The
landlord did not pay any of the cost of buying and in-
stalling the special plumbing and did not lower the rent.
John can include in medical expenses the entire
amount he paid.
Car
You can include in medical expenses the cost of special
hand controls and other special equipment installed in
a car for the use of a person with a disability.
Special design.You can include in medical expenses
the difference in the cost of a car specially designed to
hold a wheelchair and a regular car.
Cost of operation.You cannot deduct the cost of
operating a specially equipped car, except as discussed
under Transportation, later.
Chiropractor
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to
a chiropractor for medical care.
Christian Science
Practitioner
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to
Christian Science practitioners for medical care.
Contact Lenses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for contact lenses needed for medical reasons. You can
also include the cost of equipment and materials re-
quired for using contact lenses, such as saline solution
and enzyme cleaner. See also Eyeglasses and Laser
Eye Surgery, later.
Crutches
You can include in medical expenses the amount you
pay to buy or rent crutches.
Dental Treatment
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you
pay for dental treatment. This includes fees paid to
dentists for X-rays, fillings, braces, extractions,
dentures, etc.
Drug Addiction
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for
drug addiction. This includes meals and lodging at the
center during treatment.
Drugs
See Medicines, later.
Eyeglasses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical
reasons. You can also include fees paid for eye ex-
aminations.
1. Enter amount you paid for the improvement. $
2. Enter increase in value of your home. If line 2 is equal to
 or more than line 1, you have no deduction. Stop here. If
 not, go on to line 3.
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1. This is your medical expense. $
1. Enter amount you paid for the improvement. $8,000
2. Enter increase in value of your home. If line 2 is equal to
 or more than line 1, you have no deduction. Stop here. If
 not, go on to line 3. 4,400
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1. This is your medical expense.$3,600
Page 5

Fertility Enhancement
You can include in medical expenses the cost of the
following procedures to overcome your inability to have
children.
 Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (including
temporary storage of eggs or sperm).
 Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior
surgery that prevents you from having children.
Founder's Fee
See Lifetime Care—Advance Payments, later.
Guide Dog or
Other Animal
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a
guide dog or other animal to be used by a visually-
impaired or hearing-impaired person. You can also in-
clude the cost of a dog or other animal trained to assist
persons with other physical disabilities. Amounts you
pay for the care of these specially trained animals are
also medical expenses.
Health Institute
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay for
treatment at a health institute only if the treatment is
prescribed by a physician and the physician issues a
statement that the treatment is necessary to alleviate
a physical or mental defect or illness of the individual
receiving the treatment.
Health Maintenance
Organization (HMO)
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
to entitle you, or your spouse (if filing a joint return), or
a dependent to receive medical care from a health
maintenance organization. These amounts are treated
as medical insurance premiums. See Insurance Pre-
miums , later.
Hearing Aids
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a
hearing aid and the batteries you buy to operate it.
Home Care
See Nursing Services, later.
Hospital Services
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar
institution if the main reason for being there is to receive
medical care. This includes amounts paid for meals and
lodging. Also see Lodging, later.
Insurance Premiums
You can include in medical expenses insurance premi-
ums you pay for policies that cover medical care. Poli-
cies can provide payment for:
 Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc.,
 Prescription drugs,
 Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses, or
 Membership in an association that gives cooper-
ative or so-called “free-choice” medical service, or
group hospitalization and clinical care. 
 Qualified long-term care insurance contracts (sub-
ject to additional limitations). See Long-Term Care
Contracts, Qualified in Publication 502.
You cannot deduct insurance premiums paid with
pretax dollars because the premiums are not included
in box 1 of your Form W–2.
If you have a policy that provides more than one kind
of payment, you can include the premiums for the
medical care part of the policy if the charge for the
medical part is reasonable. The cost of the medical part
must be separately stated in the insurance contract or
given to you in a separate statement.
Employer-sponsored health insurance plan. Do not
include in your medical and dental expenses on
Schedule A (Form 1040) any insurance premiums paid
by an employer-sponsored health insurance plan un-
less the premiums are included in box 1 of your Form
W–2. Also, do not include on Schedule A (Form 1040)
any other medical and dental expenses paid by the plan
unless the amount paid is included in box 1 of your
Form W–2.
Flexible spending arrangement. Contributions
made by your employer to provide coverage for qual-
ified long-term care services under a flexible spending
or similar arrangement must be included in your in-
come. This amount will be reported as wages in box
1 of your Form W–2.
Medicare A. If you are covered under social security
(or if you are a government employee who paid Medi-
care tax), you are enrolled in Medicare A. The payroll
tax paid for Medicare A is not a medical expense. If you
are not covered under social security (or were not a
government employee who paid Medicare tax), you can
voluntarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation the
premiums paid for Medicare A can be included as a
medical expense on your tax return.
Medicare B. Medicare B is a supplemental medical
insurance. Premiums you pay for Medicare B are a
medical expense. If you applied for it at age 65 or after
you became disabled, you can deduct the monthly
premiums you paid. If you were over age 65 or disabled
when you first enrolled, check the information you re-
ceived from the Social Security Administration to find
out your premium.
Prepaid insurance premiums. Premiums you pay
before you are age 65 for insurance for medical care
for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents after you
Page 6

reach age 65 are medical care expenses in the year
paid if they are:
1) Payable in equal yearly installments, or more often,
and
2) Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach age
65 (but not for less than 5 years).
Unused sick leave used to pay premiums.You must
include in gross income cash payments you receive at
the time of retirement for unused sick leave. You must
also include in gross income the value of unused sick
leave that, at your option, your employer applies to the
cost of your continuing participation in your employer's
health plan after you retire. You can include this cost
of continuing participation in the health plan as a med-
ical expense.
If you participate in a health plan where your em-
ployer automatically applies the value of unused sick
leave to the cost of your continuing participation in the
health plan (and you do not have the option to receive
cash), you do not include the value of the unused sick
leave in gross income. You cannot include this cost of
continuing participation in that health plan as a medical
expense.
You cannot include premiums you pay for:
 Life insurance policies,
 Policies providing payment for loss of earnings,
 Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.,
 Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount each
week for a stated number of weeks if you are hos-
pitalized for sickness or injury, or
 The part of your car insurance premiums that pro-
vides medical insurance coverage for all persons
injured in or by your car because the part of the
premium for you, your spouse, and your dependents
is not stated separately from the part of the premium
for medical care for others.
Health insurance costs for self-employed persons.
If you were self-employed and had a net profit for the
year, were a general partner (or a limited partner re-
ceiving guaranteed payments), or received wages from
an S corporation in which you were a more than 2%
shareholder (who is treated as a partner), you may be
able to deduct, as an adjustment to income, up to 60%
of the amount paid for health insurance on behalf of
yourself, your spouse, and dependents. You take this
deduction on Form 1040. If you itemize your de-
ductions, include the remaining premiums with all other
medical care expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040),
subject to the 7.5% limit.
You may not take the deduction for any month in
which you were eligible to participate in any subsidized
health plan maintained by your employer or your
spouse's employer.
If you qualify to take the deduction, use the Self-
Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in
the Form 1040 instructions to figure the amount you can
deduct. But, if any of the following applies, do not use
the worksheet.
 You had more than one source of income subject
to self-employment tax. 
 You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or
Form 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
 You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term
care insurance to figure the deduction.
If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form 1040 in-
structions, use the worksheet in Publication 535, Busi-
ness Expenses, to figure your deduction.
Laboratory Fees
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you
pay for laboratory fees that are part of your medical
care.
Laser Eye Surgery
You can include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for surgery to improve vision, such as radial
keratotomy or other laser eye surgery, if it is done
primarily to promote the correct function of the eye.
Lead-Based Paint Removal
You can include in medical expenses the cost of re-
moving lead-based paints from surfaces in your home
to prevent a child who has or has had lead poisoning
from eating the paint. These surfaces must be in poor
repair (peeling or cracking) or within the child's reach.
The cost of repainting the scraped area is not a medical
expense.
If, instead of removing the paint, you cover the area
with wallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital
expenses. See Capital Expenses, earlier. Do not in-
clude the cost of painting the wallboard as a medical
expense.
Learning Disability
You can include in medical expenses tuition fees you
pay to a special school for a child who has severe
learning disabilities caused by mental or physical
impairments, including nervous system disorders. Your
doctor must recommend that the child attend the
school. See Schools and Education, Special, later.
You can also include tutoring fees you pay on your
doctor's recommendation for the child's tutoring by a
teacher who is specially trained and qualified to work
with children who have severe learning disabilities.
Legal Fees
You can include in medical expenses legal fees you
paid that are necessary to authorize treatment for
mental illness. However, you cannot include in medical
expenses fees for the management of a guardianship
estate, fees for conducting the affairs of the person
being treated, or other fees that are not necessary for
medical care.
Page 7

Lifetime Care—Advance Payments
You can include in medical expenses a part of a life-
care fee or “founder's fee” you pay either monthly or
as a lump sum under an agreement with a retirement
home. The part of the payment you include is the
amount properly allocable to medical care. The agree-
ment must require that you pay a specific fee as a
condition for the home's promise to provide lifetime care
that includes medical care.
Dependents with disabilities.You can include in
medical expenses advance payments to a private in-
stitution for lifetime care, treatment, and training of your
physically or mentally impaired child upon your death
or when you become unable to provide care. The pay-
ments must be a condition for the institution's future
acceptance of your child and must not be refundable.
Payments for future medical care.Generally, you
are not allowed to include in medical expenses current
payments for medical care (including medical insur-
ance) to be provided substantially beyond the end of the
year. This rule does not apply in situations where the
future care is purchased in connection with obtaining
lifetime care of the type described earlier.
Lodging
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals
and lodging at a hospital or similar institution if your
main reason for being there is to receive medical care.
See Nursing Home, later.
You may be able to include in medical expenses the
cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar in-
stitution. You can include the cost of such lodging while
away from home if you meet all of the following re-
quirements.
1) The lodging is primarily for and essential to medical
care.
2) The medical care is provided by a doctor in a li-
censed hospital or in a medical care facility related
to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital.
3) The lodging is not lavish or extravagant under the
circumstances.
4) There is no significant element of personal pleas-
ure, recreation, or vacation in the travel away from
home.
The amount you include in medical expenses for
lodging cannot be more than $50 for each night for each
person. Lodging is included for a person for whom
transportation expenses are a medical expense be-
cause that person is traveling with the person receiving
the medical care. For example, if a parent is traveling
with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be included
as a medical expense for lodging. Meals are not in-
cluded.
Do not include the cost of your lodging while you
are away from home for medical treatment if you do not
receive that treatment from a doctor in a licensed hos-
pital or in a medical care facility related to, or the
equivalent of, a licensed hospital or if that lodging is not
primarily for or essential to the medical care you are
receiving.
Long-Term Care Contracts, Qualified
A qualified long-term care insurance is an insurance
contract that provides only coverage of qualified long-
term care services. The contract must:
1) Be guaranteed renewable,
2) Not provide for a cash surrender value or other
money that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or
borrowed,
3) Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the
death of the insured or complete surrender or can-
cellation of the contract, and dividends under the
contract must be used only to reduce future premi-
ums or increase future benefits, and
4) Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurred
for services or items that would be reimbursed un-
der Medicare, except where Medicare is a second-
ary payer, or the contract makes per diem or other
periodic payments without regard to expenses.
Qualified Long-Term Care Services
Qualified long-term care services are:
1) Necessary diagnostic, preventative, therapeutic,
curing, treating, mitigating, rehabilitative services,
and maintenance and personal care services, and
2) Required by a chronically ill individual and provided
pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by a licensed
health care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual.You are chronically ill if you
have been certified by a licensed health care practi-
tioner within the previous 12 months as one of the fol-
lowing:
1) You are unable for at least 90 days, to perform at
least two activities of daily living without substantial
assistance from another individual, due to loss of
functional capacity. Activities of daily living are
eating, toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and
continence, or
2) You require substantial supervision to be protected
from threats to health and safety due to severe
cognitive impairment.
Periodic Payments Not Taxed
You can generally exclude from gross income benefits
you receive under a per diem type qualified long-term
care insurance contract, subject to a limit of $190 a day
($69,540 a year) for 2000. The $190 is indexed for in-
flation.
Itemized deductions.If you itemize deductions, you
can include the following as medical expenses on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
1) Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term
care services.
Page 8

2) Qualified long-term care premiums up to the
amounts shown below.
a) Age 40 or under – $220.
b) Age 41 to 50 – $410.
c) Age 51 to 60 – $820.
d) Age 61 to 70 – $2,200.
e) Age 71 or over – $2,750.
TIP
The limit on premiums is for each person.
Meals
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals
at a hospital or similar institution if the main purpose for
being there is to get medical care.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
meals that are not part of inpatient care.
Medical Conferences
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for
admission and transportation to a medical conference
if the medical conference concerns the chronic illness
of you, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs of
the medical conference must be primarily for and nec-
essary to the medical care of you, your spouse, or your
dependent. You must spend the majority of your time
at the conference attending sessions on medical infor-
mation.
CAUTION
!
The cost of meals and lodging while attending
the conference is not deductible as a medical
expense.
Medical Information Plan
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid to
a plan that keeps your medical information so that it can
be retrieved from a computer data bank for your med-
ical care.
Medical Services
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for legal medical services provided by:
 Physicians,
 Surgeons,
 Specialists, or
 Other medical practitioners.
Medicines
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for prescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug
is one that requires a prescription by a doctor for its use
by an individual. You can also include amounts you pay
for insulin. Except for insulin, you cannot include in
medical expenses amounts you pay for a drug that is
not prescribed.
Controlled substances.You cannot include in med-
ical expenses amounts you pay for controlled sub-
stances (such as marijuana, laetrile, etc.), in violation
of federal law.
Mentally Retarded,
Special Home for
You can include in medical expenses the cost of
keeping a mentally retarded person in a special home,
not the home of a relative, on the recommendation of
a psychiatrist to help the person adjust from life in a
mental hospital to community living.
Nursing Home
You can include in medical expenses the cost of med-
ical care in a nursing home or home for the aged for
yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. This in-
cludes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if the
main reason for being there is to get medical care.
Do not include the cost of meals and lodging if the
reason for being in the home is personal. You can,
however, include in medical expenses the part of the
cost that is for medical or nursing care.
Nursing Services
You can include in medical expenses wages and other
amounts you pay for nursing services. Services need
not be performed by a nurse as long as the services
are of a kind generally performed by a nurse. This in-
cludes services connected with caring for the patient's
condition, such as giving medication or changing
dressings, as well as bathing and grooming the patient.
These services can be provided in your home or an-
other care facility.
Generally, only the amount spent for nursing ser-
vices is a medical expense. If the attendant also pro-
vides personal and household services, these amounts
must be divided between the time spent performing
household and personal services and the time spent for
nursing services. However, certain maintenance or
personal care services provided for qualified long-term
care can be included in medical expenses. See Long-
Term Care Contracts, Qualified, earlier. Additionally,
certain expenses for household services or for the care
of a qualifying individual incurred to allow you to work
may qualify for the child and dependent care credit. See
Publication 503, Child and Dependent Care Expenses.
You can also include in medical expenses part of the
amount you pay for that attendant's meals. Divide the
food expense among the household members to find
the cost of the attendant's food. Then apportion that
cost in the same manner, as in the preceding para-
graph. If you had to pay additional amounts for house-
hold upkeep because of the attendant, you can include
the extra amounts with your medical expenses. This
includes extra rent or utilities you pay because you
moved to a larger apartment to provide space for the
attendant.
Employment taxes. You can include as a medical
expense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and
state employment taxes you pay for a nurse, attendant,
Page 9

or other person who provides medical care. For infor-
mation on employment tax responsibilities of household
employers, see Publication 926, Household Employer's
Tax Guide.
Healthy baby.You cannot include the cost of nursing
services for a normal, healthy baby. But you may be
able to take a credit for child care expenses. See Pub-
lication 503 for more information. You also may be able
to take the child tax credit. See the instructions in your
tax package.
Operations
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for legal operations that are not for unnecessary cos-
metic surgery. See Cosmetic Surgery under What Ex-
penses Are Not Deductible, later.
Optometrist
See Eyeglasses, earlier.
Organ Donors
See Transplants, later.
Osteopath
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
to an osteopath for medical care.
Oxygen
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for oxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathing
problems caused by a medical condition.
Prosthesis
See Artificial Limb, earlier.
Psychiatric Care
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for psychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting
a mentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medical
center where the dependent receives medical care. See
Psychoanalysis, next, and Transportation, later.
Psychoanalysis
You can include in medical expenses payments for
psychoanalysis. However, you cannot include pay-
ments for psychoanalysis that you must get as a part
of your training to be a psychoanalyst.
Psychologist
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
to a psychologist for medical care.
Schools and Education, Special
You can include in medical expenses payments to a
special school for a mentally impaired or physically
disabled person if the main reason for using the school
is its resources for relieving the disability. You can in-
clude, for example, the cost of:
 Teaching Braille to a visually impaired child,
 Teaching lip reading to a hearing impaired child, or
 Giving remedial language training to correct a con-
dition caused by a birth defect.
The cost of meals, lodging, and ordinary education
supplied by a special school can be included in medical
expenses only if the main reason for the child's being
there is the resources the school has for relieving the
mental or physical disability.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
sending a problem child to a special school for benefits
the child may get from the course of study and the
disciplinary methods.
Sterilization
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a legal
sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a
person unable to have children).
Stop-Smoking Programs
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for a program to stop smoking. If you paid for a stop-
smoking program in 1997 or 1998, you may be able to
file an amended return on Form 1040X to include in
medical expenses the amounts you paid for that stop-
smoking program. However, you cannot include in
medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that do
not require a prescription, such as nicotine gum or
patches, that are designed to help stop smoking.
Surgery
See Operations, earlier.
Telephone
You can include in medical expenses the cost and re-
pair of special telephone equipment that lets a
hearing-impaired person communicate over a regular
telephone.
Television
You can include in medical expenses the cost of
equipment that displays the audio part of television
programs as subtitles for hearing-impaired persons.
This may be the cost of an adapter that attaches to a
regular set. It also may be the cost of a specially
equipped television that exceeds the cost of the same
model regular television set.
Therapy
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for therapy you receive as medical treatment.
“Patterning” exercises.You can include in medical
expenses amounts you pay to an individual for giving
“patterning” exercises to a mentally retarded child.
These exercises consist mainly of coordinated physical
manipulation of the child's arms and legs to imitate
crawling and other normal movements.
Page 10

Transplants
You can include in medical expenses payments you
make for surgical, hospital, laboratory, and transporta-
tion expenses for a donor or a possible donor of a kid-
ney or other organ. You cannot include expenses if you
did not pay for them.
A donor or possible donor can include surgical,
hospital, laboratory, and transportation expenses in
medical expenses only if he or she pays for them.
Transportation
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for
transportation primarily for, and essential to, medical
care.
You can include:
 Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambulance ser-
vice,
 Transportation expenses of a parent who must go
with a child who needs medical care,
 Transportation expenses of a nurse or other person
who can give injections, medications, or other
treatment required by a patient who is traveling to
get medical care and is unable to travel alone, and
 Transportation expenses for regular visits to see a
mentally ill dependent, if these visits are recom-
mended as a part of treatment.
You cannot include:
 Transportation expenses to and from work, even if
your condition requires an unusual means of trans-
portation, or
 Transportation expenses if, for nonmedical reasons
only, you choose to travel to another city, such as
a resort area, for an operation or other medical care
prescribed by your doctor.
Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket ex-
penses for your car, such as gas and oil, when you use
your car for medical reasons. You cannot include de-
preciation, insurance, general repair, or maintenance
expenses.
If you do not want to use your actual expenses, you
can use a standard rate of 10 cents a mile for use of
your car for medical reasons.
You can also include the cost of parking fees  and
tolls. You can add these fees and tolls to your medical
expenses whether you use actual expenses or use the
standard mileage rate.
Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for medical
reasons during the year. He spent $200 for gas, $5 for
oil, and $50 for tolls and parking. He wants to figure the
amount he can include in medical expenses both ways
to see which gives him the greater deduction.
He figures the actual expenses first. He adds the
$200 for gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 for tolls and
parking for a total of $255.
He then figures the standard mileage amount. He
multiplies the 2,800 miles by 10 cents a mile for a total
of $280. He then adds the $50 tolls and parking for a
total of $330.
Bill includes the $330 of car expenses with his other
medical expenses for the year because the $330 is
more than the $255 he figured using actual expenses.
Trips
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for transportation to another city if the trip is primarily
for, and essential to, receiving medical services. You
may be able to include up to $50 per night for lodging.
See Lodging, earlier.
You cannot include in medical expenses a trip or
vacation taken merely for a change in environment,
improvement of morale, or general improvement of
health, even if you make the trip on the advice of a
doctor.
Tuition
You can include in medical expenses charges for
medical care included in the tuition of a college or pri-
vate school, if the charges are separately stated in the
bill or given to you by the school. See Learning Disa-
bility, earlier, and Schools and Education, Special,
earlier.
Vasectomy
You can include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for a vasectomy.
Weight-Loss Program
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a
weight-loss program undertaken at a physician's direc-
tion to treat an existing disease (such as heart disease).
But you cannot include the cost of a weight-loss pro-
gram if the purpose of the weight control is to maintain
your general good health.
Wheelchair
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for an autoette or a wheelchair used mainly for the relief
of sickness or disability, and not just to provide trans-
portation to and from work. The cost of operating and
keeping up the autoette or wheelchair is also a medical
expense.
Page 11

X-ray Fees
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for X-rays that you get for medical reasons.
What Expenses Are Not
Deductible?
Following is a list of some items that you cannot in-
clude in figuring your medical expense deduction. The
items are listed in alphabetical order.
Baby Sitting, Child Care, and
Nursing Services for a Normal,
Healthy Baby
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
pay for the care of your children even if the expenses
enable you to get medical or dental treatment. Also, any
expense allowed as a child care credit cannot be
treated as an expense paid for medical care. See also
Healthy baby under Nursing Services, earlier.
Controlled Substances
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
pay for controlled substances (such as marijuana,
laetrile, etc.), in violation of federal law.
Cosmetic Surgery
Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses the
amount you pay for unnecessary cosmetic surgery. This
applies to any procedure that is directed at improving
the patient's appearance and does not meaningfully
promote the proper function of the body or prevent or
treat illness or disease. Procedures such as face lifts,
hair transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), and
liposuction generally are not deductible.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve
a deformity arising from, or directly related to, a con-
genital abnormality, a personal injury resulting from an
accident or trauma, or a disfiguring disease.
Dancing Lessons
You cannot include the cost of dancing lessons, swim-
ming lessons, etc., even if they are recommended by
a doctor, if they are only for the improvement of general
health.
Diaper Service
You cannot include in medical expenses the amount
you pay for diapers or diaper services, unless they are
needed to relieve the effects of a particular disease.
Electrolysis or
Hair Removal
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Funeral Expenses
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
pay for funerals. However, funeral expenses may be
deductible on the decedent's federal estate tax return.
Hair Transplant
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Health Club Dues
You cannot include in medical expenses health club
dues, YMCA dues, or amounts paid for steam baths for
your general health or to relieve physical or mental
discomfort not related to a particular medical condition.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
membership in any club organized for business, pleas-
ure, recreation, or other social purpose.
Household Help
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
household help, even if such help is recommended by
a doctor. This is a personal expense that is not
deductible. However, you may be able to include certain
expenses paid to a person providing nursing-type ser-
vices. Also, certain maintenance or personal care ser-
vices provided for qualified long-term care can be in-
cluded in medical expenses.
Illegal Operations and Treatments
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
pay for illegal operations, treatments, or controlled
substances whether rendered or prescribed by licensed
or unlicensed practitioners.
Insurance Premiums for Certain
Types of Policies
See Insurance Premiums under What Medical Ex-
penses Are Deductible, earlier.
Maternity Clothes
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
pay for maternity clothes.
Medical Savings Accounts
You cannot deduct as a qualified medical expense
amounts you contribute to a medical savings account
(MSA). You cannot deduct qualified medical expenses
as an itemized deduction if you pay for them with a
tax-free distribution from your MSA. You also cannot
use other funds equal to the amount of the distribution
and claim a deduction. For more information on MSAs,
see Publication 969, Medical Savings Accounts
(MSAs).
Page 12

Nonprescription Drugs and
Medicines
Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical ex-
penses amounts you pay for a drug that is not pre-
scribed.
Nutritional Supplements
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
nutritional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements,
“natural medicines”, etc., unless you can only obtain
them legally with a physician's prescription.
Personal Use Items
You cannot include in medical expenses an item ordi-
narily used for personal, living, or family purposes un-
less it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate a physical
or mental defect or illness. For example, the cost of a
wig purchased upon the advice of a physician for the
mental health of a patient who has lost all of his or her
hair from disease can be included with medical ex-
penses.
Where an item purchased in a special form primarily
to alleviate a physical defect is one that in normal form
is ordinarily used for personal, living, or family pur-
poses, the excess of the cost of the special form over
the cost of the normal form is a medical expense (see
Braille Books and Magazines under What Medical Ex-
penses Are Deductible, earlier).
Swimming Lessons
See Dancing Lessons, earlier.
Weight-Loss Program
You cannot include the cost of a weight-loss program
in medical expenses if the purpose of the weight control
is to maintain your general good health. But you can
include the cost of a weight-loss program undertaken
at a physician's direction to treat an existing disease
(such as heart disease).
How Do You Deduct
Impairment-Related Work
Expenses?
If you are disabled and have expenses which are nec-
essary for you to be able to work (impairment-related
work expenses), take a business deduction for these
expenses, rather than a medical deduction. You are
disabled if you have:
 A physical or mental disability (for example,
blindness or deafness) that functionally limits your
being employed, or
 A physical or mental impairment (for example, a
sight or hearing impairment) that substantially limits
one or more of your major life activities, such as
performing manual tasks, walking, speaking,
breathing, learning, or working.
Deduct impairment-related expenses as business
expenses if they are:
 Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily,
 For goods and services not required or used, other
than incidentally, in your personal activities, and
 Not specifically covered under other income tax
laws.
If you are self-employed, deduct the business ex-
penses on the appropriate form (Schedule C, C–EZ,
E, or F) used to report your business income and ex-
penses. If you are an employee with impairment-related
work expenses, complete Form 2106, Employee Busi-
ness Expenses, or Form 2106–EZ, Unreimbursed Em-
ployee Business Expenses. Your impairment-related
work expenses are not subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to other
employee business expenses.
Example. You are blind. You must use a reader to
do your work. You use the reader both during your
regular working hours at your place of work and outside
your regular working hours away from your place of
work. The reader's services are only for your work. You
can deduct your expenses for the reader as business
expenses.
How Do You Treat
Reimbursements? 
You can deduct as medical expenses only those
amounts paid during the taxable year for which you
received no insurance or other reimbursement.
Insurance Reimbursement
You must reduce your total medical expenses for the
year by all reimbursements for medical expenses that
you receive from insurance or other sources during the
year. This includes payments from Medicare.
Generally, you do not reduce medical expenses by
payments you receive for:
 Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or
function of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing,
etc.) or disfigurement that is based on the nature
of the injury without regard to the amount of time lost
from work,
 Loss of earnings, or
 Damages for personal injury or sickness.
You must, however, reduce your medical expenses
by any part of these payments that is designated for
medical costs. See How Do You Figure Your
Deduction, later.
What If Your Insurance Reimbursement Is
More Than Your Medical Expenses?
If you are reimbursed more than your medical ex-
penses, you may have to include the excess in income.
Page 13

Premiums paid by you.If you pay the entire premium
for your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan
similar to medical insurance, and your insurance pay-
ments or other reimbursements are more than your total
medical expenses for the year, you have excess re-
imbursement . Generally, you do not include the ex-
cess reimbursement in your gross income. However,
gross income does include total payments in excess
of the per diem limit for qualified long-term care insur-
ance. See Periodic Payments Not Taxed, under What
Medical Expenses Are Deductible, earlier, for the per
diem amounts.
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this publication.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
Premiums paid by you and your employer.If both
you and your employer contribute to your medical in-
surance plan and your employer's contributions are not
included in your gross income, you must include in your
gross income the part of your excess reimbursement
that is from your employer's contribution.
Example. You are covered by your employer's
medical insurance policy. The annual premium is
$2,000. Your employer pays $600 of that amount and
the balance of $1,400 is taken out of your wages. The
part of any excess reimbursement you receive under
the policy that is from your employer's contributions is
figured like this:
You must include in your gross income 30% of any
excess reimbursement you received for medical ex-
penses under the policy.
Premiums paid by your employer.If your employer
or your former employer pays the total cost of your
medical insurance plan and your employer's contribu-
tions are not included in your income, you must report
all of your excess reimbursement as other income.
More than one policy.If you are covered under more
than one policy, the costs of which are paid by both you
and your employer, you must first divide the medical
expense among the policies to figure the excess re-
imbursement from each policy. Then divide the policy
costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement
that is from your employer's contribution.
Example. You are covered by your employer's
health insurance policy. The annual premium is $1,200.
Your employer pays $300, and the balance of $900 is
deducted from your wages. You also paid the entire
premium ($250) for a personal health insurance policy.
During the year, you paid medical expenses of
$3,600. In the same year, you were reimbursed $2,500
under your employer's policy and $1,500 under your
personal policy.
You figure the part of the excess reimbursement that
is from your employer's contribution like this:
What If You Receive Insurance
Reimbursement in a Later Year?
If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical ex-
penses you deducted in an earlier year, you must report
the reimbursement as income up to the amount you
previously deducted as medical expenses. However,
do not report as income the amount of reimbursement
you received up to the amount of your medical de-
ductions that did not reduce your tax for the earlier year.
Total annual cost of policy $2,000
Amount paid by employer 600
Employer's contribution in relation to the total annual cost of the
policy
($600 ÷ $2,000) 30%
Step 1.
Reimbursement from employer's policy ................................................ $2,500
Reimbursement from your policy ........................................................... 1,500
Total reimbursement ...........................................................................$4,000
Amount of medical expenses from your policy [($1,500 ÷ $4,000) ×
$3,600 total medical expenses] ............................................................. $1,350
Amount of medical expenses from your employer's policy [($2,500 ÷
$4,000) × $3,600 total medical expenses] ............................................ 2,250
Total medical expenses ......................................................................$3,600
Excess reimbursement from your employer's policy ($2,500 −
$2,250) ................................................................................................... $250
Step 2.
Because both you and your employer contributed to the cost of this policy, you
must divide the cost to determine the excess reimbursement from your em-
ployer's contribution.
Employer's contribution in relation to the annual cost of the policy
($300 ÷ $1,200) ..................................................................................... 25%
Amount to report as other income on line 21, Form 1040 (25% ×
$250) ......................................................................................................$62.50
Page 14

Example. You are single. Your adjusted gross in-
come last year was $20,000. During that year you paid
medical insurance premiums of $500 and other medical
expenses of $1,900. You deducted $900, figured like
this:
For more information about the recovery of an
amount that you claimed as an itemized deduction in
an earlier year, see Recoveries in Publication 525.
What If You Are Reimbursed for Medical
Expenses You Did Not Deduct?
If you did not deduct a medical expense in the year you
paid it because your medical expenses were not more
than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, or because
you did not itemize deductions, do not include in income
the reimbursement for this expense that you receive in
a later year. However, if the reimbursement is more
than the expense, see What If Your Insurance Re-
imbursement Is More Than Your Medical Expenses,
earlier.
Example. Last year, you had $500 of medical ex-
penses. You cannot deduct the $500 because it is less
than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. If, in a later
year, you are reimbursed for any of the $500 of medical
expenses, you do not include that amount in your gross
income.
How Do You Report the
Deduction on Your Tax
Return?
Once you have determined which medical care ex-
penses you can include when figuring your deduction,
you must report the deduction on your tax return.
What Tax Form Do You Use?
You report your medical expense deduction on
Schedule A , Form 1040. You cannot claim medical
expenses on Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. An ex-
ample of a filled-in medical and dental expense part of
Schedule A is shown on page 17.
How Do You Figure Your Deduction?
To figure your medical and dental expense deduction,
complete lines 1–4 of Schedule A, Form 1040, as fol-
lows:
Line 1. Enter the amount you paid for medical ex-
penses after reducing the amount by payments you
received from insurance and other sources.
Line 2. Enter your adjusted gross income from Form
1040, line 34.
Line 3. Multiply the amount on line 2 (adjusted gross
income) by 7.5% (.075) and enter the result.
Line 4.If line 3 is more than line 1, enter zero. Other-
wise, subtract the amount on line 3 from the amount
on line 1. This is your deduction for medical and dental
expenses.
Example. Bill and Helen Jones belong to a group
medical plan and part of their insurance is paid by Bill's
employer. They file a joint return, and their adjusted
gross income is $33,004. The following medical ex-
penses Bill and Helen paid this year have been reduced
by payments they received from the insurance com-
pany.
1) For themselves, Bill and Helen paid $375 for pre-
scription medicines and drugs, $337 for hospital
bills, $439 for doctor bills, $295 for hospitalization
insurance, $380 for medical and surgical insurance,
and $33 for transportation for medical treatment,
which totals $1,859.
2) For Grace Taylor (Helen's dependent mother), they
paid $300 for doctors, $300 for insulin, and $175 for
eyeglasses, which totals $775.
3) For Betty Jones (Bill's dependent sister), they paid
$450 for doctors and $350 for prescription medi-
cines and drugs, which totals $800.
Bill and Helen add all their medical and dental ex-
penses together ($1,859 + $775 + $800 = $3,434).
They figure their deduction on the medical and dental
Step 1.
Medical expenses $1,900
Insurance premiums 500
Total $2,400
Minus 7.5% (.075) of adjusted gross income 1,500
Total medical expense deduction $900
Step 2.
Last year, your itemized deductions, including medical expenses, were $5,100.
This year, you collected $600 from your insurance policy for part of last year's
medical expenses. If you had collected it last year, your deduction for medical
expenses would have been only $300, figured like this:
Medical expenses $1,900
Insurance premiums 500
Total $2,400
Minus: insurance payments 600
Balance $1,800
Minus: 7.5% (.075) of adjusted gross income 1,500
Total medical expense deduction $300
Step 3.
Your $900 medical expense deduction last year reduced your income tax in that
year. You must include the $600 of insurance reimbursement in income this
year. Report the $600 on line 21 of Form 1040.
Page 15

expenses part of Schedule A, Form 1040, as shown
on the next page.
RECORDS
Recordkeeping. For each medical expense,
you must keep a record of the name and ad-
dress of each person you paid, and the amount
and date of the payment.
When requested by the IRS, you must be able to
substantiate your medical deduction with a statement
or itemized invoice from the person or entity you paid
showing the nature of the expense, for whom it was
incurred, the amount paid, the date of payment, and
any other information the IRS may deem necessary.
Do not send these records with your return.
Sale of Medical Property
You may have a taxable gain if you sell medical
equipment or property, the cost of which you deducted
as a medical expense on your tax return for a previous
year. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling price
that is more than the equipment's adjusted basis. The
adjusted basis is the portion of the equipment's cost
that was not deductible because of the 7.5% limit (5%
for 1983–1986 and 3% before 1983) used to compute
the medical deduction. Use the formula below (with
amounts from the return on which the cost of the
equipment was deducted) to figure the adjusted basis.
7.5% (5% for
1983–1986, 3%
before 1983) of
Adjusted Gross
Income
X
Cost of
Equipment
Total Medical
Expenses
= Adjusted
Basis
If your allowable itemized deductions were more than
your adjusted gross income for the year the cost of the
equipment was deducted, the adjusted basis of the
equipment is increased by a portion of the surplus
itemized deductions. Use the formula below to figure
the increase.
Surplus Itemized
Deductions X
Cost of
Equipment—
Adjusted Basis
Total Itemized
Deductions
= Increase
Add the increase to the adjusted basis. The result is
the new adjusted basis for purposes of computing the
taxable gain. See chapter 3 in Publication 544, Sales
and Other Dispositions of Assets, for information on the
tax treatment of the gain.
Example of sale of medical property.You have
a heart condition and difficulty breathing. Your doctor
prescribed oxygen equipment to help you breathe. Last
year, you bought the oxygen equipment for $3,000. You
itemized deductions and included it in your medical
expense deduction.
Last year you also paid $750 for deductible medical
services and $6,400 for other itemized deductions. Your
adjusted gross income was $5,000.
Taking into account the 7.5% limit on medical ex-
penses, your allowable itemized deductions totaled
$9,775, figured as follows:
There was a $4,775 surplus of allowable itemized
deductions over adjusted gross income ($9,775 −
$5,000 = $4,775).
Allocating the nondeductible limit.To determine
the part of the 7.5% limit that is allocable to the oxygen
equipment, multiply the limit, $375, by the ratio of cost
of the equipment, $3,000, to the total medical ex-
penses, $3,750 [$375 × ($3,000 ÷ $3,750) = $300].
Your basis in the equipment is this $300 portion of the
cost of the equipment that is nondeductible because
of the 7.5% limit.
Allocating surplus deductions. To determine the
part of the surplus itemized deductions that is allocable
to the oxygen equipment, multiply the total available
surplus deductions, $4,775, by the ratio of the deduct-
ible portion of the amount paid for the oxygen equip-
ment, $2,700 ($3,000 cost of equipment minus $300
attributable to the 7.5% limit) to the total available de-
ductions, $9,775. Your adjusted basis in the oxygen
equipment includes this $1,319 [$4,775 × ($2,700 ÷
$9,775) = $1,319]. This amount is the portion of surplus
deductions allocable to the oxygen equipment. Your
total adjusted basis in the equipment is $1,619 ($300
+ $1,319).
Determining gain. This year, you sold the oxygen
equipment for $2,000. You realized a gain of $381
($2,000 − $1,619). This amount represents the recovery
of an amount previously deducted for federal income
tax purposes and is taxable as ordinary income.
Settlement of Damage Suit
If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal
injury suit, the part that is for medical expenses de-
ducted in an earlier year is included in income in the
later year if your medical deduction in the earlier year
reduced your income tax in that year. See What If You
Receive Insurance Reimbursement in a Later Year,
discussed earlier.
Future medical expenses.If you receive an amount
in settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries that
is properly allocable or determined to be for future
medical expenses, you must reduce any medical ex-
penses for these injuries until the amount you received
has been completely used.
Oxygen equipment $3,000
Medical services 750
Total medical expenses $3,750
Limit (7.5% of adjusted
gross income of $5,000) −375
Allowable medical
expense deduction $3,375
Other itemized deductions 6,400
Allowable itemized deductions $9,775
Page 16

Bill and Helen Jones 000 00 0000
3,434
2,475
33,004
959
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A and B (Form 1040).
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and 
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-1)1
22
3Multiply line 2 above by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 34
(99)
1999
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get more
information from the IRS in several ways. By selecting
the method that is best for you, you will have quick and
easy access to tax help.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. If you have
attempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully,
you should contact your Taxpayer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your interests
and concerns within the IRS by protecting your rights
and resolving problems that have not been fixed
through normal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates
cannot change the tax law or make a technical tax de-
cision, they can clear up problems that resulted from
previous contacts and ensure that your case is given
a complete and impartial review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate at 1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office in
your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see Publication 1546, The
Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.
Free tax services. To find out what services are
available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free Tax Ser-
vices. It contains a list of free tax publications and an
index of tax topics. It also describes other free tax in-
formation services, including tax education and assist-
ance programs and a list of TeleTax topics.
Personal computer. With your personal com-
puter and modem, you can access the IRS on
the Internet at www.irs.gov. While visiting our
web site, you can select:
 Frequently Asked Tax Questions (located under
Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find answers to questions
you may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download forms and publications
or search for forms and publications by topic or
keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under Forms & Pubs) to enter
information while the form is displayed and then
print the completed form.
 Tax Info For You to view Internal Revenue Bulletins
published in the last few years.
 Tax Regs in English to search regulations and the
Internal Revenue Code (under United States Code
(USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS Local News Net (both lo-
cated under Tax Info For Business) to receive our
electronic newsletters on hot tax issues and news.
 Small Business Corner (located under Tax Info For
Business) to get information on starting and oper-
ating a small business.
You can also reach us with your computer using File
Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone attached to
your fax machine, you can receive forms and
instructions by calling 703–368–9694. Follow
the directions from the prompts. When you order forms,
enter the catalog number for the form you need. The
items you request will be faxed to you.
Phone. Many services are available by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call 
1–800–829–3676 to order current and prior year
forms, instructions, and publications.
 Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax
questions at 1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to
TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–4059 to ask
tax questions or to order forms and publications.
 TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to listen to
pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services.
To ensure that IRS representatives give accurate,
courteous, and professional answers, we evaluate the
quality of our telephone services in several ways.
Page 17

 A second IRS representative sometimes monitors
live telephone calls. That person only evaluates the
IRS assistor and does not keep a record of any
taxpayer's name or tax identification number.
 We sometimes record telephone calls to evaluate
IRS assistors objectively. We hold these recordings
no longer than one week and use them only to
measure the quality of assistance.
 We value our customers' opinions. Throughout this
year, we will be surveying our customers for their
opinions on our service.
Walk-in. You can walk in to many post offices,
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain
forms, instructions, and publications. Also,
some libraries and IRS offices have:
 An extensive collection of products available to print
from a CD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible
proofs.
 The Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal
Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-
able for research purposes.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, in-
structions, and publications to the Distribution
Center nearest to you and receive a response
within 10 workdays after your request is received. Find
the address that applies to your part of the country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and foreign addresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publication 1796,
Federal Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain:
 Current tax forms, instructions, and publications.
 Prior-year tax forms, instructions, and publications.
 Popular tax forms which may be filled in electron-
ically, printed out for submission, and saved for
recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
The CD-ROM can be purchased from National
Technical Information Service (NTIS) by calling
1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet at
www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release is available in
mid-December and the final release is available in late
January.
IRS Publication 3207, The Business Resource
Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that contains infor-
mation important to small businesses. It is available in
mid-February. You can get one free copy by calling
1–800–829–3676.
Page 18

Index
A
 Abortion ................................... 4
 Acupuncture ............................ 4
Adopted child medical expense 3
 AGI limitation ........................... 2
 Alcoholism ............................... 4
 Ambulance ............................... 4
 Artificial limb ............................ 4
 Artificial teeth ........................... 4
Assistance (See Tax help)           
Autoette (See Wheelchair)           
B
 Baby sitting ............................ 12
Birth control pills ...................... 4
Braille books and magazines .. 4
C
 Capital expenses ..................... 4
 Car ........................................... 5
 Car expenses:
 Medical expense ................ 11
 Child care .............................. 12
 Chiropractor ............................. 5
Christian Science practitioner . 5
 Chronically ill ........................... 8
 Community property ................ 2
 Contact lenses ......................... 5
 Controlled substance ......... 9, 12
 Cosmetic surgery .................. 12
 Crutches .................................. 5
D
 Dancing lessons .................... 12
Decedent medical expenses 2, 3
 Dental treatment ...................... 5
Dependent's medical expenses 3
 Diaper service ....................... 12
 Drug addiction ......................... 5
Drugs (See Medicines)                
E
Electrolysis (See Cosmetic
surgery)                                     
Employer-sponsored health in-
surance plan ........................ 6
 Employment taxes ................... 9
 Eyeglasses .............................. 5
F
 Fertility enhancement .............. 6
Flexible spending arrangement 6
 Founder's fee .......................... 6
Free tax services ................... 17
 Funeral expenses .................. 12
G
 Guide dog ................................ 6
H
Hair removal (See Cosmetic
surgery)                                     
Hair transplant (See Cosmetic
surgery)                                     
Health club dues ................... 12
 Health institute ......................... 6
 Health maintenance organization
(HMO) .................................. 6
 Hearing aid .............................. 6
Home care (See Nursing services)
Hospital services (See also
Lodging) ................................. 6
 Household help ..................... 12
How to figure your deduction 15
I
Illegal operations and treat-
ments ................................. 12
 Impairment-related expenses 13
 Insurance premiums:
 Long-term care .................... 6
 Insurance reimbursement 13, 15
 Itemized deductions ................ 8
L
 Laboratory fees ....................... 7
Lead-based paint removal ....... 7
 Learning disability .................... 7
 Legal fees ................................ 7
 Lifetime care ............................ 8
 Lodging .................................... 8
Long-term care contracts ........ 8
M
 Maternity clothes ................... 12
 Meals ....................................... 9
Medical information plan ......... 9
Medical savings accounts ..... 12
 Medicare .................................. 6
 Medicines ................................ 9
Mentally retarded, home for .... 9
More information (See Tax help)
N
 Nursing home .......................... 9
Nursing services (See also
Long - term care
contracts) ......................... 9, 12
 Nutritional supplements ......... 13
O
 Operations ............................. 10
Optometrist (See Eyeglasses)     
Organ donors (See Transplants)
 Osteopath .............................. 10
 Oxygen .................................. 10
P
Parking fees and tolls:
 Medical ............................... 11
 Patterning exercises .............. 10
Personal use items ................ 13
Prosthesis (See Artificial limb)     
Psychiatric care (See also
Psychoanalysis) ................... 10
 Psychoanalysis ...................... 10
 Psychologist .......................... 10
Publications (See Tax help)         
S
Sale of medical property ....... 16
Schools and education,
special ................................ 10
 Self-employed persons ............ 7
 Sick leave ................................ 7
Spouse's medical expenses .... 3
 Sterilization ............................ 10
 Stop-smoking program .......... 10
Surgery (See Operations)            
Swimming lessons (See Dancing
lessons)                           
T
 Tax form .................................. 2
 Form 1040X ......................... 2
 Tax help ................................. 17
 Taxpayer Advocate ............... 17
 Telephone .............................. 10
 Television .............................. 10
 Therapy ................................. 10
 Transplants ............................ 11
 Transportation ....................... 11
Trips (See also Lodging)......... 11
 TTY/TDD information ............ 17
 Tuition .................................... 11
V
 Vasectomy ............................. 11
W
 Weight-loss program ....... 11, 13
 Wheelchair ............................. 11
X
 X-ray fees .............................. 12
/H18549
Page 19

Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2001
Highlights of 2000 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
and Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other
Information for Members of the
Clergy and Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Scholarships and Fellowships
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
(Business and Nonbusiness)
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With
Income From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care
Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) (Including Roth IRAs and
Education IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and Power
of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of
the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaraci ón de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
508
514
516
517
519
520
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
534
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax,
phone, and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration
of Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes Attributable to IRAs, Other
Qualified Retirement Plans, Annuities,
Modified Endowment Contracts, and MSAs
Alternative Minimum Tax –Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Higher Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Page 20