Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -35% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P463.cvt (28-May-2003) (Init. & date)
D:\Users\DXWolf00\documents\Epicfiles\2002 Publication SGML
Filename: Files\Publication 463\02p463_coe.sgm
Page 1 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
Important Changes................ 1Department
of the Important Reminders.............. 2Travel,Treasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Entertainment, 1. Travel....................... 3Service Tax Home .................... 3
Temporary Assignment or Job...... 4
What Travel Expenses AreGift, and Car
Deductible?................ 4
Meals .................... 5
Travel in the United States...... 6Expenses Travel Outside the United
States................. 7
Luxury Water Travel.......... 8
Conventions............... 9For use in preparing
2. Entertainment.................. 9
What Entertainment Expenses2002 Returns Are Deductible?............. 10
Directly-Related Test......... 11
Associated Test............. 11
50% Limit.................... 12
Exceptions to the 50% Limit..... 12
3. Gifts........................ 13
4. Transportation................. 13
Car Expenses................. 15
Standard Mileage Rate........ 15
Actual Car Expenses......... 16
Leasing a Car.............. 23
Disposition of a Car............. 23
5. Recordkeeping................. 24
How To Prove Expenses.......... 24
What Are Adequate
Records? .............. 24
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? .............. 25
Separating and Combining
Expenses .............. 26
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts...... 26
Examples of Records......... 26
6. How To Report................. 26
Where To Report............... 26
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer .............. 27
Reimbursements ............... 27
Accountable Plans........... 27
Nonaccountable Plans........ 30
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients..... 30
Completing Forms 2106 and
2 1 0 6 – E Z .................31
Special Rules.............. 32
Illustrated Examples.......... 33
7. How To Get Tax Help............ 38
Appendices ..................... 39
Index.......................... 49
Important Changes
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile-
age rate for the cost of operating your car in
2002 is 36
1/2 cents a mile for all business miles.

Page 2 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Car expenses and use of the standard mile- penses while traveling away from your tax home A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one
age rate are explained in chapter 4. for business purposes. You can deduct a higher that is not likely to be used more than minimally
percentage if the meals take place during or for personal purposes because of its design.
Special depreciation allowance.Generally, incident to any period subject to the Department For information on how to report your car
new cars bought and placed in service in 2002of Transportation’s “hours of service” limits. expenses that your employer did not provide or
qualify for a special depreciation allowance. The(These limits apply to certain workers who are reimburse you for (such as when you pay for gas
special allowance is a depreciation deductionunder certain federal regulations.) The percent- and maintenance for a car your employer pro-
equal to 30% of the adjusted basis of the car.age is 65% for 2002. Business meal expenses vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employer
The special depreciation allowance can beare covered in chapter 1. in chapter 6.
claimed for cars used more than 50% in a quali-
Who does not need to use this publication.fied business use. See Special Depreciation Al-Limits that apply to employee deductions.
Other businesses (such as partnerships, corpo-lowance under Actual Car Expenses in chapter If you are an employee, deduct your work-re-
rations, and trusts) and employers who reim-4. lated expenses discussed in this publication as
burse their employees for business expensesa miscellaneous itemized deduction on Sched-
Depreciation limits on cars.If you claim the should refer to their tax form instructions andule A (Form 1040). Generally, the amount of
special depreciation allowance, the limit on the chapter 13 of Publication 535, Business Ex-miscellaneous itemized deductions you can de-
2002 depreciation deduction for a car (including penses, for information on deducting travel,duct is limited to the amount that is more than
any section 179 deduction) is increased to meals, entertainment, and transportation ex-2% of your adjusted gross income. It may be
$7,660. For cars that do not qualify for (or for penses.further limited if your adjusted gross income is
which you choose not to claim) the special de- If you are an employee, you will not need tomore than $137,300 ($68,650 if you are married
preciation allowance, the limit remains $3,060. read this publication if all of the following arefiling separately). How to report your expenses
See Depreciation Limits under Actual Car Ex- true.is covered in chapter 6.
penses in chapter 4.
1) You fully accounted to your employer forPhotographs of missing children.The Inter-Exception for electric cars. If you claim the
your work-related expenses.nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with thespecial depreciation allowance for an electric
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-car, the limit on the 2002 depreciation deduction 2) You received full reimbursement for yourdren. Photographs of missing children selected(including any section 179 deduction) is in- expenses.by the Center may appear in this publication oncreased to $22,980. For electric cars that do not
3) Your employer required you to return anypages that would otherwise be blank. You canqualify for (or for which you choose not to claim)
excess reimbursement and you did so.help bring these children home by looking at thethe special depreciation allowance, the limit is
photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST$9,180. See Exceptions for clean-fuel cars 4) Box 12 of your Form W–2, Wage and Tax
(1–800–843–5678)  if you recognize a child.under Depreciation Limits in chapter 4. Statement, shows no amount with a code
L.
 If you meet these four conditions, there is no
need to show the expenses or the reimburse-
IntroductionImportant Reminders ments on your return. If you would like more
You may be able to deduct the ordinary andinformation on reimbursements and accounting
Claiming the special depreciation allowancenecessary business-related expenses you haveto your employer, see chapter 6.
for 2001. If you filed your 2001 calendar yearfor:  If you meet these conditions and yourreturn before June 1, 2002, and did not claim the
• Travel, employer included reimbursements onnew special depreciation allowance for a quali-
your Form W–2 in error, ask your em-fied car, you can claim it by filing an amended
TIP
• Entertainment, ployer for a corrected Form W–2.return on Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual • Gifts, orIncome Tax Return, by April 15, 2003. At the top
of the Form 1040X, print “Filed pursuant to Rev-• Transportation. Volunteers. If you perform services as aenue Procedure 2002–33.” If you are an em-An ordinary expense is one that is common volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you mayployee, attach Form 2106, Employee Business and accepted in your field of trade, business, orbe able to deduct some of your costs as aExpenses. If you are self-employed, attachprofession. A necessary expense is one that ischaritable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortization. helpful and appropriate for your business. Anpenses in Giving Services in Publication 526,Or, you can claim the special depreciationexpense does not have to be required to beCharitable Contributions, for information on theallowance by filing Form 3115, Application forconsidered necessary. expenses you can deduct.Change in Accounting Method, with your 2002
return. For details, see Revenue Procedure This publication explains what expenses areComments and suggestions. We welcome2002–33. deductible, how to report them on your return,your comments about this publication and your
what records you need to prove your expenses,suggestions for future editions.Standard meal allowance. The standard and how to treat any expense reimbursementsYou can e-mail us while visiting our web sitemeal allowance (also referred to as the limit onyou may receive. at www.irs.gov.meals and incidental expenses (M&IE rate)) for You can write to us at the following address:most small localities in the United States is $30.Who should use this publication. You
However, the standard meal allowance is highershould read this publication if you are an em-Internal Revenue Servicefor most major cities and many other localities inployee or a sole proprietor who has business-re-Tax Forms and Publicationsthe continental United States. See Publicationlated travel, entertainment, gift, or transportationW:CAR:MP:FP1542, Per Diem Rates. expenses. 1111 Constitution Ave. NWThese rates (allowances/limits) are also Washington, DC 20224Users of employer-provided vehicles.Iflisted in Appendix A of Chapter 41, Part 301 of
an employer-provided vehicle was available forthe Code of Federal Regulations. If you have a We respond to many letters by telephone.your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener-computer, you can find them on the Internet at Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-ally, your employer must include the value of thewww.policyworks.gov/perdiem . Click on clude your daytime phone number, including theuse or availability in your income as pay. How-“2002 Domestic Per Diem Rates” for the period area code, in your correspondence.ever, there are exceptions if the use of the vehi-January 1, 2002, through September 30, 2002,
cle qualifies as a working condition fringe benefitand on “2003 Domestic Per Diem Rates” for the
(such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal useUseful Itemsperiod October 1, 2002, through December 31,
vehicle). You may want to see:2002. Use of the standard meal allowance is
A working condition fringe benefit is anyexplained in chapter 1.
property or service provided to you by your em-Publication
Meal expenses when subject to “hours of ployer for which you could deduct the cost as an❏ 225 Farmer’s Tax Guideservice” limits.Generally, you can deduct employee business expense if you had paid for
only 50% of your business-related meal ex- it. ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
Page 2

Page 3 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 535 Business Expenses scheduled round-trip run between two cities and Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $9,000.
return home 16 hours later. During the run, youCincinnati is your main place of work because❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property have 6 hours off at your turnaround point whereyou spend most of your time there and earn
❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to getmost of your income there.
necessary sleep before starting the return trip.
No main place of business or work. YouForm (and Instructions) You are considered to be away from home.
may have a tax home even if you do not have a❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized Example 2. You are a truck driver. Youregular or main place of work. Your tax homeDeductions leave your terminal and return to it later themay be the home where you regularly live.
same day. You get an hour off at your turn-❏ Schedule C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss Factors used to determine tax home.Ifaround point to eat. Because you are not off toFrom Business you do not have a regular or main place ofget necessary sleep and the brief time off is not❏ Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040)Net Profit business or work, use the following three factorsan adequate rest period, you are not travelingFrom Business to determine where your tax home is. away from home.
❏ Schedule F (Form 1040)Profit or Loss 1) You perform part of your business in theMembers of the Armed Forces. If you are aFrom Farming area of your main home and use thatmember of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-
home for lodging while doing business in❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses nent duty assignment overseas, you are not
the area.traveling away from home. You cannot deduct❏ 2106–EZ Unreimbursed Employee your expenses for meals and lodging. You can-2) You have living expenses at your mainBusiness Expenses not deduct these expenses even if you have tohome that you duplicate because your❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization maintain a home in the United States for yourbusiness requires you to be away from
family members who are not allowed to accom-that home.See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help, for
pany you overseas. If you are transferred frominformation about getting these publications and 3) You have not abandoned the area in whichone permanent duty station to another, you mayforms. both your historical place of lodging andhave deductible moving expenses, which are
your claimed main home are located; youexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
have a member or members of your familyA naval officer assigned to permanent duty
living at your main home; or you often useaboard a ship that has regular eating and living
that home for lodging.facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel
expense purposes. If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home
1. is the home where you regularly live. If you
satisfy only two factors, you may have a tax
home depending on all the facts and circum-
Tax Home stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are aTravel transient; your tax home is wherever you work
To determine whether you are traveling awayand you cannot deduct travel expenses.
If you temporarily travel away from your taxfrom home, you must first determine the location
home, you can use this chapter to determine ifof your tax home. Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-
you have deductible travel expenses. This chap-Generally, your tax home is your regularton in an apartment you rent. You have worked
ter defines “travel expenses,” “tax home,” “tem-place of business or post of duty, regardless offor your employer in Boston for a number of
porary assignment,” and the “standard mealwhere you maintain your family home. It in-years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month
allowance.” It also discusses the rules for travelcludes the entire city or general area in which executive training program. You do not expect to
inside and outside the United States, luxuryyour business or work is located. return to work in Boston after you complete your
water travel, and deductible convention ex-If you have more than one regular place oftraining.penses. business, your tax home is your main place ofDuring your training, you do not do any workbusiness. See Main place of business or work,in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andTravel expenses defined.For tax purposes,later. on-the-job training throughout the United States.travel expenses are the ordinary and necessaryIf you do not have a regular or a main placeYou keep your apartment in Boston and return toexpenses of traveling away from home for yourof business because of the nature of your work,it frequently. You use your apartment to conductbusiness, profession, or job. then your tax home may be the place where youyour personal business. You also keep up yourAn ordinary expense is one that is commonregularly live. See No main place of business orcommunity contacts in Boston. When you com-and accepted in your field of trade, business, orwork, later. plete your training, you are transferred to Losprofession. A necessary expense is one that isIf you do not have a regular place of businessAngeles.helpful and appropriate for your business. Anor post of duty and there is no place where youexpense does not have to be required to be You do not satisfy factor (1) because you didregularly live, you are considered a transientconsidered necessary. not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-(an itinerant) and your tax home is whereverYou will find examples of deductible travel cause you had duplicate living expenses. Youyou work. As a transient, you cannot claim aexpenses in Table 1, later. also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-travel expense deduction because you are don your apartment in Boston as your mainnever considered to be traveling away fromTraveling away from home. You are travel- home, you kept your community contacts, andhome.ing away from home if: you frequently returned to live in your apartment.
Main place of business or work.If you have You have a tax home in Boston.1) Your duties require you to be away from
more than one place of work, consider the fol-the general area of your tax home (defined
Example 2. You are an outside salespersonlowing when determining which one is your mainlater) substantially longer than an ordinary
with a sales territory covering several states.place of business or work. day’s work, and
Your employer’s main office is in Newark, but
2) You need to sleep or rest to meet the de-1) The total time you ordinarily spend in eachyou do not conduct any business there. Your
mands of your work while away from place. work assignments are temporary, and you have
home. no way of knowing where your future assign-2) The level of your business activity in each
ments will be located. You have a room in yourThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merelyplace.
married sister’s house in Dayton. You stay therenapping in your car. You do not have to be away3) Whether your income from each place isfor one or two weekends a year, but you do nofrom your tax home for a whole day or from dusksignificant or insignificant. work in the area. You do not pay your sister forto dawn as long as your relief from duty is long
the use of the room.enough to get necessary sleep or rest.
You do not satisfy any of the three factorsExample. You live in Cincinnati where you
listed earlier. You are a transient and have noExample 1. You are a railroad conductor. have a seasonal job for 8 months each year and
tax home.You leave your home terminal on a regularly earn $25,000. You work the other 4 months in
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel to family home.If you (and your fam- able to deduct the cost of relocating to your newGoing home on days off. If you go back to
ily) do not live at your tax home (defined earlier), tax home as a moving expense. See Publication your tax home from a temporary assignment on
you cannot deduct the cost of traveling between 521 for more information. your days off, you are not considered away from
your tax home and your family home. You also home while you are in your hometown. You
Exception for federal crime investigations orcannot deduct the cost of meals and lodging cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-
prosecutions. If you are a federal employeewhile at your tax home. See Example 1 that ing there. However, you can deduct your travel
participating in a federal crime investigation orfollows. expenses, including meals and lodging, while
prosecution, you are not subject to the one-yearIf you are working temporarily in the same traveling between your temporary place of work
rule. This means you may be able to deductcity where you and your family live, you may be and your tax home. You can claim these ex-
travel expenses even if you are away from yourconsidered as traveling away from home. See penses up to the amount it would have cost you
tax home for more than one year.Example 2, below. to stay at your temporary place of work.
For you to qualify, the Attorney General mustIf you keep your hotel room during your visitcertify that you are traveling:Example 1. You are a truck driver and you home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel
and your family live in Tucson. You are em- room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-1) For the federal government,ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in penses of returning home up to the amount you
2) In a temporary duty status, andPhoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return would have spent for meals had you stayed at
to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one your temporary place of work.3) To investigate or prosecute, or providenight there before returning home. You cannotsupport services for the investigation ordeduct any expenses you have for meals and Probationary work period.If you take a jobprosecution of, a federal crime.lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from that requires you to move, with the understand-
You can deduct your otherwise allowable travelPhoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is ing that you will keep the job if your work is
expenses throughout the period of certification.your tax home. satisfactory during a probationary period, the job
is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourDetermining temporary or indefinite.YouExample 2. Your family home is in Pitts- expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-must determine whether your assignment isburgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The bationary period.temporary or indefinite when you start work. Ifrest of the year you work for the same employer
you expect an assignment or job to last for onein Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants
year or less, it is temporary unless there areand sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the
facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti- What Travel ExpensesAn assignment or job that is initially temporarymore.
may become indefinite due to changed circum-Because you spend most of your working Are Deductible?stances. A series of assignments to the sametime and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,
location, all for short periods but that togetherthat city is your tax home. You cannot deduct Once you have determined that you are travel-cover a long period, may be considered an in-any expenses you have for meals and lodging ing away from your tax home, you can determinedefinite assignment.there. However, when you return to work in what travel expenses are deductible.The following examples illustrate whether anPittsburgh, you are away from your tax home You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-assignment or job is temporary or indefinite.even though you stay at your family home. You penses you have when you travel away fromcan deduct the cost of your round trip between home on business. The type of expense you canExample 1. You are a construction worker.Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct deduct depends on the facts and your circum-You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. Youyour part of your family’s living expenses for stances.are a member of a trade union in Los Angelesmeals and lodging while you are living and work- Table 1 summarizes travel expenses youthat helps you get work in the Los Angeles area.ing in Pittsburgh. may be able to deduct. You may have otherBecause of a shortage of work, you took a job on
deductible travel expenses that are not covereda construction project in Fresno. Your job was
there, depending on the facts and your circum-scheduled to end in 8 months. The job actually
stances.lasted 10 months.Temporary You realistically expected the job in Fresno When you travel away from home on
to last 8 months. The job actually did last lessbusiness, you should keep records ofAssignment or Job than 1 year. The job is temporary and your tax all the expenses you have and anyRECORDS
home is still in Los Angeles. advances you receive from your employer. YouYou may regularly work at your tax home and
can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otheralso work at another location. It may not beExample 2. The facts are the same as inwritten record to keep track of your expenses.practical to return to your tax home from thisExample 1, except that you realistically ex-The types of expenses you need to record,other location at the end of each work day.pected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. Thealong with supporting documentation, are de-Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign-job actually was completed in 10 months. scribed in Table 4 (see chapter 5).ment. If your assignment or job away from Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you
your main place of work is temporary, your tax realistically expected the work to last longer than
home does not change. You are considered to1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1
Separating costs.If you have one expensebe away from home for the whole period you areyear. You cannot deduct any travel expenses
that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,away from your main place of work. You canyou had in Fresno because Fresno became your
and other services (such as lodging or transpor-deduct your travel expenses if they otherwisetax home.
tation), you must allocate that expense betweenqualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary
the cost of meals and entertainment and the costassignment in a single location is one that isExample 3. The facts are the same as in
of other services. You must have a reasonablerealistically expected to last (and does in factExample 1, except that you realistically ex-
basis for making this allocation. For example,last) for one year or less. pected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. After
you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-However, if your assignment or job is indefi- 8 months, however, you were asked to remain
cludes one or more meals in its room charge.nite, the location of the assignment or job be- for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15
comes your new tax home and you cannot months). Travel expenses for another individual.If adeduct your travel expenses while there.  An Initially, you realistically expected the job inspouse, dependent, or other individual goes withassignment or job in a single location is consid- Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, dueyou (or your employee) on a business trip or to aered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last to changed circumstances occurring after 8business convention, you generally cannot de-for more than one year, whether or not it actually months, it was no longer realistic for you toduct his or her travel expenses.lasts for more than one year. expect that the job in Fresno would last for one
If your assignment is indefinite, you must year or less. You can only deduct your travelEmployee. You can deduct the travel ex-
include in your income any amounts you receive expenses for the first 8 months. You cannotpenses of someone who goes with you if that
from your employer for living expenses, even if deduct any travel expenses you had after thatperson:
they are called travel allowances and you ac- time because Fresno became your tax home
count to your employer for them. You may be when the job became indefinite. 1) Is your employee,
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
50% limit on meals. You can figure yourTable 1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
meals expense using either of the following two
methods.This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home
for business purposes. 1) Actual cost.
2) The standard meal allowance.IF you have
expenses for.... THEN you can deduct the cost of....................... Both of these methods are explained below. But,
regardless of the method you use, you generallyTransportation Travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed costbusiness destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are
of your meals.riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your
If you are reimbursed for the cost of yourcost is zero. If you travel ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise
meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends onships (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits.
whether your employer’s reimbursement planTaxi, commuter Fares for these and other types of transportation that take youwas accountable or nonaccountable. If you arebus, and airport between: not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whetherlimousine 1) The airport or station and your hotel, and the unreimbursed meal expense is for business2) The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, yourtravel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-business meeting place, or your temporary work location. cusses the 50% limit in more detail, and chapter
6 discusses accountable and nonaccountableBaggage and Sending baggage and sample or display material between your regular
plans.shipping and temporary work locations.
Car Operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home
on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileageActual Cost
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car
You can use the actual cost of your meals towhile away from home on business, you can deduct only the
figure the amount of your expense before reim-business-use portion of the expenses.
bursement and application of the 50% deductionLodging and meals Your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or longlimit. If you use this method, you must keepenough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform yourrecords of your actual cost.duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, and
related tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits.
Standard Meal AllowanceCleaning Dry cleaning and laundry.
Generally, you can use the “standard meal al-Telephone Business calls while on your business trip. This includes business
lowance” method as an alternative to the actualcommunication by fax machine or other communication devices.
cost method. It allows you to use a set amount
Tips Tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. for your daily meals and incidental expenses
(M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-Other Other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to yourtual costs. The set amount varies depending onbusiness travel. These expenses might include transportation to orwhere and when you travel. In this publication,from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, computer rental“standard meal allowance” refers to the federalfees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer. rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount of
standard meal allowance. If you use the stan-
dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-2) Has a bona fide business purpose for the Jerry pays $115 a day for a double room. Aords to prove the time, place, and businesssingle room costs $90 a day. He can deduct thetravel, and purpose of your travel. See the recordkeepingtotal cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,rules for travel in chapter 5.3) Would otherwise be allowed to deduct thebut only $90 a day for his hotel room. If he usestravel expenses. Incidental expenses.These include, but arepublic transportation, he can deduct only his
not limited to, your costs for the following items.fare.Business associate.If a business associ-
ate travels with you and meets the conditions in 1) Laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing.
Meals (These expenses are not considered inci-(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel
dental expenses after December 31,expenses you have for that person. A businessYou can deduct the cost of meals in either of the2002.)associate is someone with whom you could rea-following two situations.sonably expect to actively conduct business. A 2) Fees and tips for persons who provide
business associate can be a current or prospec- services, such as porters and baggage1) It is necessary for you to stop for substan-
tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, carriers.tial sleep or rest to properly perform your
employee, agent, partner, or professional advi-duties while traveling away from home onIncidental expenses do not include taxicabsor. business. fares, lodging taxes, or the costs of telegrams or
telephone calls.Bona fide business purpose.A bona fide 2) The meal is business-related entertain-
business purpose exists if you can prove a realment. Incidental expenses only method.Effective
business purpose for the individual’s presence. after September 30, 2002, you can use an op-Business-related entertainment is discussed inIncidental services, such as typing notes or as- tional method (instead of actual cost) for deduct-chapter 2. The following discussion deals onlysisting in entertaining customers, are not ing incidental expenses only. The amount of thewith meals that are not business-related enter-enough to make the expenses deductible. deduction is $2 per day for incidental expensestainment. paid or incurred for travel away from home if you
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- did not pay or incur any meal expenses. This
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is method is subject to the proration rules for par-Lavish or extravagant.You cannot deduct
tial days. See Travel for days you depart andnot Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally typesexpenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-
return, later in this chapter.notes, performs similar services, and accompa-gant. An expense is not considered lavish or
nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-extravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsFederal employees should refer to the
formance of these services does not establishand circumstances. Expenses will not be disal- Federal Travel Regulations at
that her presence on the trip is necessary to thelowed merely because they are more than a www.policyworks.gov/ftr  forCAUTION
!
conduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses are fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-changes affecting their claims for reimburse-
taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.not deductible. ment of these expenses.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you travel to more than one location in oneExample. Jen is employed in New Orleans
day, use the rate in effect for the area where you as a convention planner. In March, her employer50% limit may apply.If you use the standardstop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor- sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, tomeal allowance method for meal expenses andtation industry, however, see Special rate forattend a planning seminar. She left her home inyou are not reimbursed or you are reimbursedtransportation workers, later. New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday andunder a nonaccountable plan, you can generally arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. AfterStandard meal allowance for areas outsidededuct only 50% of the standard meal allow- spending two nights there, she flew back to Newthe continental United States.The standardance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta- Orleans on Friday and arrived back home atmeal allowance rates do not apply to travel inble plan and you are deducting amounts that are 8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amountAlaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outsidemore than your reimbursements, you can de- to cover her expenses and included it with herthe continental United States. The federal perduct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50% wages.diem rates for these locations are publishedlimit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and Under Method 1, Jen can claim 21/2 days ofmonthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al-accountable and nonaccountable plans are dis- the standard meal allowance for Washington,lowances for Foreign Areas.cussed in chapter 6. DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday and
You can access foreign per diem ratesFriday (the days she departed and returned),There is no optional standard lodging
at www.state.gov/m/a/als/prdm. and the full daily rate for Thursday.amount similar to the standard meal
Under Method 2, Jen could also use anyallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-CAUTION
!
method that she applies consistently and that ispense deduction is your actual cost.
in accordance with reasonable business prac-
tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of theYour employer may have these rates
standard meal allowance even though a federalWho can use the standard meal allowance. available, or you can purchase the
employee would have to use Method 1 and beYou can use the standard meal allowance publication from the:
limited to only 21/2 days.whether you are an employee or self-employed,
and whether or not you are reimbursed for your
traveling expenses.
Travel in the United StatesSuperintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing OfficeWho cannot use the standard meal allow- The following discussion applies to travel in theP.O. Box 371954ance. You cannot use the standard meal al- United States. For this purpose, the UnitedPittsburgh, PA 15250–7954lowance if you are related to your employer as States includes the 50 states and the District ofdefined next. Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-You can also order it by calling the
penses depends on how much of your trip wasRelated to employer. You are related to Government Printing Office at
business related and on how much of your tripyour employer if: 1–202–512–1800  (not a toll-free
occurred within the United States. See Part ofnumber).1) Your employer is your brother or sister, Trip Outside the United States, later.
half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-
tor, or lineal descendant, Special rate for transportation workers.
Trip Primarily for BusinessYou can use a special standard meal allowance2) Your employer is a corporation in which
if you work in the transportation industry. Youyou own, directly or indirectly, more than You can deduct all of your travel expenses ifare in the transportation industry if your work:10% in value of the outstanding stock, or your trip was entirely business related. If your
trip was primarily for business and, while at your3) Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-1) Directly involves moving people or goodsbusiness destination, you extended your stay forduciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, ora vacation, made a personal side trip, or hada trust, and your employer. truck, and other personal activities, you can deduct yourYou may be considered to indirectly own stock,2) Regularly requires you to travel away frombusiness-related travel expenses. These ex-for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in ahome and, during any single trip, usuallypenses include the travel costs of getting to andcorporation, partnership, estate, or trust thatinvolves travel to areas eligible for differentfrom your business destination and anyowns the stock or if a member of your family orstandard meal allowance rates. business-related expenses at your businessyour partner owns the stock. destination.If this applies to you, you can claim a standard
Use of the standard meal allowance for othermeal allowance of $38 a day ($42 for travel Example. You work in Atlanta and take atravel.You can use the standard meal allow-outside the continental United States) for Janu-business trip to New Orleans. On your wayance to figure your meal expenses when youary 1, 2002, through September 30, 2002, andhome, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.travel in connection with investment and other$40 a day ($45 for travel outside the continentalYou spend $630 for the 9 days you are awayincome-producing property. You can also use itUnited States) for October 1, 2002, through De-from home for travel, meals, lodging, and otherto figure your meal expenses when you travel forcember 31, 2002. travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-qualifying educational purposes. You cannot Using the special rate for transportationbile, you would have been gone only 6 days, anduse the standard meal allowance to figure theworkers eliminates the need for you to deter-your total cost would have been $580. You cancost of your meals when you travel for medicalmine the standard meal allowance for everydeduct $580 for your trip, including the cost ofor charitable purposes. area where you stop for sleep or rest. If youround-trip transportation to and from New Orle-choose to use the special rate for any trip, youAmount of standard meal allowance. The ans. The deduction for your meals is subject tomust use the special rate (and not use the regu-standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.lar standard meal allowance rates) for all tripsrate. For travel in 2002, the rate is $30 a day for
you take that year.most small localities in the United States. Most
major cities and many other localities in the Trip Primarily forTravel for days you depart and return.ForUnited States are designated as high-cost ar- Personal Reasonsboth the day you depart for and the day youeas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-
return from a business trip, you must prorate theIf your trip was primarily for personal reasons,lowances. These rates are listed in Publication
standard meal allowance (figure a reducedsuch as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a1542.
amount for each day). You can do so by one ofnondeductible personal expense. However, youYou can also find this information ontwo methods. can deduct any expenses you have while at yourthe internet at www.policyworks.gov/ destination that are directly related to your busi-perdiem. Click on “2002 Domestic Per• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- ness.Diem Rates” for the period January 1, 2002 – dard meal allowance. A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be aSeptember 30, 2002, and on “2003 Domestic • Method 2: You can prorate using any vacation even if the promoter advertises that it isPer Diem Rates” for the period October 1, 2002method that you consistently apply and primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-– December 31, 2002. that is in accordance with reasonable busi- dental business activities during a trip, such as
ness practice. viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealing
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel considered entirely for business.with general subjects, will not change what is Seattle. You spent one day flying in each direc-
Even if you did not spend your entire time ontion.really a vacation into a business trip.
business activities, your trip is considered en-Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of your
tirely for business if you meet at least one of thetotal time abroad was for nonbusiness activities,
following four exceptions.Part of Trip Outside you can deduct as travel expenses what it would
the United States have cost you to make the trip if you had notException 1 – No substantial control. engaged in any nonbusiness activity. TheYour trip is considered entirely for business ifIf part of your trip is outside the United States, amount you can deduct is the cost of theyou did not have substantial control over arrang-use the rules described later in this chapter round-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing ofunder Travel Outside the United States for that ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other relatedyour trip does not, by itself, mean that you havepart of the trip. For the part of your trip that is expenses.substantial control over arranging your trip.inside the United States, use the rules for travelYou do not have substantial control overException 4 – Vacation not a major con-in the United States. Travel outside the Unitedyour trip if you: sideration.Your trip is considered entirely forStates does not include travel from one point in business if you can establish that a personalthe United States to another point in the United1) Are an employee who was reimbursed orvacation was not a major consideration, even ifStates. The following discussion can help youpaid a travel expense allowance, you have substantial control over arranging thedetermine whether your trip was entirely within trip.2) Are not related to your employer, andthe United States.
3) Are not a managing executive.
Public transportation.If you travel by public Travel Primarily for Business“Related to your employer” was defined ear-transportation, any place in the United Stateslier in this chapter under Standard Meal Allow-where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a If you travel outside the United States primarilyance.point in the United States. Once the vehicle for business but spend some of your time onA “managing executive” is an employee wholeaves the last scheduled stop in the United other activities, you generally cannot deduct allhas the authority and responsibility, without be-States on its way to a point outside the United of your travel expenses. You can only deduct theing subject to the veto of another, to decide onStates, you apply the rules under Travel Outside business portion of your cost of getting to andthe need for the business travel.the United States. from your destination. You must allocate theA self-employed person generally has sub-costs between your business and other activitiesstantial control over arranging business trips.Example. You fly from New York to Puerto to determine your deductible amount. See
Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return Travel allocation rules, below.Exception 2 – Outside United States no
to New York nonstop. The flight from New Yorkmore than a week. Your trip is considered You do not have to allocate your travelto Miami is in the United States, so only the flightentirely for business if you were outside the expenses if you meet one of the fourfrom Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the UnitedUnited States for a week or less, combining exceptions listed earlier under Travel
TIP
States. Because there are no scheduled stopsbusiness and nonbusiness activities. One weekconsidered entirely for business. In those cases,between Puerto Rico and New York, all of themeans seven consecutive days. In counting theyou can deduct the total cost of getting to andreturn trip is outside the United States.days, do not count the day you leave the Unitedfrom your destination.States, but do count the day you return to the
Private car.Travel by private car in the UnitedUnited States.
States is travel between points in the United
Travel allocation rules.If your trip outside theStates, even though you are on your way to aExample. You traveled to Brussels primarily
United States was primarily for business, youdestination outside the United States. for business. You left Denver on Tuesday and
must allocate your travel time on a day-to-dayflew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew from
basis between business days and nonbusinessExample. You travel by car from Denver toNew York to Brussels, arriving the next morning.
days. The days you depart from and return to theMexico City and return. Your travel from DenverOn Thursday and Friday, you had business dis-
United States are both counted as days outsideto the border and from the border back to Den-cussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, you
the United States.ver is travel in the United States, and the rules inwere sightseeing. You flew back to New York,
this section apply. The rules under Travel To figure the deductible amount of yourarriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday,
Outside the United States apply to your trip from round-trip travel expenses, use the followingyou flew back to Denver.
the border to Mexico City and back to the border. fraction. The numerator (top number) is the totalAlthough you were away from your home in
number of business days outside the UnitedDenver for more than a week, you were not
States. The denominator (bottom number) is theoutside the United States for more than a week.Travel Outside
total number of travel days outside the UnitedThis is because the day you depart does notthe United States States.count as a day outside the United States.
You can deduct your cost of the round-tripIf any part of your business travel is outside the Counting business days. Your businessflight between Denver and Brussels. You canUnited States, some of your deductions for the days include transportation days, days youralso deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels forcost of getting to and from your destination may presence was required, days you spent on busi-Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi-be limited. For this purpose, the United States ness, and certain weekends and holidays.ness. However, you cannot deduct the cost ofincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum-
your stay in Brussels from Saturday throughbia. Transportation day.Count as a business
Tuesday because those days were spent on day any day you spend traveling to or from aHow much of your travel expenses you can
nonbusiness activities. business destination. However, if because of adeduct depends in part upon how much of your
nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a directtrip outside the United States was business re-Exception 3 – Less than 25% of time on
route, your business days are the days it wouldlated. personal activities.Your trip is considered
take you to travel a reasonably direct route toentirely for business if:
your business destination. Extra days for side
trips or nonbusiness activities cannot beTravel Entirely for Business or 1) You were outside the United States for
counted as business days.more than a week, andConsidered Entirely for Business
Presence required. Count as a business2) You spent less than 25% of the total timeYou can deduct all your travel expenses of get- day any day your presence is required at ayou were outside the United States onting to and from your business destination if your particular place for a specific business purpose.nonbusiness activities.trip is entirely for business or considered entirely Count it as a business day even if you spendfor business. For this purpose, count both the day your tripmost of the day on nonbusiness activities.began and the day it ended.
Travel entirely for business.If you travel Day spent on business. If your principal
outside the United States and you spend theExample. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo, activity during working hours is pursuit of your
entire time on business activities, you can de-where you spent 14 days on business and 5 trade or business, count the day as a business
duct all of your travel expenses. days on personal matters. You then flew back to day. Also, count as a business day any day you
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are prevented from working because of circum- You figure the deductible part of your air conferences are set up to acquaint individuals in
travel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of the most occupations with selected facilities in sev-stances beyond your control.
round-trip fare and other expenses you would eral regions of the world. However, none of theCertain weekends and holidays. Count have had in traveling directly between New York conferences are directed toward specific occu-weekends, holidays, and other necessary and Dublin ($850 × 7/18 = $331) from your total pations or professions. It is up to each partici-standby days as business days if they fall be-expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to pant to seek out specialists and organizationaltween business days. But if they follow yourDublin and back to New York ($450 + $200 + settings appropriate to his or her occupationalbusiness meetings or activity and you remain at$500 = $1,150). interests.your business destination for nonbusiness or Three-hour sessions are held each day overYour deductible air travel expense is $819personal reasons, do not count them as busi- a 5-day period at each of the selected overseas($1,150 − $331).ness days. facilities where participants can meet with indi-
Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-Example 1. Your tax home is New York business destination.If you had a vacationposed of a variety of activities includingCity. You travel to Quebec, where you have aor other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyondworkshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-business appointment on Friday. You have an-your business destination, you must allocatevelopment, and exercises. Professional confer-other appointment on the following Monday. Be-part of your travel expenses to the nonbusinessence directors schedule and conduct thecause your presence was required on both activity. sessions. Participants can choose those ses-Friday and Monday, they are business days. The part you must allocate is the amount itsions they wish to attend.Because the weekend is between business would have cost you to travel between the pointYou can participate in this program since youdays, Saturday and Sunday are counted as where travel outside the United States beginsare a member of the alumni association. Youbusiness days. This is true even though you useand your business destination and a return toand your family take one of the trips. You spendthe weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, orthe point where travel outside the United Statesabout 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.other nonbusiness activity. ends. The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-
You determine the nonbusiness portion ofing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1Example 2. If, in Example 1, you had no that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. Theweek.business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed untilnumerator of the fraction is the number of non-Your travel expenses for the trip are notMonday before starting home, Saturday andbusiness days during your travel outside thedeductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-Sunday would be nonbusiness days. United States and the denominator is the totaltion. However, registration fees and any other
number of days you spend outside the Unitedincidental expenses you have for the fiveNonbusiness activity on the way to or fromStates. planned sessions you attended that are directlyyour business destination.If you stopped None of your travel expenses for nonbusi-related and beneficial to your business are de-for a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei-ness activities at, near, or beyond your businessductible business expenses. These expensesther on the way from the United States to yourdestination are deductible. should be specifically stated in your records tobusiness destination, or on the way back to the ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-United States from your business destination,Example. Assume that the dates are theness expenses.you must allocate part of your travel expenses tosame as in the previous example but that in-the nonbusiness activity. stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you flyLuxury Water TravelThe part you must allocate is the amount itto Venice, Italy, for a vacation.
would have cost you to travel between the pointYou cannot deduct any part of the cost ofIf you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or otherwhere travel outside the United States beginsyour trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris.form of luxury water transportation for businessand your nonbusiness destination and a returnIn addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfarepurposes, there is a daily limit on the amountto the point where travel outside the Unitedand other expenses from New York to Paris andyou can deduct. The limit is twice the highestStates ends. back to New York. federal per diem rate allowable at the time of
You determine the nonbusiness portion of You can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip planeyour travel. (Generally, the federal per diem is
that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. Thefare and other travel expenses from New York tothe amount paid to federal government employ-
numerator of the fraction is the number of non-Paris, plus your meals, lodging, and any otherees for daily living expenses when they travel
business days during your travel outside thebusiness expenses you had in Paris. (Assumeaway from home, but in the United States, for
United States and the denominator is the totalthese expenses total $900). If the round-tripbusiness purposes.)
number of days you spend outside the Unitedplane fare and other travel-related expenses
Daily limit on luxury water travel.The high-States. (such as food during the trip) are $800 from New
est federal per diem rate allowed and the dailyYork to Paris, you can deduct travel costs of
limit for luxury water travel in 2002 is shown inExample. You live in New York. On May 4$489 (11/18 × $800), plus the full $900 for the
the following table.you flew to Paris to attend a business confer-expenses you had in Paris.
ence that began on May 5. The conference
Highest Daily Limitended at noon on May 14. That evening you flewOther methods. You can use another method 2002 Federal on Luxuryto Dublin where you visited with friends until the of counting business days if you establish that itDates Per Diem Water Travelafternoon of May 21, when you flew directly more clearly reflects the time spent on other
Jan. 1 – Sep. 30 $254 $508home to New York. The primary purpose for thethan business activities outside the United
Oct. 1 – Dec. 31 258 516trip was to attend the conference. States.
If you had not stopped in Dublin, you would
Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveledhave arrived home the evening of May 14. You
Travel Primarily for Personal by ocean liner from New York to London, Eng-did not meet any of the exceptions that would
Reasons land, on business in May. Her expense for theallow you to consider your travel entirely for
6-day cruise was $3,500. Caroline’s deductionbusiness. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) areIf you travel outside the United States primarilyfor the cruise cannot exceed $3,048 (6 days ×business days and May 15 through May 21 (7for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-$508 daily limit).days) are nonbusiness days. tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personalYou can deduct the cost of your meals (sub-expense. If you spend some time attending briefMeals and entertainment.If your expensesject to the 50% limit), lodging, and otherprofessional seminars or a continuing educationfor luxury water travel include separately statedbusiness-related travel expenses while in Paris.program, you can deduct your registration feesamounts for meals or entertainment, those
You cannot deduct your expenses while inand other expenses you have that are directlyamounts are subject to the 50% limit on meals
Dublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it related to your business. and entertainment before you apply the daily
would have cost you to travel round-trip between limit. For a discussion of the 50% limit, see
New York and Dublin. Example. The university from which youchapter 2.
You paid $450 to fly from New York to Paris, graduated has a continuing education program
$200 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $500 to fly for members of its alumni association. This pro-Example. In the previous example,
from Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfare gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-Caroline’s luxury water travel had a total cost of
from New York to Dublin would have been $850.tries where academic exercises and $3,500. Of that amount, $1,600 was separately
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stated as meals and entertainment. Caroline, If the meeting meets these requirements, you a) A schedule of the business activities of
who is self-employed, is not reimbursed for any also must satisfy the rules for deducting ex- each day of the meeting, and
of her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de- penses for business trips in general, discussedb) The number of hours you attended theductible travel expenses as follows. earlier under Travel Outside the United States. scheduled business activities.
Meals and entertainment...... $1,600 North American area. The North American50% limit................ × .50 area includes the following locations.Allowable meals & entertainment $  800
Other travel expenses....... +  1,900 American Samoa Kingman ReefAllowable cost before the daily limit.... $2,700 Baker Island Marshall Islands
Daily limit for May 2002...... $5 0 8 Barbados Mexico
Times number of days....... × 6 Bermuda Micronesia
Maximum luxury water travel deduction $3,048 2.Canada Midway Islands
Costa Rica Northern MarianaAmount of allowable deduction..... $2,700 Dominica Islands
Dominican Republic PalauCaroline’s deduction for her cruise is limited toGrenada Palmyra Entertainment$2,700, even though the limit on luxury waterGuam Puerto Ricotravel is higher. Guyana Saint Lucia
You may be able to deduct business-relatedHonduras Trinidad and TobagoNot separately stated.If your meal or en-
Howland Island USA entertainment expenses you have for entertain-tertainment charges are not separately stated orJamaica U.S. Virgin Islands ing a client, customer, or employee. The rulesare not clearly identifiable, you do not have toJarvis Island Wake Island and definitions are summarized in Table 2.allocate any portion of the total charge to mealsJohnston Island You can deduct entertainment expensesor entertainment.
only if they are both ordinary and necessary and
meet one of the following two tests.Reasonableness test. The following factors
Exceptions are taken into account to determine if it was
1) Directly-related test.reasonable to hold the meeting outside theThe daily limit on luxury water travel (discussedNorth American area. 2) Associated test.earlier) does not apply to expenses you have to
attend a convention, seminar, or meeting on Both of these tests are explained later under1) The purpose of the meeting and the activi-
board a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships under What Entertainment Expenses Are Deductible.ties taking place at the meeting.
Conventions Held Outside the North American An ordinary expense is one that is common2) The purposes and activities of the spon-Area. and accepted in your field of trade, business, orsoring organizations or groups. profession. A necessary expense is one that is
3) The homes of the active members of thehelpful and appropriate for your business. AnConventions
sponsoring organizations and the places atexpense does not have to be required to be
You can deduct your travel expenses when youwhich other meetings of the sponsoring or-considered necessary.
attend a convention if you can show that yourganizations or groups have been or will be The amount you can deduct for enter-attendance benefits your trade or business. Youheld. tainment expenses may be limited.cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-4) Other relevant factors you may present. Generally, you can deduct only 50% ofCAUTION
!
ily. your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.If the convention is for investment, political, This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.social, or other purposes unrelated to your trade
Cruise Shipsor business, you cannot deduct the expenses.
You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of yourYour appointment or election as a dele- Club dues and membership fees. You can-expenses of attending conventions, seminars,gate does not, in itself, determine not deduct dues (including initiation fees) foror similar meetings held on cruise ships. Allwhether you can deduct travel ex-CAUTION
!
membership in any club organized for:ships that sail are considered cruise ships.penses. You can deduct your travel expenses
only if your attendance is connected to your ownYou can deduct these expenses only if all1) Business,trade or business. five of the following requirements are met.
2) Pleasure,
1) The convention, seminar, or meeting is di-3) Recreation, orrectly related to your trade or business.
Convention agenda. The convention agenda 4) Other social purpose.2) The cruise ship is a vessel registered inor program generally shows the purpose of thethe United States. This rule applies to any membership organiza-convention. You can show your attendance at
tion if one of its principal purposes is either:the convention benefits your trade or business3) All of the cruise ship’s ports of call are in
by comparing the agenda with the official dutiesthe United States or in possessions of the1) To conduct entertainment activities forand responsibilities of your position. The agendaUnited States. members or their guests, ordoes not have to deal specifically with your offi-4) You attach to your return a written state-2) To provide members or their guests withcial duties and responsibilities; it will be enoughment signed by you that includes informa-access to entertainment facilities, dis-if the agenda is so related to your position that ittion about: cussed later.shows your attendance was for business pur-
poses. a) The total days of the trip (not includingThe purposes and activities of a club, not its
the days of transportation to and fromname, will determine whether or not you can
the cruise ship port), deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paidConventions Held Outside to:b) The number of hours each day that youthe North American Area
devoted to scheduled business activi-1) Country clubs,You cannot deduct expenses for attending a ties, and
convention, seminar, or similar meeting held 2) Golf and athletic clubs,c) A program of the scheduled businessoutside the North American area unless: activities of the meeting. 3) Airline clubs,
1) The meeting is directly related to your 4) Hotel clubs, and5) You attach to your return a written state-trade or business, and ment signed by an officer of the organiza- 5) Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
2) It is as reasonable to hold the meeting tion or group sponsoring the meeting that cumstances generally considered to be
outside the North American area as in it. includes: conducive to business discussions.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Entertainment facilities.Generally, you can- You cannot claim the cost of your mealEntertainment tickets.Generally, you cannot
not deduct any expense for the use of an enter- both as an entertainment expense anddeduct more than the face value of an entertain-
tainment facility. This includes expenses for as a travel expense. ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. ForCAUTION
!
depreciation and operating costs such as rent, example, you cannot deduct service fees you
utilities, maintenance, and protection. pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
over the face value of the tickets you pay toAn entertainment facility is any property youMeals sold in the normal course of your
scalpers.own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples business are not considered entertain-
include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, ment. Exception for events that benefit charita-
TIP
swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, ble organizations.Different rules apply when
airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits a
vacation resort. Deduction may depend on your type of charitable organization. You can take into ac-
business. Your kind of business may deter-count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itOut-of-pocket expenses.You can deduct
mine if a particular activity is considered enter-is more than the face value, if all of the followingout-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and
tainment. For example, if you are a dressconditions apply. beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that
designer and have a fashion show to introduceyou provided during entertainment at a facility. 1) The event’s main purpose is to benefit ayour new designs to store buyers, the showThese are not expenses for the use of an enter- qualified charitable organization.generally is not considered entertainment. Thistainment facility. However, these expenses are
is because fashion shows are typical in yoursubject to the directly-related and associated 2) The entire net proceeds go to the charity.
business. But, if you are an appliance distributortests and to the 50% limit, all discussed later. 3) The event uses volunteers to perform sub-and hold a fashion show for the spouses of your
stantially all the event’s work.retailers, the show generally is considered en-Gift or entertainment.Any item that might be
tertainment.considered either a gift or entertainment gener- The 50% limit on entertainment doesally will be considered entertainment. However, not apply to any expense for a packageSeparating costs.If you have one expenseif you give a customer packaged food or bever- deal that includes a ticket to such athat includes the costs of entertainment, and
TIP
ages that you intend the customer to use at a charitable sports event.other services (such as lodging or transporta-later date, treat it as a gift.
tion), you must allocate that expense betweenIf you give a customer tickets to a theaterthe cost of entertainment and the cost of otherperformance or sporting event and you do not goservices. You must have a reasonable basis forExample 1. You purchase tickets to a golfwith the customer to the performance or event,making this allocation. For example, you musttournament organized by the local volunteer fireyou have a choice. You can treat the tickets asallocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-company. All net proceeds will be used to buyeither a gift or entertainment, whichever is totainment in its lounge on the same bill with yournew fire equipment. The volunteers will run theyour advantage. room charge. tournament. You can deduct the entire cost ofYou can change your treatment of the tickets
the tickets as a business expense if they other-at a later date by filing an amended return.Taking turns paying for meals or entertain-wise qualify as an entertainment expense.Generally, an amended return must be filedment. If a group of business acquaintances
within 3 years from the date the original returntake turns picking up each others’ meal or enter-Example 2. You purchase tickets to a col-was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxtainment checks without regard to whether anylege football game through a ticket broker. Afterwas paid, whichever is later. business purposes are served, no member ofhaving a business discussion, you take a clientIf you go with the customer to the event, youthe group can deduct any part of the expense.to the game. Net proceeds from the game go tomust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.Lavish or extravagant expenses.You can-ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case, However, since the colleges also pay individualsnot deduct expenses for entertainment that areto treat the tickets as a gift. to perform services, such as coaching andlavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid-recruiting, you can only use the face value of theered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonabletickets in determining your business deduction. considering the facts and circumstances. Ex-
penses will not be disallowed just because theyWhat Entertainment Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes.Ifare more than a fixed dollar amount or takeyou rent a skybox or other private luxury box forplace at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs,Expenses more than one event at the same sports arena,or resorts. you generally cannot deduct more than the priceAre Deductible? of a nonluxury box seat ticket.Allocating between business and To determine whether a skybox has beennonbusiness. If you entertain business andThis section explains different types of entertain- rented for more than one event, count eachnonbusiness individuals at the same event, youment expenses that you may be able to deduct. game or other performance as one event. Formust divide your entertainment expenses be-It also explains the directly-related test and the example, renting a skybox for a series of playofftween business and nonbusiness. You can de-associated test. games is considered renting it for more than oneduct only the business part. If you cannotevent. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,establish the part of the expense for each per-Entertainment. Entertainment includes any along with any rentals by related parties, areson participating, allocate the expense to eachactivity generally considered to provide enter- considered in making this determination.participant on a pro rata basis.tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples Related parties include:include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-
Example. You entertain a group of individu-cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at 1) Family members (spouses, ancestors, andals that includes yourself, three business pros-sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish- lineal descendants),pects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of theing, vacation, and similar trips.
2) Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-expense qualifies as a business entertainmentEntertainment also may include meeting per- rangement involving the sharing ofexpense. You cannot deduct the expenses forsonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such skyboxes,the seven social guests because those costs areas providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car tononbusiness expenses.customers or their families. 3) Related corporations,
A meal as a form of entertainment.Enter- Trade association meetings.You can de- 4) A partnership and its principal partners,
tainment includes the cost of a meal you provideduct entertainment expenses that are directlyand
to a customer or client, whether the meal is arelated to and necessary for attending business5) A corporation and a partnership with com-part of other entertainment or by itself. A mealmeetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-mon ownership.expense includes the cost of food, beverages,nizations if the expenses of your attendance are
taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct anrelated to your active trade or business. These
entertainment-related meal, you or your em-organizations include business leagues, cham-Example. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seat
ployee must be present when the food or bever-bers of commerce, real estate boards, trade skybox at Team Stadium for three baseball
ages are provided. associations, and professional associations. games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seats
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
relationship between you and the persons
entertained. An example is entertainment
of business and civic leaders at the open-
ing of a new hotel or play when the pur-
pose is to get business publicity rather
than to create or maintain the goodwill of
the persons entertained.
Expenses not considered directly related.
Entertainment expenses generally are not con-
sidered directly related if you are not there or in
situations where there are substantial distrac-
tions that generally prevent you from actively
conducting business. The following are exam-
ples of situations where there are substantial
distractions. 
1) A meeting or discussion at a nightclub,
theater, or sporting event.
2) A meeting or discussion during what is es-
sentially a social gathering, such as a
cocktail party.
3) A meeting with a group that includes per-
sons who are not business associates at
places such as cocktail lounges, country
clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation
resorts.
Associated Test
Even if your expenses do not meet the
directly-related test, they may meet the associ-
ated test.
To meet the associated test for entertain-
ment expenses (including entertainment-related
meals), you must show that the entertainment is:
1) Associated with the active conduct of your
trade or business, and
2) Directly before or after a substantial busi-
Table 2. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
Definitions
Tests to be met
Other rules
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a
client, customer, or employee if the expenses meet the
directly-related test or the associated test.
● Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to
provide entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes
meals provided to a customer or client.
● An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your
field of business, trade, or profession.
● A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate,
although not necessarily required, for your business.
Directly-related test
● Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
● Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of
business, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or
some other specific business benefit.
Associated test
● Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
● Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
● You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment
expense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
● You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under
the circumstances.
● You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed
entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
You did engage in business with the person during the
entertainment period, and
ness discussion (defined later).
at each event is $20 a seat. You can deduct use of an entertainment facility. See Entertain-
ment facilities earlier in this chapter.(subject to the 50% limit) $600 ((10 seats × $20 Associated with trade or business.Gener-
You must consider all the facts, including theeach) × 3 events). ally, an expense is associated with the active
nature of the business transacted and the rea-conduct of your trade or business if you canFood and beverages in skybox seats.If sons for conducting business during the enter-show that you had a clear business purpose forexpenses for food and beverages are separatelytainment. It is not necessary to devote more timehaving the expense. The purpose may be to getstated, you can deduct these expenses in addi-to business than to entertainment. However, ifnew business or to encourage the continuationtion to the amounts allowable for the skybox,the business discussion is only incidental to theof an existing business relationship.subject to the requirements and limits that apply.entertainment, the entertainment expenses doThe amounts separately stated for food and Substantial business discussion.Whethernot meet the directly-related test.beverages must be reasonable. You cannot in- a business discussion is substantial depends on
You do not have to show that businessflate the charges for food and beverages to the facts of each case. A business discussion
income or other business benefit actu-avoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals. will not be considered substantial unless you
ally resulted from each entertainmentcan show that you actively engaged in the dis-
TIP
expense. cussion, meeting, negotiation, or other businessDirectly-Related Test
transaction to get income or some other specific
To meet the directly-related test for entertain- business benefit.
Clear business setting.If the entertainmentment expenses (including entertainment-related The meeting does not have to be for any
takes place in a clear business setting and is forspecified length of time, but you must show thatmeals), you must show that:
your business or work, the expenses are consid-the business discussion was substantial in rela-
ered directly related to your business or work.1) The main purpose of the combined busi- tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-
The following situations are examples of enter-ness and entertainment was the active sary that you devote more time to business than
tainment in a clear business setting. conduct of business, to entertainment. You do not have to discuss
business during the meal or entertainment.2) You did engage in business with the per-1) Entertainment in a hospitality room at a
son during the entertainment period, and Meetings at conventions.You are consid-convention where business goodwill is cre-
ered to have a substantial business discussion ifated through the display or discussion of3) You had more than a general expectation you attend meetings at a convention or similarbusiness products.of getting income or some other specific event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-business benefit at some future time. 2) Entertainment that is mainly a price rebatesored and conducted by a business or profes-on the sale of your products (such as aBusiness is generally not considered to be sional organization. However, your reason forrestaurant owner providing an occasionalthe main purpose when business and entertain- attending the convention or meeting must be tofree meal to a loyal customer).ment are combined on hunting or fishing trips, or further your trade or business. The organization
on yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you3) Entertainment of a clear business nature that sponsors the convention or meeting must
show that business was the main purpose, youoccurring under circumstances where schedule a program of business activities that is
generally cannot deduct the expenses for the there is no meaningful personal or social the main activity of the convention or meeting.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The 50% limit applies to business meals or
entertainment expenses you have while:
1) Traveling away from home (whether eating
alone or with others) on business,
2) Entertaining customers at your place of
business, a restaurant, or other location, or
3) Attending a business convention or recep-
tion, business meeting, or business lunch-
eon at a club.
Included expenses. Expenses subject to the
50% limit include:
1) Taxes and tips relating to a business meal
or entertainment activity,
2) Cover charges for admission to a night-
club,
3) Rent paid for a room in which you hold a
dinner or cocktail party, and
4) Amounts paid for parking at a sports
arena.
However, the cost of transportation to and from
a business meal or a business-related entertain-
ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
Application of 50% limit.The 50% limit on
meal and entertainment expenses applies if the
expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal
and entertainment expenses that are not busi-
ness related. It applies to meal and entertain-
ment expenses you have for the production of
income, including rental or royalty income. It
also applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit.You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
have to determine the amount of meal and en-
tertainment expenses that would be deductible
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
Directly before or after business discussion. under the other rules discussed in this publica-personal or social purpose, for providing the
tion.If the entertainment is held on the same day asentertainment.
the business discussion, it is considered to be
Example 1. You spend $100 for aExample. You entertain a customer. Theheld directly before or after the business discus-
business-related meal. If $40 of that amount iscost is an ordinary and necessary business ex-sion.
not allowable because it is lavish and extrava-pense and is allowed under the entertainmentIf the entertainment and the business discus- gant, the remaining $60 is subject to the 50%rules. The customer’s spouse joins you becausesion are not held on the same day, you must limit. Your deduction cannot be more than $30it is impractical to entertain the customer withoutconsider the facts of each case to see if the (50% × $60).the spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter-associated test is met. Among the facts to con-
taining the customer’s spouse. If your spousesider are the place, date, and duration of the Example 2. You purchase two tickets to ajoins the party because the customer’s spousebusiness discussion. If you or your business concert and give them to a client. You pur-is present, the cost of the entertainment for yourassociates are from out of town, you must also chased the tickets through a ticket agent. Youspouse is also deductible.consider the dates of arrival and departure, and paid $150 for the two tickets, which had a facethe reasons the entertainment and the discus- value of $60 each ($120 total). Your deductionsion did not take place on the same day. cannot be more than $60 (50% × $120).
Example. A group of business associates50% Limit Exceptions to the 50% Limitcomes from out of town to your place of busi-
ness to hold a substantial business discussion.In general, you can deduct only 50% of yourGenerally, business-related meal and entertain-If you entertain those business guests on thebusiness-related meal and entertainment ex-ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.evening before the business discussion, or onpenses. (If you are subject to the Department ofFigure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
the evening of the day following the business applies to you.Transportation’s “hours of service” limits, youdiscussion, the entertainment generally is con-can deduct a higher percentage. See IndividualsExpenses not subject to 50% limit.Yoursidered to be held directly before or after thesubject to “hours of service” limits, later.) meal or entertainment expense is not subject todiscussion. The expense meets the associated
The 50% limit applies to employees or theirthe 50% limit if the expense meets one of thetest.
employers, and to self-employed persons (in-following exceptions.
cluding independent contractors) or their clients,Expenses for spouses.You generally cannot 1 – Employee’s reimbursed expenses.Ifdepending on whether the expenses are reim-deduct the cost of entertainment for your spouse you are an employee, you are not subject to thebursed.or for the spouse of a customer. However, you 50% limit on expenses for which your employer
can deduct these costs if you can show that youFigure A summarizes the general rules ex-reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
had a clear business purpose, rather than aplained in this section. countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2 – Self-employed. If you are self-em- 3) Certain railroad employees (such as engi- a) Has your name clearly and perma-
ployed, your deductible meal and entertainment neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- nently imprinted on the gift, and
expenses are not subject to the 50% limit if all ers, and control operations personnel) whob) Is one of a number of identical itemsthree of the following requirements are met. are under Federal Railroad Administration you widely distribute.regulations.
1) You have these expenses as an indepen- Examples include pens, desk sets, and4) Certain merchant mariners who are underdent contractor. plastic bags and cases.Coast Guard regulations.
2) Your customer or client reimburses you or 2) Signs, display racks, or other promotional
gives you an allowance for these ex- material to be used on the business prem-
penses in connection with services you ises of the recipient.
perform.
3) You provide adequate records of these ex- Gift or entertainment.Any item that might be
penses to your customer or client. (See considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
chapter 5.) ally will be considered entertainment. However,3.
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-In this case, your client or customer is sub- ages that you intend the customer to use at aject to the 50% limit on the expenses. later date, treat it as a gift.
 Gifts If you give a customer tickets to a theaterExample. You are a self-employed attorney
performance or sporting event and you do not gowho adequately accounts for meal and enter-
If you give gifts in the course of your trade or with the customer to the performance or event,tainment expenses to a client who reimburses
business, you can deduct all or part of the cost. you have a choice. You can treat the cost of theyou for these expenses. You are not subject to
This chapter explains the limits and rules for tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-the directly-related or associated test, nor are
deducting the costs of gifts. ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.you subject to the 50% limit. If the client can
You can change your treatment of the ticketsdeduct the expenses, the client is subject to the$25 limit.You can deduct no more than $25at a later date by filing an amended return.50% limit. for business gifts you give directly or indirectly toGenerally, an amended return must be filedIf you (the contractor) have expenses forany one person during your tax year. A gift to awithin 3 years from the date the original returnmeals and entertainment related to providingcompany that is intended for the eventual per-was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxservices for a client but do not adequately ac-sonal use or benefit of a particular person or awas paid, whichever is later.count for and seek reimbursement from the cli-limited class of people will be considered anIf you go with the customer to the event, youent for those expenses, you are subject to theindirect gift to that particular person or to themust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-directly-related or associated test and to theindividuals within that class of people who re-ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,50% limit. ceive the gift. to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.3 – Advertising expenses. You are not If you give a gift to a member of a customer’s
subject to the 50% limit if you provide meals,family, the gift is generally considered to be an
entertainment, or recreational facilities to theindirect gift to the customer. This rule does not
general public as a means of advertising orapply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-
promoting goodwill in the community. For exam-ness connection with that family member and
ple, neither the expense of sponsoring a televi-the gift is not intended for the customer’s even-
sion or radio show nor the expense of tual use. 4.
distributing free food and beverages to the gen-If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
eral public is subject to the 50% limit. you are treated as one taxpayer. It does not
matter whether you have separate businesses,4 – Sale of meals or entertainment.You Transportationare separately employed, or whether each ofare not subject to the 50% limit if you actually
you has an independent connection with thesell meals, entertainment, goods and services,
recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-This chapter discusses expenses you can de-or use of facilities to the public. For example, if
ship and the partners are treated as one tax-duct for business transportation when you areyou run a nightclub, your expense for the enter-
payer. not traveling away from home as defined intainment you furnish to your customers, such as
chapter 1. These expenses include the cost ofa floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit.
Example. Bob Jones sells products to Localtransportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the5 – Charitable sports event.You are not Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave Localcost of driving and maintaining your car.subject to the 50% limit if you pay for a packageCompany three cheese packages to thank themTransportation expenses include the ordi-deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita-for their business. They paid $80 for each pack-nary and necessary costs of all of the following.ble sports event. For the conditions the sportsage, or $240 total. Three of Local Company’s• Getting from one workplace to another inevent must meet, see Exception for events thatexecutives took the packages home for their the course of your business or professionbenefit charitable organizations under Entertain- families’ use. Bob and Jan have no independentwhen you are traveling within the city orment tickets, earlier. business relationship with any of the executives’general area that is your tax home. Taxother family members. They can deduct a totalIndividuals subject to “hours of service” home is defined in chapter 1.of $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the cheese packages.limits.You can deduct a higher percentage of
• Visiting clients or customers.your meal expenses if the meals take placeIncidental costs.Incidental costs, such asduring or incident to any period subject to the • Going to a business meeting away fromengraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,Department of Transportation’s “hours of serv- your regular workplace.and mailing, are generally not included in deter-ice” limits. The percentage is 65% for 2002, andmining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25• Getting from your home to a temporaryit gradually increases to 80% by the year 2008.limit. workplace when you have one or moreIndividuals subject to the Department of A cost is incidental only if it does not addregular places of work. These temporaryTransportation’s “hours of service” limits includesubstantial value to the gift. For example, theworkplaces can be either within the areathe following persons. cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-of your tax home or outside that area.
ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for1) Certain air transportation workers (such as Transportation expenses do not include ex-packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if thepilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and penses you have while traveling away fromvalue of the basket is substantial compared tocontrol tower operators) who are under home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-the value of the fruit.Federal Aviation Administration regula- penses which are discussed in chapter 1. How-tions. ever, if you use your car while traveling awayExceptions. The following items are not con-
2) Interstate truck operators and bus drivers from home overnight, use the rules in this chap-sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. 
who are under Department of Transporta- ter to figure your car expense deduction. See
tion regulations. 1) An item that costs $4 or less and: Car Expenses, later.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 13

Page 14 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Two places of work.If you work at two places
in one day, whether or not for the same em-
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
from one workplace to the other. However, if for
some personal reason you do not go directly
from one location to the other, you cannot de-
duct more than the amount it would have cost
you to go directly from the first location to the
second.
Transportation expenses you have in going
between home and a part-time job on a day off
from your main job are commuting expenses.
You cannot deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists.A meeting of an
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of
business if the meeting is held on a day on which
you work at your regular job. You can deduct the
expense of getting from one workplace to the
other as just discussed under Two places of
work.
You usually cannot deduct the expense if the
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you
do not work at your regular job. In this case, your
transportation generally is a nondeductible com-
muting expense. However, you can deduct your
transportation expenses if the location of the
meeting is temporary and you have one or more
regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
itan area but not at any specific location and the
reserve meeting is held at a temporary location
outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct
your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to
attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can
deduct your travel expenses. These expenses
are discussed in chapter 1.
Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct
the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi,
or of driving a car between your home and your
main or regular place of work. These costs are
personal commuting expenses. You cannot de-
duct commuting expenses no matter how far
your home is from your regular place of work.
You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if
you work during the commuting trip.
Example. You had a telephone installed in
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have aregular or main job
at another location
Always deductible
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home. )
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
your car. You sometimes use that telephone to
Illustration of transportation expenses.Fig- some later date the employment is realisticallymake business calls while commuting to and
ure B illustrates the rules for when you can expected to last more than 1 year, that employ-from work. Sometimes business associates ride
deduct transportation expenses when you have ment will be treated as temporary (unless therewith you to and from work, and you have a
a regular or main job away from your home. You are facts and circumstances that would indicatebusiness discussion in the car. These activities
may want to refer to it when deciding whether otherwise) until your expectation changes. It willdo not change the trip from personal to busi-
you can deduct your transportation expenses. not be treated as temporary after the date youness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex-
determine it will last more than 1 year. penses.Temporary work location.If you have one or If the temporary work location is beyond themore regular work locations away from your Parking fees.Fees you pay to park your cargeneral area of your regular place of work andhome and you commute to a temporary work at your place of business are nondeductibleyou stay overnight, you are traveling away fromlocation in the same trade or business, you can commuting expenses. You can, however, de-home. You may have deductible travel ex-deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip duct business-related parking fees when visitingpenses as discussed in chapter 1.transportation between your home and the tem- a customer or client.
porary location, regardless of distance. Advertising display on car.Putting displayNo regular place of work.If you have noIf your employment at a work location is material that advertises your business on yourregular place of work but ordinarily work in therealistically expected to last (and does in fact car does not change the use of your car frommetropolitan area where you live, you can de-last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo- personal use to business use. If you use this carduct daily transportation costs between homerary unless there are facts and circumstances for commuting or other personal uses, you stilland a temporary work site outside that metro-that would indicate otherwise. cannot deduct your expenses for those uses.politan area.If your employment at a work location is
Generally, a metropolitan area includes therealistically expected to last for more than 1 year Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of
area within the city limits and the suburbs thator if there is no realistic expectation that the using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not
are considered part of that metropolitan area.employment will last for 1 year or less, the em- include payments you receive from the passen-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of You cannot deduct daily transportation costs gers in your income. These payments are con-
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year. If between your home and temporary work sitessidered reimbursements of your expenses.
employment at a work location initially is realisti-within your metropolitan area. These are non- However, if you operate a car pool for a profit,
cally expected to last for 1 year or less, but at deductible commuting expenses. you must include payments from passengers in
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your income. You can then deduct your car  In this publication, “car” includes a van, mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more information
expenses (using the rules in this publication). pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of “car” on reimbursements.
for depreciation purposes, see Car definedHauling tools or instruments. Hauling Choosing the standard mileage rate.If youunder Actual Car Expenses, later.tools or instruments in your car while commuting want to use the standard mileage rate for a carto and from work does not make your car ex- you own, you must choose to use it in the firstYou may be entitled to a tax credit forpenses deductible. However, you can deduct year the car is available for use in your business.an electric vehicle or a deduction fromany additional costs you have for hauling tools or Then in later years, you can choose to use eithergross income for a part of the cost of a
TIP
instruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.clean-fuel vehicle that you place in service dur-with your car). If you want to use the standard mileage rateing the year. The vehicle must meet certain
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entirerequirements, and you do not have to use it inUnion members’ trips from a union hall.If
lease period. For leases that began on or beforeyour business to qualify for the credit or theyou get your work assignments at a union hall
December 31, 1997, the standard mileage ratededuction. However, you must reduce your ba-and then go to your place of work, the costs of
must be used for the entire portion of the leasesis for depreciation of the electric vehicle orgetting from the union hall to your place of work
period (including renewals) that is after 1997.clean-fuel vehicle property by the amount of theare nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-
credit or deduction you claim. See Depreciation If you choose to use the standard mileagethough you need the union to get your work
Deduction, later, under Actual Car Expenses. rate, you are considered to have chosen not toassignments, you are employed where you
For more information on electric or clean-fueluse the depreciation methods discussed later.work, not where the union hall is located.
vehicles, see chapter 12 of Publication 535.This is because the standard mileage rate in-
cludes an allowance for depreciation that is notOffice in the home.If you have an office in
expressed in terms of years. If you change to theyour home that qualifies as a principal place of
actual expenses method in a later year, butbusiness, you can deduct your daily transporta-Rural mail carriers.If you are a rural mailbefore your car is fully depreciated, you have totion costs between your home and another workcarrier, you may be able to treat the amount ofestimate the remaining useful life of the car andlocation in the same trade or business. (Seequalified reimbursement you received as theuse straight line depreciation. For more informa-Publication 587, Business Use of Your Home, amount of your allowable expense. Because thetion about depreciation included in the standardfor information on determining if your home of-qualified reimbursement is treated as paid undermileage rate, see Exception under Methods office qualifies as a principal place of business.)an accountable plan, your employer should notdepreciation under Depreciation Deduction,include the amount of reimbursement in yourlater.Examples of deductible transportation.The income. And, since the reimbursement equals
following examples show when you can deductthe expense, you have no deduction to report onStandard mileage rate not allowed. Youtransportation expenses based on the locationyour tax return. cannot use the standard mileage rate if you:of your work and your home. A “qualified reimbursement” is the amount of
reimbursement you receive that meets both of1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),Example 1. You regularly work in an officethe following conditions. 
2) Use two or more cars at the same time (asin the city where you live. Your employer sends
in fleet operations),you to a one-week training session at a different1) It is given as an equipment maintenance
office in the same city. You travel directly fromallowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.3) Claimed a depreciation deduction for theyour home to the training location and returnPostal Service. car using any method other than straighteach day. You can deduct the cost of your daily line, for example, MACRS (as discussed2) It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-round-trip transportation between your home later under Methods of depreciation underlective bargaining agreement. Any laterand the training location. Depreciation Deduction),agreement cannot increase the qualified
reimbursement amount by more than the 4) Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis-Example 2. Your principal place of businessrate of inflation. cussed later) on the car,is in your home. You can deduct the cost of
round-trip transportation between your qualify-See your employer for information on your reim-5) Claimed the special depreciation allow-ing home office and your client’s or customer’sbursement. ance (discussed later) on the car,place of business. If you are a rural mail carrier and re-6) Claimed actual car expenses after 1997ceived a qualified reimbursement, youExample 3. You have no regular office, and for a car you leased, orcannot use the standard mileage rate.CAUTION
!
you do not have an office in your home. In this 7) Are a rural mail carrier who received acase, the location of your first business contact qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mailis considered your office. Transportation ex- carriers under Car Expenses, earlier.)penses between your home and this first contactStandard Mileage Rateare nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans- Two or more cars. If you own two or moreportation expenses between your last businessYou may be able to use the standard mileagecars that are used for business at the same time,contact and your home are also nondeductiblerate to figure the deductible costs of operatingyou cannot use the standard mileage rate for thecommuting expenses. Although you cannot de-your car for business purposes. For 2002, thebusiness use of any car. However, you may beduct the costs of these trips, you can deduct thestandard mileage rate is 361/2 cents a mile for allable to deduct your actual expenses for operat-costs of going from one client or customer tobusiness miles. This rate is adjusted periodi-ing each of the cars in your business. See Actualanother. cally. Car Expenses, later, for information on how to
figure your deduction.If you use the standard mileage rate forYou are not using two or more cars for busi-a year, you cannot deduct your actualness at the same time if you alternate using (usecar expenses for that year. You cannotCAUTION
!Car Expenses at different times) the cars for business.deduct the special depreciation allowance (andThe following examples illustrate the rulesyou do not need to make the election not toIf you use your car for business purposes, you for when you can and cannot use the standardclaim the allowance), depreciation, or lease pay-ordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener- mileage rate for two or more cars.ments, maintenance and repairs, gasoline (in-ally can use one of the two following methods tocluding gasoline taxes), oil, insurance, andfigure your deductible expenses. Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns avehicle registration fees. See Choosing the car and a van that she alternates using for call-standard mileage rate and Standard mileage• Standard mileage rate. ing on her customers. She can use the standardrate not allowed, later.• Actual car expenses. mileage rate for the business mileage of the car
and the van.
If you use actual expenses to figure your de-You generally can use the standard mileage
duction for a car you lease, there are rules that Example 2. Tony uses his own pickup truckrate whether or not you are reimbursed and
affect the amount of your lease payments that in his landscaping business. During the year, hewhether or not any reimbursement is more or
you can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later. traded in his old truck for a newer one. Tony canless than the amount figured using the standard
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Depreciation Lease Registrationuse the standard mileage rate for the business figure your business-related car expenses in the
Licenses payments feesmileage of both the old and the new trucks. year you first place a car in service.
Gas Insurance Repairs If you claim either a section 179 deduction,Oil Garage rent TiresExample 3. Chris owns a repair shop and the special depreciation allowance, or deprecia-Tolls Parking feesan insurance business. He uses his pickup truck tion using a method other than straight line for its
If you have fully depreciated a car that youfor the repair shop and his car for the insurance estimated useful life in the year you first place a
still use in your business, you can continue tobusiness. No one else uses either the truck or car in service, you cannot use the standard
claim your other actual car expenses. Continuethe car for business purposes. Chris can use the mileage rate on that car in any future year.
to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5.standard mileage rate for the business use of Car defined. For depreciation purposes, athe truck and the car. car is any four-wheeled vehicle (including aBusiness and personal use.If you use your
truck or van) that is made primarily for use oncar for both business and personal purposes,Example 4. Maureen owns a car and a van public streets, roads, and highways. Its un-you must divide your expenses between busi-that are both used in her housecleaning busi- loaded gross vehicle weight (gross vehicleness and personal use. You can divide yourness. Her employees use the van and she uses weight in the case of a truck or van) must not beexpense based on the miles driven for eachthe car to travel to the various customers. Mau- more than 6,000 pounds. A car includes anypurpose.reen cannot use the standard mileage rate for part, component, or other item that is physicallythe car or the van. This is because both vehicles attached to it or is usually included in theExample. You are a sales representativeare used in Maureen’s business at the same purchase price.for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000time. She must use actual expenses for both A car does not include: miles during the year: 12,000 miles for businessvehicles. and 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claim
1) An ambulance, hearse, or combinationonly 60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of oper-Interest.If you are an employee, you cannot ambulance-hearse used directly in a busi-ating your car as a business expense.deduct any interest paid on a car loan. This ness, orapplies even if you use the car 100% for busi-Employer-provided vehicle.If you use a ve-ness as an employee. 2) A vehicle used directly in the business ofhicle provided by your employer for businessHowever, if you are self-employed and use transporting persons or property for pay orpurposes, you can deduct your actual un-your car in your business, you can deduct that hire.reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use thepart of the interest expense that represents yourstandard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided by See Special Depreciation Allowance, laterbusiness use of the car. For example, if you useYour Employer in chapter 6. for more information on how to depreciate youryour car 60% for business, you can deduct 60% vehicle.of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). YouInterest on car loans.If you are an employee,cannot deduct the rest of the interest expense.you cannot deduct any interest paid on a car
loan. This interest is treated as personal interestIf you use a home equity loan to Section 179 Deduction
and is not deductible. If you are self-employedpurchase your car, you may be able to
and use your car in that business, see Interest,The section 179 deduction allows you to treatdeduct the interest. See Publication
TIP
earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate. part or all of the business cost of a car as a936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, for
current expense rather than taking depreciationmore information. Taxes paid on your car.If you are an em- deductions over a number of years.ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes
The limit on total section 179 and de-paid on your car if you itemize deductions. EnterPersonal property taxes.If you itemize your preciation deductions (discussed later)the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Formdeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can may reduce or eliminate any benefit1040).
TIP
deduct on line 7 state and local personal prop- from claiming the section 179 deduction.You cannot deduct sales taxes, even if youerty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take thisuse your car 100% for business. Sales taxes arededuction even if you use the standard mileagepart of your car’s basis and are recovered You can claim the section 179 deductionrate or if you do not use the car for business.through depreciation. See Special Depreciationonly in the year you place the car in service. ForIf you are self-employed and use your car inAllowance and Depreciation Deduction, later. this purpose, a car is placed in service when ityour business, you can deduct the business part is ready and available for a specific use, whetherof state and local personal property taxes onFines and collateral.You cannot deduct finesin a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, amotor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C–EZ,and collateral you pay for traffic violations.personal activity, or for the production of in-or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize your come. Even if you are not using the property, it isCasualty and theft losses.If your car is dam-deductions, you can include the remainder of in service when it is ready and available for itsaged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able toyour state and local personal property taxes on specific use.deduct part of the loss that is not covered bythe car on Schedule A (Form 1040). A car first used for personal purposes cannotinsurance. See Publication 547, Casualties, Di-
Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using qualify for the deduction in a later year when itssasters, and Thefts, for information on deducting
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any use changes to business.a loss on your car.
business-related parking fees and tolls. (ParkingDepreciation and section 179 deductions.fees that you pay to park your car at your place Example. In 2001 you bought a new car andGenerally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax andof work are nondeductible commuting ex- placed it in service for personal purposes. Thisimprovements, is a capital expense. Becausepenses.) year, you began to use it for business. Changingthe benefits last longer than one year, you gen-its use to business use does not qualify the costSale, trade-in, or other disposition.If you erally cannot deduct a capital expense. How-of your car for a section 179 deduction this year.sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car,ever, you can recover this cost through theHowever, you can claim a depreciation deduc-you may have a gain or loss on the transactionsection 179 deduction (the deduction allowed bytion for the business use of the car. See Depreci-or an adjustment to the basis of your new car.section 179 of the Internal Revenue Code), theation Deduction, later.See Disposition of a Car, later. special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-
Limits. There are limits on:tion deductions. By using depreciation, you re-
cover the cost over more than one year byActual Car Expenses 1) The total cost of qualifying property youdeducting part of it each year. The section 179can choose to treat as a section 179 de-deduction, special depreciation allowance, andIf you do not use the standard mileage rate, you duction, andthe depreciation deduction are discussed later.may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.
Generally, there are limits on these deduc-2) The total amount of the section 179 deduc-If you qualify to use both methods, youtions. Special rules apply if you use your cartion plus the depreciation deduction (dis-may want to figure your deduction both50% or less in your work or business. cussed later) you can claim for a qualifyingways to see which gives you a larger
TIP
You can claim a section 179 deduction, theproperty.deduction. special depreciation allowance, and use a de-
preciation method other than straight line only ifLimit on cost of qualifying property.Gen-
Actual car expenses include: you do not use the standard mileage rate to erally, you can choose to treat up to $24,000 of
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the cost of qualifying property as a section 179 amended tax return filed after the due date of 75%). He then figures the special depreciation
deduction in 2002. The limit depends on the your return (including extensions). allowance of $4,500 ($15,000 × 30%).
percentage of business use. You must use the If you make the election on an amended The remaining depreciable basis of $10,500
property more than 50% for business to claimreturn, attach the appropriate election form($15,000 − $4,500) is depreciated using
any section 179 deduction. If you used the prop- (2106 or 4562) to it and print “Filed pursuant toMACRS (200% declining balance method,
erty more than 50% for business, multiply the section 301.9100–2” on the election statement. half-year convention) and results in a deduction
cost of the property by the percentage of busi- File the amended return at the same address of $2,100 ($10,500 × 20%), for a total deprecia-
ness use. The result is the cost of the property you filed the original return. tion deduction for 2002 of $6,600 ($4,500 +
that qualifies for the section 179 deduction. Once made, the choice can be changed only $2,100). However, Bob’s depreciation deduction
with the consent of the Internal Revenue Service is limited to $5,745 ($7,660 × 75%), as dis-
Example. Peter purchased a car this year(IRS). cussed next.
for $14,500 and he used it 60% for business.
Depreciation limit.The limit on your depreci-Reduction in business use.To be eligible toThe total cost of Peter’s car that qualifies for the
ation deduction for 2002 is $7,660 for a car thatclaim the section 179 deduction, you must usesection 179 deduction is $8,700 ($14,500 cost ×
is qualified property (defined above) and foryour car more than 50% for business or work in60% business use). But see Limit on total sec-
which you claim the special depreciation allow-the year you acquired it. If your business use oftion 179 and depreciation deductions, discussed
ance. The limit is $22,980 if the car is an electricthe car is 50% or less in a later tax year duringnext.
car.the recovery period, you have to recapture (in-Limit on total section 179 and depreciation If you use a car less than 100% in yourclude in income) in that later year any excessdeductions. Generally, the total amount of business or work, the limit is $7,660 (or $22,980depreciation. Any section 179 deductionsection 179 and depreciation deductions that for an electric car) multiplied by the percentageclaimed on the car is included in calculating theyou can claim for a car that you place in service of business and investment use during the year.excess depreciation. For information on this cal-in 2002 cannot be more than $7,660 if you claim  For cars that do not qualify for (or for whichculation, see Excess depreciation later in thisthe special depreciation allowance ($3,060 if you choose not to claim) the special deprecia-chapter under Car Used 50% or Less for Busi-you elect not to claim the special depreciation tion allowance, the limit is $3,060 ($9,180 forness.allowance for the car or the car is not qualified electric cars), see Depreciation Limits later.
property as explained later under Special De- Dispositions.If you dispose of a car on whichElection not to claim the special depreciationpreciation Allowance). The limit is reduced ifyou had claimed the section 179 deduction, theallowance. You can elect not to claim theyour business use of the car is less than 100%.amount of that deduction is treated as a depreci-special depreciation allowance for a car that isSee Depreciation Limits, later, for more informa-ation deduction for recapture purposes. Youqualified property by making a statement at-tion. treat any gain on the disposition of the propertytached to, or written on, your return indicatingas ordinary income up to the amount of thethat you are electing not to claim the specialExample. In the previous example, Petersection 179 deduction and any allowable depre-depreciation allowance for 5-year property. As ahad a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes ofciation (unless you establish the amount actuallygeneral rule, you must make this election by thethe section 179 deduction) of $8,700. However,allowed). For information on the disposition of adue date (including extensions) of your return.Peter’s total section 179 deduction and depreci-car, see Disposition of a Car, later. You can have an automatic extension of 6ation deduction is limited. If Peter claims the
months from the due date of your return (exclud-special depreciation deduction (discussed
ing extensions) to make the election with anlater), the total of the two deductions cannot be
Special Depreciation Allowance amended return. To get this extension, you mustmore than $4,596 ($7,660 limit x 60% business
file your original return by the due date (includinguse). If Peter’s car does not qualify for the spe-The special depreciation allowance is a deduc-
extensions). At the top of the statement, writecial depreciation allowance or Peter elects not totion equal to 30% of the depreciable basis of
“Filed pursuant to section 301.9100–2.”claim the allowance, the total of the two deduc-qualified property. If your car qualifies for this
If you elect not to claim the special deprecia-tions cannot be more than $1,836 ($3,060 x 60%deduction, you must reduce the car’s adjusted
tion allowance for a car that is qualified property,business use). basis by the amount of the allowance, unless
you cannot claim it for any other 5-year propertyyou elect not to claim the allowance, as dis-
Cost of car.For purposes of the section 179 placed in service during the same year.cussed later. You figure the amount of the spe-
deduction, the cost of the car does not includecial depreciation allowance after any section Unless you elect not to claim the spe-any amount figured by reference to any other179 deduction you choose to claim, but before cial depreciation allowance, you mustproperty held by you at any time. For example, iffiguring your regular depreciation deduction reduce the car’s adjusted basis by theCAUTION
!
you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car tounder MACRS. amount of the allowance, even if the allowanceuse in your business, your cost for purposes ofYou can claim the special depreciation allow-was not claimed.the section 179 deduction does not include yourance only for the year the qualified property is
adjusted basis in the car you trade in for the newplaced in service.
car. Your cost includes only the cash you paid. Claiming the special depreciation allowanceQualified property.Qualified property in-Basis of car for depreciation.The amount for 2001. If you filed your 2001 calendar yearcludes a car (See Car defined earlier, underof the section 179 deduction reduces your basis return before June 1, 2002, and did not claim theActual Car Expenses.) that meets all of the fol-in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc- new special depreciation allowance for a quali-lowing requirements.tion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc- fied car, you can claim it by filing an amended
tion from the cost of your car. The resulting return on Form 1040X, by April 15, 2003. At the1) You bought the car new after Septemberamount is the basis in your car that you use to top of the Form 1040X, print “Filed pursuant to10, 2001.figure your depreciation deduction. Revenue Procedure 2002–33.” If you are an
2) You placed the car in service for businessemployee, attach Form 2106, If you are self-em-
in 2002, andWhen to choose. If you want to take the sec- ployed, attach Form 4562.
tion 179 deduction, you must make the choice in Or, you can claim the special depreciation3) You used the car more than 50% in athe tax year you both purchase the car and allowance by filing Form 3115, with your 2002qualified business use.place it in service for business or work. return. For details, see Revenue Procedure
For more information on other depreciable prop-2002–33.
How to choose. Employees use Form 2106 toerty that may qualify for the special depreciation
make this choice and report the section 179allowance, see Publication 946.
deduction. All others use Form 4562. Make your Depreciation Deduction
choice by taking the deduction on the appropri-Example. Bob bought a new car in 2002 for
ate form and file it with your original tax return. $20,000 and placed it in service immediately, If you use actual car expenses to figure your
If you timely filed your return for the year using it 75% for business. Bob’s car is qualified deduction for a car you own and use in your
without making the election, you can still make property. business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-
the election by filing an amended return within 6 Bob chooses not to take a section 179 de- tion: that is, you can deduct a certain amount
months of the due date of the return (excluding duction for the car. Bob first must figure the car’s each year as a recovery of your cost or other
extensions). You cannot make the choice on an depreciable basis, which is $15,000 ($20,000 × basis in your car. You cannot use the standard
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
mileage rate if you decide to take a depreciationMore-than-50%-use test. Generally, you for that period. Your business use for the year is
deduction in the year you first place the car in must use your car more than 50% for qualified 40% (80% × 6/12).
service. business use (defined next) during the year to Limits. The amount you can claim for sectionuse MACRS. You must meet thisIn addition, you may be able to claim the 179 and depreciation deductions may be limited.more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov-special depreciation allowance for new cars pur- The maximum amount you can claim dependsery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car.chased and placed in service in 2002. See Spe- on the year in which you placed your car inIf your business use is 50% or less, you mustcial Depreciation Allowance earlier. service. You have to reduce the maximumuse the straight line method to depreciate yourYou generally need to know the following amount if you did not use the car exclusively forcar. This is explained later under Car Used 50%things about the car you intend to depreciate. business. See Depreciation Limits, later.or Less for Business.
1) Your basis in the car. Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjustedQualified business use.A qualified businessbasis (often referred to as your basis or your2) The date you place the car in service. use is any use in your trade or business. It doesbasis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia-not include use for the production of income3) The method of depreciation and recov- tion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex-(investment use). However, you do combineery period you will use. plained later under Modified Accelerated Costyour business and investment use to computeRecovery System (MACRS). Your unadjustedyour depreciation deduction for the tax year.basis for figuring depreciation is your originalBasis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-Use of your car by another person.Do not basis increased or decreased by certaination is generally its cost. This includes anytreat any use of your car by another person asamounts.amount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-use in your trade or business unless that useTo figure your unadjusted basis, begin witherty, or services. meets one of the following three conditions. your car’s original basis, which generally is itsGenerally, you figure depreciation using your cost. Cost includes sales taxes, destinationbasis. However, in some situations (such as use1) It is directly connected with your business.charges, and dealer preparation. Increase yourof the straight line method) you will use your basis by any substantial improvements you2) It is properly reported by you as income toadjusted basis (your basis reduced by deprecia- make to your car, such as adding air condition-the other person (and, if you have to, yoution allowed or allowable in earlier years). For ing or a new engine. Decrease your basis by anywithhold tax on the income).one of these situations see, Exception under deductible casualty loss, section 179 deduction,Methods of depreciation, later. 3) It results in a payment of fair market rent.special depreciation allowance, diesel fuel taxIf you change the use of a car from personalThis includes any payment to you for thecredit, gas guzzler tax, clean-fuel vehicle deduc-to business, your basis is the lesser of the fairuse of your car. tion, and qualified electric vehicle credit. Seemarket value or your adjusted basis in the car on Publication 535 for more information on thethe date of conversion. Additional rules concern-Business use changes. If you used your carclean-fuel vehicle deduction and the qualifieding basis are discussed later in this chaptermore than 50% in qualified business use in theelectric vehicle credit.under Unadjusted basis. year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in a
If your business use later falls to 50%later year (including the year of disposition), you
Placed in service.You generally place a car or less, you may have to recapturehave to change to the straight line method of
in service when it is available for use in your (include in your income) any excessdepreciation. See Qualified business use 50%CAUTION
!
work or business, in an income-producing activ- depreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less foror less in a later year under Car Used 50% or
ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation begins Business, later, for more information.Less for Business, later.
when the car is placed in service for use in your
Property does not cease to be usedwork or business or for the production of income. If you acquired the car by gift or inheritance,more than 50% in qualified businessFor purposes of computing depreciation, if see Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor-use by reason of a transfer at death.
TIP
you first start using the car only for personal use mation on your basis in the car.and later convert it to business use, you place
the car in service on the date of conversion. Improvements. A major improvement to a
Use for more than one purpose.If you use car is treated as a new item of 5-year recoveryCar placed in service and disposed of inyour car for more than one purpose during theproperty. It is treated as placed in service in thethe same year. If you place a car in servicetax year, you must allocate the use to the vari-year the improvement is made. It does not mat-and dispose of it in the same tax year, youous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile-ter how old the car is when the improvement iscannot claim any depreciation deduction for thatage. Figure the percentage of qualified businessadded. Follow the same steps for depreciatingcar. use by dividing the number of miles you drivethe improvement as you would for depreciating
your car for business purposes during the yearthe original cost of the car. However, you mustMethods of depreciation.Generally, you fig-by the total number of miles you drive the cartreat the improvement and the car as a wholeure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-during the year for any purpose. when applying the limits on the depreciationcelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS).
deductions. Your car’s depreciation deductionChange from personal to business use.IfMACRS is discussed later in this chapter.
for the year (plus any section 179 deduction,you change the use of a car from 100% personalException. If you used the standard mile- special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-use to business use during the tax year, youage rate in the first year of business use and tion on any improvements) cannot be more thanmay not have mileage records for the timechange to the actual expenses method in a later the depreciation limit that applies for that year.before the change to business use. In this case,year, you cannot depreciate your car under the See Depreciation Limits, later.you figure the percentage of business use forMACRS rules. You must use straight line depre-the year as follows. Effect of trade-in on basis.When youciation over the estimated remaining useful life
trade an old car for a new one, your originalof the car. 1) Determine the percentage of business usebasis in the new car is generally your adjustedTo figure depreciation under the straight linefor the period following the change. Do thisbasis in the old car plus any additional paymentmethod, you must reduce your basis in the carby dividing business miles by total milesyou make.(but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for alldriven during that period.
miles for which you used the standard mileage Traded car used only for business.If you2) Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction.rate. The rate per mile varies depending on the trade in a car that you used only in your businessThe numerator (top number) is the numberyear(s) you used the standard mileage rate. For for another car that will be used only in yourof months the car is used for business andthe rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustment business, your original basis in the new car isthe denominator (bottom number) is 12.when you used the standard mileage rate under your adjusted basis in the old car, plus any
Disposition of a Car, later. additional amount you pay for the new car.
This reduction of basis is in addition to thoseExample. You use a car only for personal
basis adjustments described later under Unad- purposes during the first 6 months of the year.Example 1. Paul trades in a car that has an
justed basis. You must use your adjusted basis During the last 6 months of the year, you drive adjusted basis of $3,000 for a new car. In addi-
in your car to figure your depreciation deduction. the car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000 tion, he pays cash of $17,000 for the new car.
For additional information on the straight line miles are for business. This gives you a busi- His original basis of the new car is $20,000 (his
method of depreciation, see Publication 946. ness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000) $3,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus the
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Excess of 100% over actual $1,820$17,000 cash paid). Paul’s unadjusted basis use of the old van since 1998. He did not claim a
section 179 deduction for the old or the new van.would be the same unless he claims the section Less: Lesser of Excess amount
179 deduction, special depreciation allowance, ($1,820)or Adjusted basisMark paid $12,800 for the 1998 van in June
of old car ($10,080) − 1,820or has other increases or decreases to his origi-1998. He paid an additional $9,800 when he
nal basis. acquired the 2002 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 of Unadjusted basis of part of new carthe depreciation deduction amount (which is in-that must be depreciated over theExample 2. In July 1999, Marcia purchasedcluded in the $8,494 depreciation expense total)remaining recovery period usinga car for $26,000 and placed it in service forfor his old van for 2002, the year of disposition,the same depreciation method $8,260100% use in her business. She did not claim aas explained later under Disposition of a Car.
section 179 deduction. Marcia’s unadjusted ba-Mark does not claim the special depreciationAdditional basis (cash paid) for new
sis for the car was $26,000. For 1999 through car that is treated as newlyallowance.
purchased MACRS property  $6,0002001, Marcia figured her depreciation deductionMark figures the unadjusted basis for depre-
using the MACRS depreciation chart for thoseciating his new van as shown next.
years.
Cost of old van $12,800In September 2002, Marcia traded that car in Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery SystemLess: Total depreciation allowed on theand paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be used (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-business cost of old van, $9,600100% in her business. Marcia is allowed covery System (MACRS) is the name given to($12,800 × 75%), from 1998 – 2002− 8,494one-half of the MACRS depreciation amount the tax rules for getting back (recovering)Adjusted basis of old van before $ 4,306
figured for 2002 for her old car. (See Disposition through depreciation deductions the cost oftrade-in adjustment
of a Car, later.) Marcia does not claim either the property used in a trade or business or to pro-
Trade-in adjustment:special depreciation allowance or the section duce income.
Depreciation at 100% business use:179 deduction. The maximum amount you can deduct is2002 — ($12,800 × .1152) × 1/2 $  737Marcia figures her basis in the new car as limited, depending on the year you placed your(Limit: $1,775)follows. car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.2001 — 12,800 × .1152 1,475
(Limit: $1,775) Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars areCost of old car $26,000 2000 — 12,800 × .192 2,458 classified as 5-year property. You actually de-Less: Total depreciation allowed (Limit: $2,950)from 1999 through 2002 − 12,508 preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a1999 — 12,800 × .32 4,096
period of 6 calendar years. This is because your(Limit: $5,000)Adjusted basis of old car and basis of 1998 — 12,800 × .20 2,560 car is generally treated as placed in service inpart of new car that must be depreciated (Limit: $3,160) the middle of the year and you claim deprecia-over the remaining recovery period Total $11,326 tion for one-half of both the first year and theusing the same depreciation method $13,492 Less: Actual depreciation sixth year.allowed − 8,494Additional basis (cash paid) for new car Excess of 100% over actual $ 2,832 Depreciation deduction for certain Indianthat is treated as newly purchased reservation property.Shorter recovery peri-Less: Lesser of Excess amount ($2,832)MACRS property + 14,200 ods are provided under MACRS for qualifiedor Adjusted basis of old van
($4,306) − 2,832 Indian reservation property placed in service onTotal basis of new car $27,692
Indian reservations after 1993 and before 2005.
Unadjusted Basis of part of new van The recovery period that applies for aTraded car used partly in business.If you that must be depreciated over the business-use car is 3 years instead of 5 years.trade in a car that you used partly in your busi-remaining recovery period using However, the depreciation limits, discussedness for a new car that you will use in yourthe same depreciation method $1,474
later, will still apply.business, you must make a “trade-in” adjust-
ment for the personal use of the old car. ThisAdditional basis (cash paid) for new van For more information on the qualifications for
that is treated as newly purchasedadjustment has the effect of reducing your basis this shorter recovery period and the percent-
MACRS property $9,800in your old car, but not below zero, for purposes ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-
of figuring your depreciation deduction for the tion, see chapter 4 of Publication 946.
new car. (This adjustment is not used, however, Depreciation methods. You can use oneExample 2. Rob paid $15,000 for a new carwhen you determine the gain or loss on the later of the following three methods to depreciatethat he placed in service in 1999. He used itdisposition of the new car. See Publication 544, your car.partly for business in 1999 (9,000 businessSales and other Dispositions of Assets, for infor-
miles of 15,000 total miles), 2000 (12,000 busi-mation on how to report the disposition of your 1) The 200% declining balance methodness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 2001car.) (200% DB) over a 5-year recovery period(14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used theTo figure the unadjusted basis of your new that switches to the straight line methodstandard mileage rate in those years to claim thecar for depreciation, first add to your adjusted when that method provides an equal orbusiness use of his car. (See Depreciation ad-basis in the old car any additional amount you greater deduction.justment when you used the standard mileagepay for the new car. Then subtract from that totalrate under Disposition of a Car, later.) 2) The 150% declining balance methodthe excess, if any, of:
(150% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodOn January 2, 2002, Rob traded in this car
that switches to the straight line methodand paid an additional $6,000 for his new car.1) The total of the amounts that would have
when that method provides an equal orRob figures the unadjusted basis for his new carbeen allowable as depreciation during the
greater deduction.as shown next.tax years before the trade if 100% of the
use of the car had been business and in- 3) The straight line method (SL) over aCost of old car $15,000vestment use, over 5-year recovery period.Less: Total depreciation allowed:
2001 — 14,400 mi. × .15 $2,1602) The total of the amounts actually allowable
If you use Table 3 (discussed later2000 — 12,000 mi. × .14 1,680as depreciation during those years.
1999 — 9,000 mi. × .12 1,080 − 4,920 under MACRS depreciation chart) to
For information about figuring depreciation, seeAdjusted basis of old car determine your depreciation rate for
TIP
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Systembefore trade-in adjustment $10,080 2002, you do not need to determine in what year
(MACRS) , which follows Example 2, later. using the straight line method provides an equalTrade-in adjustment: or greater deduction. This is because the chartDepreciation at 100% business use:Example 1. In March, Mark traded his 1998 has the switch to the straight line method built2001 — 18,000 mi. × .15 $2,700van (placed in service in 1998) for a new 2002 into its rates.2000 — 16,000 mi. × .14 2,240model. He used the old van 75% for business 1999 — 15,000 mi. × .12 1,800and he used the new van 75% for business inTotal $6,740
Before choosing a method, you may wish to2002. Mark claimed actual expenses (includingLess: Actual depreciation
consider the following facts.$8,494 depreciation expense) for the business allowed − 4,920
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
centage in the column of the chart based on the cars that run on clean fuel. Clean-fuel cars are
1) Using the straight line method provides discussed in chapter 12 of Publication 535. Thedate that you first placed the car in service andequal yearly deductions throughout the re- exceptions follow.the depreciation method that you are using. Mul-covery period. tiply the unadjusted basis of your car (defined
1) Amounts you pay for retrofit parts andearlier) by that percentage to determine the2) Using the declining balance methods pro-
components to modify a car to run onvides greater deductions during the earlier amount of your depreciation deduction. If you
clean fuel are not subject to the deprecia-recovery years with the deductions gener-prefer to figure your depreciation deduction with-
tion limit on cars. Only the cost of the carally getting smaller each year. out the help of the chart, see Publication 946. 
before modification is subject to the limit.
Your deduction cannot be more thanMACRS depreciation chart.A 2002 MACRS 2) If you place a car in service after August 5,the maximum depreciation limit forDepreciation Chart and instructions are included 1997, that was produced to run on electric-cars. See Depreciation Limits, later.CAUTION
!
in this chapter as Table 3. Using this table will ity, your depreciation limit is increased.
make it easy for you to figure the 2002 deprecia- The amounts are shown in the following
tion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap- tables.
pears in the Instructions for Form 2106. Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru-
Maximum Depreciation Deduction Forary 2001 to use exclusively in his landscapeYou may have to use the tables in Electric Cars Placed in Servicebusiness. He paid $6,200 for the truck with noPublication 946 instead of using this After August 5, 1997trade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de-MACRS Depreciation Chart.CAUTION
!
duction, and he chose to use the 200% DB Date 4th &method to get the largest depreciation deduction Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later
You must use the Depreciation Tables in in the early years. In Service Year Year Year Years
Publication 946 rather than the 2002 MACRS Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart in2002 $22,980 1 $14,700 $8,750 $5,325Depreciation Chart in this publication if any one2001 to find his percentage. The unadjusted9/11/2001 –of the following three conditions applies to you.basis of his truck equals its cost because Phil12/31/2001 23,0801 14,800 8,850 5,325used it exclusively for business. He multiplied1) You file your return on a fiscal year basis. 1/01/2001 –the unadjusted basis of his truck, $6,200, by the9/10/2001 9,280 14,800 8,850 5,3252) You file your return for a short tax yearpercentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2001
(less than 12 months). 2000 – 2001 9,280 14,800 8,850 5,325depreciation deduction of $1,240.
1999 9,280 14,900 8,950 5,325In 2002, Phil used the truck for personal3) During the year, all of the following condi-
purposes when he repaired his father’s cabin.tions apply. 1998 9,380 15,000 8,950 5,425
His records show that the business use of his1997 9,480 15,100 9,050 5,425a) You placed some property in servicetruck was 90% in 2002. Phil used Table 3 to find
from January through September. 1 If the special depreciation allowance does not applyhis percentage. Reading down the first columnor you make the election not to claim the specialfor the date placed in service and across to theb) You placed some property in service depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $9,280
for 2001 and $9,180 for 2002.200% DB column, he locates his percentage,from October through December.
32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of hisc) Your basis in the property you placed in The examples throughout this chaptertruck, $5,580 ($6,200 cost × 90% business use),service from October through Decem- illustrate gas-fueled cars.by 32% to figure his 2002 depreciation deduc-ber (excluding nonresidential real prop-tion of $1,786.
CAUTION
!
erty, residential rental property, and
property placed in service and disposed
of in the same year) was more than
Depreciation Limits Car used less than full year.The deprecia-40% of your total bases in all property tion limits are not reduced if you use a car foryou placed in service during the year.There are limits on the amount you can deductless than a full year. This means that you do notfor depreciation of your car. The section 179reduce the limit when you either place a car indeduction is treated as depreciation for pur-Depreciation in future years.If you use service or dispose of a car during the year.poses of the limits. The maximum amount youthe percentages from the chart, you generally However, the depreciation limits are reduced if
can deduct each year depends on the year youmust continue to use them for the entire recov- you do not use the car exclusively for business
place the car in service. These limits are shownery period of your car. However, you cannot and investment purposes. See Reduction for
in the following tables.continue to use the chart if your basis in your car personal use, later.
is adjusted because of a casualty. In that case, Maximumfor the year of the adjustment and the remaining Example. Marie purchased a car in JuneDepreciation Deduction
recovery period, figure the depreciation without for Cars 2002 for $18,000 to use exclusively in her busi-
the chart using your adjusted basis in the car at ness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc-
Date 4th &the end of the year of the adjustment and over tion, but she does claim the special depreciationPlaced 1st 2nd 3rd Laterthe remaining recovery period. See Figuring the allowance, and she chooses the 200% DBIn Service Year Year Year YearsDeduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 4 method of depreciation.
of Publication 946. 2002 $7,660 1 $4,900 $2,950 $1,775 Marie figures her special depreciation allow-
9/11/2001 – ance of $5,400 (18,000 × 30%).In future years, do not use the chart in
12/31/2001 7,6601 4,900 2,950 1,775this edition of the publication. Instead, Marie’s MACRS depreciation (using the rate
use the chart in the publication or the1/01/2001 – from Table 3) is $2,520 (($18,000 − $5,400) ×
TIP
9/10/2001 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775form instructions for those future years. 20%) for a total depreciation deduction of
$7,920 ($2,520 + $5,400). However, the maxi-2000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775
mum amount she can deduct for depreciation is1999 3,060 5,000 2,950 1,775Disposition of car during recovery period. $7,660. (See Deductions in years after the re-
If you dispose of the car before the end of the1998 3,160 5,000 2,950 1,775 covery period, later.)
recovery period, you are generally allowed a half1997 3,160 5,000 3,050 1,775year of depreciation in the year of disposition Reduction for personal use.The deprecia-1995 – 1996 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775unless you purchased the car during the last tion limits are reduced based on your percent-1 If the special depreciation allowance does not applyquarter of a year. See Depreciation deduction age of personal use. If you use a car less thanor you make the election not to claim the specialfor the year of disposition under Disposition of a 100% in your business or work, you must deter-depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,060.Car, later, for information on how to figure the mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-depreciation allowed in the year of disposition.Exceptions for clean-fuel cars.There are plying the limit amount by the percentage of
two exceptions to the depreciation limits forbusiness and investment use during the taxHow to use the 2002 chart.To figure your
year.cars. They are effective after August 5, 1997, fordepreciation deduction for 2002, find the per-
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3.
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below
to find the depreciation method and percentage to use for your
2002 return. If your car was placed in service before 1987, see
the depreciation chart in the Form 2106 instructions.
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the
car in service. Then select the depreciation method and
percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2002, you must use the same
method you used on last year’s return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line
method. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business. )
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in
the chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for
2002. (Also see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the
same year, you may have to use the Jan. 1—Sept. 30 percentage i nstead of the Oct. 1—Dec. 31 percentage for your car.
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of t hat year
and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in  service
after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the enti re
year, use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of
Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $22,000) in May 2002 and a new van (basis of $14,000) in October 2002, both used 100% in
your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30, 2002, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the
$14,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in
service during the year (40% /H11003($22,000 + 14,000) = $14,400).
Date Placed In Service 200% Declining
Balance (200% DB)
1 
150% Declining
Balancing (150% DB)
1
Straight Line
(SL)
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2002
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2002
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2001
2
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2001
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2000
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2000
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1999
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1999
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1998
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1998
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1997
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1997
Prior to 1997
3
200 DB 5.0%
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
20.0
38.0
32.0
22.8
19.2
13.68
11.52
10.94
11.52
9.58
5.76
150 DB 3.75%
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
15.0
28.88
25.5
20.21
17.85
16.4
16.66
16.41
16.66
14.35
8.33
SL 2.5%
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
10.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
17.5
10.0
(b)(a) (c)
1
You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
3
If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to c laim depreciation. See
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
2002 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2002.)
2
If you made the election under Notice 2001-70 to use the higher percentage rate for vehicles placed in service January 1 throug h September 30, 2001,
use the percentage rate shown for vehicles placed in service January 1 through September 30, 2001.
Example. In June 2002, Karl, an outside is the depreciation limit ($7,660) multiplied by If Karl continues to use his car for business
dental supply salesman, purchased a new car after 2007, he can continue to claim a deprecia-the business use percentage (85%).
for $25,400 to make sales calls in a territory that tion deduction for his unrecovered basis. How-Karl continues to use his car 85% for busi-extends 200 miles around his home base. He ever, he cannot deduct more than $1,775ness. Depreciation in the next four years contin-uses his car 85% for his business. Karl does not multiplied by his business use percentage. Seeues to be subject to deduction limits. Karl figuresclaim the section 179 deduction but, he does Deductions in years after the recovery period,his depreciation limits for those years as follows.claim the special depreciation allowance, and he later.
chooses the 200% DB method to figure his de-Year Limit x Business Use Depreciationpreciation deduction.
Section 179 deduction.The section 179 de-2003 $ 4,900 × 85% $ 4,165In 2002, Karl figures his special depreciation
duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. If2004 2,950 × 85% 2,508allowance of $6,477 (($25,400 × 85%) × 30%).
2005, 2006 1,775 × 85% 1,509 you place a car in service in 2002, use it only forKarl then figures his MACRS deduction by first
business, and choose the section 179 deduc-figuring his unadjusted basis of $15,113 In 2007, using the rate from Table 3, Karl’s tion, the combined section 179 and depreciation(($25,400 × 85%) − $6,447), and then multiply-
MACRS deduction is $871 ($15,113 × 5.76%). deduction for that car for 2002 is limited toing it by the MACRS rate from Table 3 to get
Since that amount is less than the depreciation$7,660 ($3,060 if you elect not to claim the$3,023 ($15,113 × 20%). Karl’s total deprecia-
limit of $1,509 ($1,775 × 85%), Karl’s deprecia-special depreciation allowance for the car or thetion for 2002 is $9,500 ($6,477 + $3,023). How-
tion deduction for 2007 is $871. car is not qualified property).ever, Karl’s deduction is limited to $6,511. This
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. On September 4, 2002, Jack At the end of 2001, Bob had an unrecovered 2) $1,224 ($3,060 maximum limit × 40% busi-
basis in the car of $12,493. This was the ness use).bought a used car for $10,000 and placed it in
$28,600 original basis of his car less theservice. He used it 80% for his business and he
Qualified business use 50% or less in a later$16,107 depreciation deductions allowed duringchooses to take a section 179 deduction for the
year. If you use your car more than 50% inthe recovery period.car.
qualified business use in the tax year it is placedBefore applying the limit, Jack figures hisBob continued to use the car 100% for busi-
in service but the business use drops to 50% ormaximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000.ness in 2002. He can claim a depreciation de-
less in a later year, you can no longer use anThis is the cost of his qualifying property (up toduction of $1,775 (the maximum allowed for
accelerated depreciation method for that car.the maximum $24,000 amount) multiplied by hiseach subsequent year) for the year. If he contin-
For the year the business use drops to 50%business use ($10,000 × 80%). ues to use the car 100% for business in 2003
or less and all later years in the recovery period,and later years, Bob can deduct the lesser ofJack then figures that his section 179 deduc- you must use the straight line depreciation$1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis intion for 2002 is limited to $2,448 (80% of method over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-each of those years until his deductions total the$3,060). He then has an unadjusted basis of tion, for the year your business use drops to$10,718 unrecovered basis ($12,493 − $1,775$5,552 (($10,000 × 80%) − $2,448) for determin- 50% or less, you must recapture (include in yourclaimed in 2002).ing his depreciation deduction. Since he has gross income) any excess depreciation (dis-already reached the maximum limit for 2002,If Bob’s business use of the car was lesscussed later). You also increase the adjustedJack will use the unadjusted basis to figure histhan 100% during any year, his depreciationbasis of your car by the same amount.depreciation deduction for 2003. deduction would be less than the maximum
amount allowable for that year. However, in de-Example. In June 1999, you purchased aDeductions in years after the recovery termining his unrecovered basis in the car, hecar for exclusive use in your business. You metperiod. If the depreciation limits apply to yourwould still reduce his original basis by the maxi-the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 yearscar, you may have unrecovered basis in your carmum amount allowable. Bob’s unrecovered ba-of the recovery period (1999 through 2001) butat the end of the recovery period. If you continuesis at the beginning of 2002 would be $12,365failed to meet it in the fourth year (2002). Youto use your car for business, you can deduct that($28,600 – $16,235) in this example. This isdetermine your depreciation for 2002 using 20%unrecovered basis after the recovery periodtrue even if his actual depreciation deduction for(from column (c) of Table 3). You also will haveends. any year was less than the maximum amountto determine and include in your gross incomeshown.Unrecovered basis. This is your cost or any excess depreciation, discussed next.
other basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel Excess depreciation. You must includevehicle deduction, electric vehicle credit, andCar Used 50% or Less any excess depreciation in your gross incomedepreciation and section 179 deductions that and add it to your car’s adjusted basis for thefor Businesswould have been allowable if you had used the first tax year in which you do not use the carcar 100% for business and investment use.If you use your car 50% or less for qualifiedmore than 50% in qualified business use. Use
business use (defined earlier under Deprecia-The recovery period.For 5-year property, Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-
tion Deduction) either in the year the car isyour recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part ure and report the excess depreciation in your
placed in service or in a later year, special rulesyear’s depreciation is allowed in the first calen- gross income.
apply. The rules that apply in these two situa-dar year, a full year’s depreciation is allowed in Excess depreciation is: 
tions are explained in the following paragraphs.each of the next 4 calendar years, and a part
1) The amount of the depreciation deductions(For this purpose, “car” was defined earlieryear’s depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen-
allowable for the car (including any sectionunder Actual Car Expenses.)dar year.
179 deduction claimed and any special de-Under MACRS, your recovery period is theQualified business use 50% or less in year preciation allowance claimed) for tax yearssame whether you use declining balance orplaced in service.If you use your car 50% or in which you used the car more than 50%straight line depreciation. You determine yourless for qualified business use (defined earlierin qualified business use, minusunrecovered basis in the 7th year after youunder Depreciation Deduction.) in the year theplaced the car in service. 2) The amount of the depreciation deductionscar is placed in service, the following three spe-that would have been allowable for thosecial rules apply. How to treat unrecovered basis.If you years if you had not used the car morecontinue to use your car for business after the than 50% in qualified business use for the1) You cannot take the section 179 deduc-recovery period, you can claim a depreciation year you placed it in service. This meanstion.deduction in each succeeding tax year until you the amount of depreciation figured usingrecover your full basis in the car. The maximum2) You cannot take the special depreciationthe straight line method.amount you can deduct each year is determinedallowance.by the date you placed the car in service and
3) You must figure depreciation using the Example. On June 25, 1999, you bought ayour business-use percentage. For example, no
straight line method over a 5-year recoverycar for $11,000 and placed it in service. You diddeduction is allowed for a year you use your car
period. You must continue to use the not claim the section 179 deduction. You used100% for personal purposes.
straight line method even if your percent-the car exclusively in qualified business use for
age of business use increases to more1999, 2000, and 2001. For those years, youExample. In May 1996, Bob bought and
than 50% in a later year. used the appropriate MACRS Depreciationplaced in service a car that he used exclusively
Chart to figure depreciation deductions totalingin his business. The car cost $28,600. Bob didInstead of making the computation yourself,$7,832 ($2,200 for 1999, $3,520 for 2000, andnot claim a section 179 deduction for the car. Heyou can use column (c) of Table 3 to find the$2,112 for 2001) under the 200% DB method.continued to use the car 100% in his businesspercentage to use. During 2002, you used the car 50% for busi-throughout the recovery period (1996 through
ness and 50% for personal purposes. Since you2001). For those years, Bob used Table 3 and Example. On May 22, 2002, Dan bought adid not meet the more-than-50%-use test, youthe Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Carscar for $15,000. He used it 40% for his consult-must include in gross income for 2002 yourtable (as explained earlier) to compute his de-ing business. Because he did not use the carexcess depreciation determined as follows.preciation deductions as shown in the followingmore than 50% for business, Dan cannot take
table. any section 179 deduction or the special depre-Total depreciation claimed: $7,832ciation allowance and he must use the straight(MACRS 200% DB method)MACRS MACRS Maximum Deprec. line method over a 5-year recovery period toMinus total depreciation allowable:Year % Amount Deduction Allowed recover the cost of his car. (Straight line method)1996 20.00 $5,720 $3,060 $ 3,060 1999 — 10% of $11,000...... $1,100Dan deducts $600 in 2002. This is the lesser1997 32.00 9,152 4,900 4,900 2000 — 20% of $11,000...... 2,200of:1998 19.20 5,491 2,950 2,950 2001 — 20% of $11,000...... 2,200 5,5001999 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775 Excess depreciation $2,3321) $600 (($15,000 cost × 40% business use)2000 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775
× 10% recovery percentage (from column In 2002, using Form 4797, you figure and2001 5.76 1,647 1,775 1,647
Total $16,235 $16,107 (c), Table 3)), or report the $2,332 excess depreciation you must
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Dollar Business Inclusioninclude in your gross income. Your adjusted $100,000 or less, use the appropriate appendix
year amount Proration use amountbasis in the car is also increased by $2,332.(depending on the year you first placed the car in
Your 2002 depreciation deduction is $1,100service) to determine the inclusion amount. If2001 $ 99 138/365 100% $ 37
($11,000 (unadjusted basis) × 50% (business 2002 218 309/365 100% 185the fair market value is more than $100,000, see
use percentage) × 20% (from column (c) of Ta- the Revenue Procedure(s) identified in the foot-
ble 3 on the line for Jan. 1— Sept. 30, 1999)).note of the appendices for the inclusion amount.Leased car changed from personal to busi-
Revenue Procedures are available at most IRSness use. If you lease a car for personal use
offices and many local libraries.Leasing a Car and, in a later year, change it to business use,
you must determine the car’s fair market valueFor each tax year during which you lease the
If you lease a car that you use in your business, on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-car for business, determine your inclusion
you can use the standard mileage rate or actual sion amount using the rules explained earlieramount by following these three steps.
expenses to figure your deductible car expense. under Figuring the inclusion amount. Use the
This section explains how to figure actual ex-1) Locate the appendix that applies to you.fair market value on the date of conversion.
penses for a leased car. To find the inclusion amount, do the follow-
Example. In March 2000, Janice leased aing.Deductible payments. You can deduct the car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,part of each lease payment that is for the use ofa) Find the line that includes the fair mar-2002, she started working as a self-employedthe car in your business. You cannot deduct anyket value of the car on the first day ofadvertising consultant and started using thepart of a lease payment that is for personal usethe lease term. leased car for business purposes. Her recordsof the car, such as commuting. show that her business use for June 1 throughb) Go across the line to the column for theYou must spread any advance payments December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusiontax year in which the car is used underover the entire lease period. You cannot deduct amount for 2002, Janice obtained an appraisalthe lease to find the dollar amount. Forany payments you make to buy a car, even if the from an independent car leasing company thatthe last tax year of the lease, use thepayments are called lease payments. showed the fair market value of her 2000 car ondollar amount for the preceding year.If you lease a car for 30 days or more, you June 1, 2002, was $18,650. Using Appendixmay have to reduce your lease payment deduc- A–6, Janice computed her inclusion amount for2) Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) fortion by an “inclusion amount.” 2002 as shown in the following table.the number of days of the lease term in-
cluded in the tax year. Tax Dollar Business Inclusion
Inclusion Amounts year amount Proration use amount3) Multiply the prorated amount from (2) by
the percentage of business and invest-2002 $ 16 214/365 60% $6If you lease a car that you use in your business
ment use for the tax year. This is yourfor a lease term of 30 days or more, you may
inclusion amount.have to include an inclusion amount in your Reporting inclusion amounts.For informa-
income for each tax year you lease the car. To tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employees
do this, you do not add an amount to income. should see Car rentals under Completing FormsExample. On January 17, 2001, you leased
Instead, you reduce your deduction for your 2106 and 2106–EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprie-a car for 3 years and placed it in service for use
lease payment. (This reduction has an effect tors should see the instructions for Schedule Cin your business. The car had a fair market value
similar to the limit on the depreciation deduction (Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc-of $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. You
you would have on the car if you owned it.) tions for Schedule F (Form 1040).use the car 75% for business and 25% for per-
The inclusion amount is a percentage of partsonal purposes during each year of the lease.of the fair market value of the leased car multi-Assuming you continue to use the car 75% forplied by the percentage of business and invest-business, you use Appendix A–5 to arrive at thement use of the car for the tax year. It is prorated Disposition of a Carfollowing inclusion amounts for each year of thefor the number of days of the lease term in thelease:tax year. If you dispose of your car, you may have a
The inclusion amount applies to each taxTax Dollar Business Inclusion taxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion of
year that you lease the car if the fair marketyear amount Proration use amount any gain that is due to depreciation (including
value (defined next) of the car when the lease any section 179 or clean-fuel vehicle deduction)2001 $140 349/365 75% $100began was more than the amounts shown in the that you claimed on the car will be treated as2002 308 365/365 75% 231
following table. 2003 456 365/365 75% 342 ordinary income. However, you may not have to
2004 456 16/366 75% 15 recognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the carYear Lease Began Fair Market Value* because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in.For each year of the lease that you deduct lease1999 – 2002 $ 15,500 This section gives some general informationpayments, you must reduce your deduction by1997 – 1998 15,800 about dispositions of cars. For information onthe inclusion amount computed for that year.1995 – 1996 15,500 how to report the disposition of your car, see1994 14,600 Publication 544.1993 14,300 Leased car changed from business to per-
1992 13,700 sonal use. If you lease a car for business useCasualty or theft.For a casualty or theft, a1991 13,400 and, in a later year, change it to personal use,gain results when you receive insurance or other1987 – 1990 12,800 follow the rules explained earlier under Figuring*These amounts are higher for electric cars. reimbursement that is more than your adjusted
the inclusion amount. For the tax year in whichbasis in your car. If you then spend all of the
you stop using the car for business, use theproceeds to acquire replacement property (aFair market value.Fair market value is thedollar amount for the previous tax year. Proratenew car or repairs to the old car) within a speci-price at which the property would change handsthe dollar amount for the number of days in thefied period of time, you do not recognize anybetween a buyer and a seller, neither having tolease term that fall within the tax year.gain. Your basis in the replacement property isbuy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl-
its cost minus any gain that is not recognized.edge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similarExample. On August 16, 2001, Will leasedSee Publication 547 for more information.property around the same date may be helpful inan electric car with a fair market value offiguring the fair market value of the property.$58,600 for 3 years. He used the car exclusivelyTrade-in. When you trade in an old car for aFigure the fair market value on the first day ofin his own data processing business. On No-new one, the transaction is considered athe lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car isvember 5, 2002, Will closed his business andlike-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss isspecified in the lease agreement, use thatwent to work for a company where he is notrecognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 ofamount as the fair market value. required to use a car for business. Using Appen- Publication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your
dix B–5, Will computed his inclusion amount forFiguring the inclusion amount. Inclusion basis in the new property is generally your ad-
2001 and 2002 as shown in the following tableamounts are listed in Appendix A and, for elec- justed basis in the old property plus any addi-
and reduced his deductions for lease paymentstric cars leased after August 5, 1997, in Appen- tional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis,
by those amounts.dix B. If the fair market value of the car is earlier.)
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Depreciation adjustment when you used theresult by the percentage from the following table evidence that, together with your record, will
standard mileage rate.If you used the stan- support each element of an expense.for the month that you disposed of the car.
dard mileage rate for the business use of your
Documentary evidence. You generally mustMonth Percentagecar, depreciation was included in that rate. The
have documentary evidence, such as receipts,rate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan-Jan., Feb., March............ 12.5%
canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-dard mileage rate is shown in the chart thatApril, May, June............. 37.5%
penses.July, Aug., Sept.............. 62.5%follows. You must reduce your basis in your car
Oct., Nov., Dec.............. 87.5%(but not below zero) by the amount of this depre- Exception. Documentary evidence is not
ciation. needed if any of the following conditions apply.Do not use this table if you are a fiscal
These rates do not apply for any year in year filer. See Sale or Other Disposi-1) You have meals or lodging expenses whilewhich the actual expenses method tion Before the Recovery Period EndsCAUTION
!
traveling away from home for which youwas used. in chapter 4 of Publication 946.
TIP
account to your employer under an ac-
countable plan, and you use a per diem
allowance method that includes meals
Depreciation and/or lodging. (Accountable plans andYear(s) Rate per Mile per diem allowances are discussed in
2001 –  2002 $ .15 chapter 6.)
2000 .14
2) Your expense, other than lodging, is less1994 –  1999 .12
1992 –  1993 .11 1/2 than $75.
5.1989 –  1991 .11 3) You have a transportation expense for1988 .10 1/2
which a receipt is not readily available.1987 .10
1986 .09
1983 –  1985 .08
Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-Recordkeeping1982 .07 1/2 dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it
1980 –  1981 .07 shows the amount, date, place, and essentialIf you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-For tax years after 1989, the depreciation character of the expense.portation expenses, you must be able to proverates apply to all business miles. For tax years For example, a hotel receipt is enough to(substantiate) certain elements of expense. Thisbefore 1990, the depreciation rates apply to the support expenses for business travel if it has allchapter discusses the records you need to keepfirst 15,000 miles. of the following information.
to prove these expenses.
Example. In 1997, you bought a car for ex- 1) The name and location of the hotel.If you keep timely and accurate rec-clusive use in your business. The car cost ords, you will have support to show the 2) The dates you stayed there.$14,000. From 1997 through 2002, you used the IRS if your tax return is ever examined.RECORDS
standard mileage rate to figure your car expense 3) Separate amounts for charges such asYou will also have proof of expenses that yourdeduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles in lodging, meals, and telephone calls.employer may require if you are reimbursed1997, 16,300 miles in 1998, 15,600 miles in A restaurant receipt is enough to prove anunder an accountable plan. These plans are1999, 16,700 miles in 2000, 15,100 miles in expense for a business meal if it has all of thediscussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements.2001, and 14,900 miles in 2002. Your deprecia- following information.tion is figured as follows.
1) The name and location of the restaurant.Year Miles x Rate Depreciation
2) The number of people served.1997 14,100 × .12 $ 1,692
1998 16,300 × .12 1,956 3) The date and amount of the expense.How To Prove1999 15,600 × .12 1,872
If a charge is made for items other than food and2000 16,700 × .14 2,338 Expenses2001 15,100 × .15 2,265 beverages, the receipt must show that this is the
2002 14,900 × .15 2,235 case.Table 4 is a summary of records you need toTotal depreciation $12,358
Canceled check. A canceled check, to-prove each expense discussed in this publica-At the end of 2002, your adjusted basis in the car gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-tion. You must be able to prove the elementsis $1,642 ($14,000 − $12,358). tablishes the cost. However, a canceled checklisted across the top portion of the chart. You
by itself does not prove a business expenseprove them by having the information and re-Depreciation deduction for the year of without other evidence to show that it was for aceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed indisposition.If you deduct actual car ex- business purpose.the first column.penses and you dispose of your car before the
Duplicate information.You do not have toYou cannot deduct amounts that youend of its recovery period, you are allowed a
record information in your account book or otherapproximate or estimate.reduced depreciation deduction for the year of
record that duplicates information shown on adisposition. CAUTION
!
receipt as long as your records and receiptsTo figure the reduced depreciation deduction complement each other in an orderly manner.for a car disposed of in 2002, first determine theYou should keep adequate records to prove You do not have to record amounts yourdepreciation deduction for the full year using employer pays directly for any ticket or otheryour expenses or have sufficient evidence thatTable 3. travel item. However, if you charge these itemswill support your own statement. You must gen-If you used a Date Placed in Service line for to your employer, through a credit card or other-erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-Jan. 1—Sept. 30, you can deduct one-half of wise, you must keep a record of the amountsered adequate. This is because written evidencethe depreciation amount figured for the full year. you spend.is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-Figure your depreciation deduction for the full
ever, if you prepare a record in a computeryear using the rules explained in this chapter Timely-kept records.You should record thememory device with the aid of a logging pro-and deduct 50% of that amount with your other elements of an expense or of a business use atgram, it is considered an adequate record.actual car expenses. or near the time of the expense or use and
If you used a Date Placed in Service line for support it with sufficient documentary evidence.
What Are AdequateOct. 1—Dec. 31, you can deduct a percentage A timely-kept record has more value than a
of the depreciation amount figured for the full statement prepared later when generally there isRecords?
year. The percentage you use is determined by a lack of accurate recall.
You should keep the proof you need in an ac-the month you disposed of the car. Figure your You do not need to write down the elements
count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-depreciation deduction for the full year using the of every expense on the day of the expense. If
rules explained in this chapter and multiply the ilar record. You should also keep documentary you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac-
Page 24 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 25 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have
expenses
for:
Travel
Entertainment
Gifts
Transportation
Amount Time
Place or
Description
Business Purpose and
Business Relationship
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements.
Cost of each separate expense
for travel, lodging, and meals.
Incidental expenses may be
totaled in reasonable categories
such as taxis, daily meals for
traveler, etc.
Dates you
left and
returned for
each trip
and number
of days
spent on
business.
Destination or area
of your travel
(name of city, town,
or other
designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
Incidental expenses such as
taxis, telephones, etc., may be
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of
entertainment.
(Also see
Business
Purpose.)
Name and address
or location of place
of entertainment.
Type of
entertainment if not
otherwise apparent.
(Also see Business
Purpose.)
Cost of the gift. Date of the
gift.
Description of the
gift.
Date of the
expense.
For car
expenses,
the date of
the use of
the car.
Your business
destination.
Cost of each separate expense.
For car expenses, the cost of
the car and any improvements,
the date you started using it for
business, the mileage for each
business use, and the total miles
for the year.
Purpose:
 Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 N/A
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or other
designations) about the recipients that
shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that
you or your employee was present if the
entertainment was a business meal.
For entertainment, the nature of the
business discussion or activity. If the
entertainment was directly before or after a
business discussion: the date, place, nature,
and duration of the business discussion,
and the identities of the persons who took
part in both the business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
Relationship: N/A
counts for use during the week, the log is consid- ship) in your account book, diary, or other re- ple, the nature of your work, such as making
ered a timely-kept record. cord. However, you do have to record the deliveries, provides circumstantial evidence of
If you give your employer, client, or customer information elsewhere at or near the time of the the use of your car for business purposes. In-
an expense account statement, it can also be expense and have it available to fully prove that voices of deliveries establish when you used the
considered a timely-kept record. This is true if element of the expense. car for business.
you copy it from your account book, diary, state-
ment of expense, or similar record. Sampling. You can keep an adequate record
What If I Have Incomplete
for parts of a tax year and use that record toRecords?Proving business purpose.You must gener- prove the amount of business or investment useally provide a written statement of the business for the entire year. You must demonstrate byIf you do not have complete records to prove anpurpose of an expense. However, the degree of other evidence that the periods for which anelement of an expense, then you must prove theproof varies according to the circumstances in adequate record is kept are representative ofelement with: each case. If the business purpose of an ex- the use throughout the tax year.pense is clear from the surrounding circum-1) Your own written or oral statement con-stances, then you do not need to give a written Example. You use your car to visit the of-taining specific information about the ele-explanation. fices of clients, meet with suppliers and otherment, and
subcontractors, and pick up and deliver items toExample. If you are a sales representative2) Other supporting evidence that is sufficientclients. There is no other business use of thewho calls on customers on an established salesto establish the element. car, but you and your family use the car forroute, you do not have to give a written explana- personal purposes. You keep adequate recordsIf the element is the description of a gift, ortion of the business purpose for traveling that during the first week of each month that showthe cost, time, place, or date of an expense, theroute. You can satisfy the requirements by re- that 75% of the use of the car is for business.supporting evidence must be either direct evi-cording the length of the delivery route once, the Invoices and bills show that your business usedence or documentary evidence. Direct evi-date of each trip at or near the time of the trips, continues at the same rate during the laterdence can be written statements, or the oraland the total miles you drove the car during the weeks of each month. Your weekly records aretestimony of your guests or other witnesses set-tax year. You could also establish the date of representative of the use of the car each monthting forth detailed information about the element.each trip with a receipt, record of delivery, or and are sufficient evidence to support the per-Documentary evidence can be receipts, paidother documentary evidence. centage of business use for the year.bills, or similar evidence.
Confidential information.You do not need to If the element is either the business relation-
put confidential information relating to an ele- ship of your guests or the business purpose ofExceptional circumstances.You can satisfy
ment of a deductible expense (such as the the amount spent, the supporting evidence can the substantiation requirements with other evi-
place, business purpose, or business relation- be circumstantial, rather than direct. For exam- dence if, because of the nature of the situation in
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 25

Page 26 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
which an expense is made, you cannot get a between two deliveries. You can account forExamples of Records
receipt. This applies if all the following are true.these using a single record of miles driven.
Examples of records that show the informationGift expenses.You do not always have to1) You were unable to obtain evidence for an you need to keep for different types of expensesrecord the name of each recipient of a gift. Aelement of the expense or use that com- are included in this publication as Table 6 andgeneral listing will be enough if it is evident thatpletely satisfies the requirements ex- Table 7. They are part of the illustrated exam-you are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limitplained earlier under What Are Adequate ples shown at the end of chapter 6.on the amount you can deduct for gifts to anyRecords.
one person. For example, if you buy a large2) You are unable to obtain evidence for annumber of tickets to local high school basketballelement that completely satisfies the twogames and give one or two tickets to each ofrules listed earlier under What if I Have many customers, it is usually enough to record aIncomplete Records. general description of the recipients.
3) You have presented other evidence for the 6.
Allocating total cost.If you can prove theelement that is the best proof possible
total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-under the circumstances.
not prove how much it cost for each person who
How To Reportparticipated in the event, you may have to allo-Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a
cate the total cost among you and your guestsreceipt because of reasons beyond your control,
on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishThis chapter explains where and how to reportyou can prove a deduction by reconstructing
the number of persons who participated in thethe expenses discussed in this publication. Ityour records or expenses. Reasons beyond
event. discusses reimbursements and how to treatyour control include fire, flood, and other casu-
them under accountable and nonaccountableAn allocation would be needed, for example,alty.
plans. It also explains rules for independent con-if you did not have a business relationship with
tractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certainall of your guests. See Allocating between busi-Separating and Combining
performing artists, and certain disabled employ-ness and nonbusiness in chapter 2.Expenses ees. The chapter ends with illustrations of how to
report travel, entertainment, gift, and car ex-If your return is examined.If your return isThis section explains when expenses must be penses on Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ.examined, you may have to provide additionalkept separate and when expenses can be com-
information to the IRS. This information could bebined.
needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or
Separating expenses. Each separate pay- reliability of information contained in your rec-
ment is generally considered a separate ex-ords, statements, testimony, or documentaryWhere To Report
pense. For example, if you entertain a customerevidence before a deduction is allowed.
or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the This section provides general information on
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick- where to report the expenses discussed in thisHow Long To Keepets are two separate expenses. You must record publication.Records and Receiptsthem separately in your records. Self-employed. You must report your income
You must keep records as long as they may beSeason or series tickets.If you buy sea- and expenses on Schedule C or C–EZ (Form
needed for the administration of any provision ofson or series tickets for business use, you must 1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched-
the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, thistreat each ticket in the series as a separate item. ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not
means you must keep records that support yourTo determine the cost of individual tickets, divide use Form 2106 or 2106–EZ.
deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years fromthe total cost (but not more than face value) by If you claim car or truck expenses, you must
the date you file the income tax return on whichthe number of games or performances in the provide certain information on the use of your
the deduction is claimed. A return filed early isseries. You must keep records to show whether vehicle. You provide this information on Sched-
considered filed on the due date. For a moreyou use each ticket as a gift or entertainment. ule C, Schedule C–EZ, or  Form 4562.
complete explanation of how long to keep rec-Also, you must be able to prove the cost of If you file Schedule C:
ords, get Publication 583, Starting a Businessnonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox or
and Keeping Records. 1) Report your travel expenses, exceptother private luxury box for more than one event.
meals, on line 24a,See Entertainment tickets in chapter 2. You must keep records of the business use
of your car for each year of the recovery period.2) Report your meals (actual cost or standardCombining items. You can make one daily See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 under meal allowance) and entertainment on lineentry in your record for reasonable categories ofDepreciation Deduction. 24b (The 50% limit is figured on line 24c.),expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone
calls, or other incidental travel costs. Meals 3) Report your gift expenses and transporta-Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whoshould be in a separate category. You can in- tion expenses, other than car expenses,give their records and documentation to theirclude tips for meal-related services with the on line 27, andemployers and are reimbursed for their ex-costs of the meals. penses generally do not have to keep copies of4) Report your car expenses on line 10.Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-this information. However, you may have to Complete Part IV of the form unless youing the course of a single event are considered aprove your expenses if any of the following con-have to file Form 4562 for depreciation orsingle expense. For example, if during entertain-ditions apply. amortization.ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately for
each serving of refreshments, the total expense If you file Schedule C–EZ, report the total of1) You claim deductions for expenses thatfor the refreshments is treated as a single ex- all business expenses on line 2. You can onlyare more than reimbursements.pense. include 50% of your meals and entertainment in
2) Your expenses are reimbursed under a that total. If you include car expenses, you mustCar expenses. You can account for several nonaccountable plan. also complete Part III of the form.uses of your car that can be considered part of a
If you file Schedule F:3) Your employer does not use adequate ac-single use, such as a round trip or uninterrupted
counting procedures to verify expense ac-business use, with a single record. Minimal per- 1) Report your car expenses on line 12. At-counts.sonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the way tach Form 4562 and provide informationbetween two business stops, is not an interrup-4) You are related to your employer as de- on the use of your car in Part V of Formtion of business use. fined under Standard Meal Allowance in 4562.
chapter 1.Example. You make deliveries at several 2) Report all other business expenses dis-
Reimbursements, adequate accounting, anddifferent locations on a route that begins and cussed in this publication on line 34. You
nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapterends at your employer’s business premises and can only include 50% of your meals and
6.that includes a stop at the business premises entertainment on that line.
Page 26 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 27 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See your forms instructions for more information lated transportation expenses, report them on standing that you will pay your own expenses. In
on how to complete your tax return. line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). this situation, you have no reimbursement or
allowance arrangement, and you do not have to
Both self-employed and an employee. If read this section on reimbursements. Instead,Vehicle Provided byyou are both self-employed and an employee, see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ,Your Employeryou must keep separate records for each busi- later, for information on completing your tax re-
ness activity. Report your business expenses for turn.If your employer provides you with a car, youself-employment on Schedule C, C–EZ, or Fmay be able to deduct the actual expenses ofReimbursement, allowance, or advance.A(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report youroperating that car for business purposes. Thereimbursement or other expense allowance ar-business expenses for your work as an em-amount you can deduct depends on the amountrangement is a system or plan that an employerployee on Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, as discussedthat your employer included in your income anduses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-next. the business and personal miles you drove dur-penses, advances, reimbursements, and
ing the year. You cannot use the standard mile-amounts charged to the employer for employeeEmployees. If you are an employee, you gen-age rate. business expenses. Arrangements include pererally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your
diem and car allowances.travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-Value reported on Form W–2. Your em- A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofpenses. However, you can use the shorter Formployer can figure and report either the actualdaily reimbursement your employer gives you2106–EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all 3value of your personal use of the car or the valuefor your lodging, meals, and incidental expensesof the following conditions. of the car as if you used it only for personalwhen you are away from home on business.purposes (100% income inclusion). Your em-1) You are an employee deducting expenses (The term “incidental expenses” is defined inployer must separately state the amount if 100%attributable to your job. chapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) Aof the annual lease value was included in yourcar allowance is an amount your employer givesincome. If you are unsure of the amount in-2) You were not reimbursed by your em- you for the business use of your car.cluded in your Form W–2, ask your employer.ployer for your expenses (amounts in- Your employer should tell you what methodcluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are notFull value included in your income.You can of reimbursement is used and what records youconsidered reimbursements). deduct the value of the business use of anmust provide.
3) If you claim car expenses, you use theemployer-provided car if your employer reportedEmployers. If you are an employer and youstandard mileage rate. 100% of the value of the car in your income. Onreimburse employee business expenses, howyour 2002 Form W–2, the amount of the valueFor more information on how to report your you treat this reimbursement on yourwill be included in box 1, Wages, tips, otherexpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, see employee’s Form W–2 depends in part oncompensation, and box 12.Completing Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, later. whether you have an accountable plan. Reim-To claim your expenses, complete Part II,bursements treated as paid under an accounta-Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse-Sections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter yourble plan, as explained next, are not reported asments (or the reimbursements were all includedactual expenses on line 23 of Section C andpay. Reimbursements treated as paid underin box 1 of your Form W–2), the only businessinclude the entire value of the employer-pro-nonaccountable plans, as explained later, areexpense you are claiming is for gifts, and thevided car on line 25. Complete the rest of thereported as pay. See Publication 15, Circular E,Special Rules discussed later do not apply toform. Employer’s Tax Guide, for information on em-you, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ.Less than full value included in your income.ployee pay.Instead, claim the amount of your deductibleIf less than the full annual lease value of the cargifts directly on line 20 of Schedule A (Formwas included on your Form W–2, this meansAccountable Plans1040). that your Form W–2 only includes the value of
Statutory employees. If you received a your personal use of the car. Do not enter thisTo be an accountable plan, your employer’s
Form W–2 and the “Statutory employee” box invalue on your Form 2106; it is not deductible.reimbursement or allowance arrangement must
box 13 was checked, report your income and If you paid any actual costs (that your em-include all three of the following rules.
expenses related to that income on Schedule Cployer did not provide or reimburse you for) to
1) Your expenses must have a business con-or C–EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Formoperate the car, you can deduct the business
nection — that is, you must have paid or2106 or 2106–EZ. portion of those costs. Examples of costs that
incurred deductible expenses while per-Statutory employees include full-time life in-you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-
forming services as an employee of yoursurance salespersons, certain agent or commis-plete Part II, Sections A and C, of Form 2106.
employer.sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certainEnter your actual costs on line 23 of Section C
homeworkers. and leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of the2) You must adequately account to your em-form. ployer for these expenses within a reason-If you are entitled to a reimbursement
able period of time.from your employer but you do not
claim it,   you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
!
3) You must return any excess reimburse-for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim- ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-Reimbursementsbursement applies. riod of time.
This section explains what to do when you re-“Adequate accounting” and “returning ex-
ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofcess reimbursements” are discussed later.Reimbursement for personal expenses. If the employee business expenses discussed inAn excess reimbursement or allowance  isyour employer reimburses you for nondeduct-this publication. any amount you are paid that is more than theible personal expenses, such as for vacationIf you received an advance, allowance, orbusiness-related expenses that you adequatelytrips, your employer must report the reimburse-reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-accounted for to your employer. ment as wage income in box 1 of your Formport this amount and your expenses depends onThe definition of reasonable period of timeW–2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.whether the reimbursement was paid to youdepends on the facts and circumstances of your
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountablesituation. However, regardless of the facts andIncome-producing property. If you have plan. circumstances of your situation, actions thattravel or transportation expenses related toThis section explains the two types of plans,take place within the times specified in the fol-income-producing property, report your deducti-how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-lowing list will be treated as taking place within able expenses on the form appropriate for thating the amount of your expenses, and the taxreasonable period of time.activity. treatment of your reimbursements and ex-For example, if you have rental real estatepenses. It also covers rules for independent1) You receive an advance within 30 days ofincome and expenses, report your expenses oncontractors. the time you have an expense.Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss.
See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed 2) You adequately account for your expenses
erty, for more information on the rental of real or given an allowance for your expenses if you within 60 days after they were paid or in-
estate. If you have deductible investment-re- are paid a salary or commission with the under- curred.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 27

Page 28 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) You return any excess reimbursement enter in your record and documents you need to the federal government will pay to its employees
within 120 days after the expense was prove certain expenses.) for lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (or
paid or incurred. You must account for all amounts you re- meals and incidental expenses only) while they
ceived from your employer during the year asare traveling away from home in a particular4) You are given a periodic statement (atadvances, reimbursements, or allowances. Thisarea. The rates are different for different loca-least quarterly) that asks you to either re-includes amounts you charged to your employertions. Your employer should have these ratesturn or adequately account for outstandingby credit card or other method. You must giveavailable. (Employers can get Publication 1542,advances and you comply within 120 daysyour employer the same type of records andwhich gives the rates in the continental Unitedof the statement. supporting information that you would have toStates for the current year.)
give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductionThe standard meal allowance.The stan-Employee meets accountable plan rules.If on your return. You must pay back the amount ofdard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) isyou meet the three rules for accountable plans,any reimbursement or other expense allowancethe federal rate for meals and incidental ex-your employer should not include any reim-for which you do not adequately account or thatpenses (M&IE). The rate for most small localitiesbursements in your income in box 1 of youris more than the amount for which you ac-in the United States is $30. Most major cities andForm W–2. If your expenses equal your reim-counted. many other localities qualify for higher rates.bursement, you do not complete Form 2106.
The rates for all localities within the continentalYou have no deduction since your expenses
United States are listed in Publication 1542.and reimbursement are equal. Per Diem and Car Allowances
You receive an allowance only for meals andIf your employer included reimburse-If your employer reimburses you for your ex-incidental expenses when your employer doesments in box 1 of your Form W–2 andpenses using a per diem or a car allowance, youone of the following. you meet all three rules for accounta-
TIP
can generally use the allowance as proof for theble plans, ask your employer for a corrected 1) Provides you with lodging (furnishes it inamount of your expenses. A per diem or carForm W–2. kind).allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-
quirements for the amount of your expenses2) Reimburses you, based on your receipts,only if all four of the following conditions apply. for the actual cost of your lodging.Accountable plan rules not met. Even
1) Your employer reasonably limits paymentsthough you are reimbursed under an accounta- 3) Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your
of your expenses to those that are ordinaryble plan, some of your expenses may not meet lodging.
and necessary in the conduct of the tradeall three rules. Those expenses that fail to meet 4) Does not have a reasonable belief that youor business.all three rules for accountable plans are treated had (or will have) lodging expenses, suchas having been reimbursed under a nonac- 2) The allowance is similar in form to and notas when you stay with friends or relativescountable plan (discussed later). more than the federal rate (defined later).or sleep in the cab of your truck.
Reimbursement of nondeductible 3) You prove the time (dates), place, and5) Figures the allowance on a basis similar toexpenses. You may be reimbursed under business purpose of your expenses to that used in computing your compensa-your employer’s accountable plan for expensesyour employer (as explained in Table 4) tion, such as number of hours worked orrelated to that employer’s business, some ofwithin a reasonable period of time. miles traveled.which are deductible as employee business ex-
penses and some of which are not deductible.4) You are not related to your employer (as
High-low rate.This is a simplified methodThe reimbursements you receive for the nonde-defined under Standard Meal Allowance in
of computing the federal per diem rate for travelductible expenses do not meet rule (1) for ac-chapter 1). If you are related to your em-
within the continental United States. It elimi-countable plans, and they are treated as paidployer, you must be able to prove your
nates the need to keep a current list of the perunder a nonaccountable plan. expenses to the IRS even if you have al-
diem rate for each city.ready adequately accounted to your em-
Under the high-low method, the per diemExample. Your employer’s plan reimburses ployer and returned any excess
you for travel expenses while away from home amount for travel during January through Sep-reimbursement.
on business and also for meals when you work tember of 2002 is $204 (including $42 for M&IE)If the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow-late at the office, even though you are not away for certain high-cost locations. All other areasance practices are not based on reasonablyfrom home. The part of the arrangement that have a per diem amount of $125 (including $34accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-reimburses you for the nondeductible meals for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542ognition of cost differences in different areas forwhen you work late at the office is treated as (Revised February 2002), which gives the areasper diem amounts), you will not be considered topaid under a nonaccountable plan. eligible for the $204 per diem amount under thehave accounted to your employer. In this case,high-low method for all or part of this period.)The employer makes the decision you must be able to prove your expenses to the
whether to reimburse employees IRS. Effective October 1, 2002, the M&IE
under an accountable plan or a nonac- rate for certain high-cost locations in-
TIP
The federal rate.The federal rate can be fig-countable plan. If you are an employee who creased to $45. The M&IE rate for allCAUTION
!
ured using any one of the following methods.receives payments under a nonaccountable other locations increased to $35. Employers can
plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay- continue to use the lower rates for the remainder1) For per diem amounts:ments under an accountable plan by voluntarily of 2002 if those rates and locations are used
accounting to your employer for the expenses consistently during October, November, anda) The regular federal per diem rate.
and voluntarily returning excess reimburse- December for all employees. Employers who didb) The standard meal allowance.ments to the employer. not use the high-low method during the first 9
months of 2002 cannot begin to use it beforec) The high-low rate.
2003. See Revenue Procedure 2002–63 for
more information.2) For car expenses:
Adequate Accounting a) The standard mileage rate.
Prorating the standard meal allowance onOne of the three rules for an accountable plan isb) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). partial days of travel.The standard meal al-that you must adequately account to your em-
lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If youployer for your expenses. You adequately ac-
For per diem amounts, use the rate intravel for part of a day, such as on the days youcount by giving your employer a statement of
effect for the area where you stop fordepart and return, you must prorate the full-dayexpense, an account book, a diary, or a similar
sleep or rest. M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-record in which you entered each expense at or
TIP
ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate ornear the time you had it, along with documentary
the high-low rate.evidence (such as receipts) of your travel, mile-
You can use either of the following methodsage, and other employee business expenses. Regular federal per diem rate.The regular
to figure the federal M&IE for that day.(See Table 4 in chapter 5 for details you need to federal per diem rate is the highest amount that
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the trip. His employer reimburses him $154 aExample 2. Joe also lives in Austin and
1) Method 1: day ($308 total) for living expenses. Jeremy’s works for the same employer as Laura. In May
living expenses in Denver are not more than the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 daysa) For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the $154 a day. and paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotel bill. Thestandard meal allowance amount for employer reimbursed Joe $50 a day for hisJeremy’s employer does not include any ofthat day. meals and incidental expenses. The federal ratethe reimbursement on his Form W–2 and Jer-
b) For the day you return, add 3/4 of the for San Diego is $46 a day.emy does not deduct the expenses on his return.
standard meal allowance amount for Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses
the preceding day. totaled $290. His employer’s accountable planExample 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-day
will not pay more than $50 a day for travel to Sanbusiness trip to Boston. Matt’s employer uses
2) Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al- Diego, so Joe does not give his employer thethe high-low method to reimburse employees.
lowance using any method that you con- records that prove that he actually spent $290.Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is given
sistently apply and that is in accordance However, he does account for the time, place,an advance of $180 a day ($360 total) for his
with reasonable business practice. For ex- and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’slodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt’s
ample, an employer can treat 2 full days of only business trip this year.actual expenses totaled $490.
per diem (that includes M&IE) paid for Joe was reimbursed $200 ($50 × 4 days),Since Matt’s $490 of expenses are moretravel away from home from 9 a.m. of one which is $16 more than the federal rate of $184than his $360 advance, he includes the excessday to 5 p.m. of the next day as being no ($46 × 4 days). The employer includes the $16expenses when he itemizes his deductions. Mattmore than the federal rate. This is true as income on Joe’s Form W–2 in box 1. Thecompletes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex-even though a federal employee would be employer also enters $184 in box 12 of Joe’spenses and reimbursements). He must also al-limited to a reimbursement of M&IE for Form W–2.locate his reimbursement between his mealsonly 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate. Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-and other expenses as discussed later underductible expenses. He enters the total of hisCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ.The standard mileage rate.This is a set actual expenses for the year ($290) on Form
rate per mile that you can use to compute your 2106. He also enters the reimbursements thatExample 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles adeductible car expenses. For 2002, the standard were not included in his income ($184). His totalyear for business. Under her employer’s ac-mileage rate is 361/2 cents a mile for all business deductible expense, before the 50% limit, iscountable plan, she accounts for the timemiles. This rate is adjusted periodically. $106. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-(dates), place, and business purpose of each
reimbursed meals and entertainment, he willtrip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowanceFixed and variable rate (FAVR).This is an include the balance, $53, as an itemized deduc-of 20 cents a mile.allowance your employer may use to reimburse tion.your car expenses. Under this method, your Since Nicole’s $3,650 expenses computed
employer pays an allowance that includes aunder the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles × Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles forcombination of payments covering fixed and va-361/2 cents) are more than her $2,000 reim-business. Under her employer’s accountableriable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate tobursement (10,000 miles × 20 cents), she item-plan, she gets reimbursed 38 cents a mile, whichcover your variable operating costs (such asizes her deductions to claim the excess is 11/2 cents a mile more than the standard mile-gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover yourexpenses. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show-age rate.fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-ing all of her expenses and reimbursements) Debbie’s employer must include the reim-ments), insurance, etc.). If your employerand enters $1,650 ($3,650 − $2,000) as an item-bursement amount up to the standard mileagechooses to use this method, your employer willized deduction. rate, $3,650 (10,000 miles × 361/2 cents), in boxrequest the necessary records from you. 12 of her Form W–2. That amount is not taxa-Allowance MORE than the federal rate.If
ble. Her employer must also include $150your allowance is more than the federal rate,Reporting your expenses with a per diem or (10,000 miles × 11/2 cents) in box 1 of her Formyour employer must include the allowancecar allowance.If your reimbursement is in the W–2. This is the reimbursement that is moreamount up to the federal rate in box 12 of yourform of an allowance received under an ac- than the standard mileage rate.Form W–2. This amount is not taxable. How-countable plan, the following two facts affect If Debbie’s expenses are equal to or lessever, the excess allowance will be included inyour reporting. than the standard mileage rate, she would notbox 1 of your Form W–2. You must report this
complete Form 2106. If her expenses are morepart of your allowance as if it were wage income.1) The federal rate.
than the standard mileage rate, she would com-If your actual expenses are less than or2) Whether the allowance or your actual ex- plete Form 2106 and report her total expensesequal to the federal rate, you do not completepenses were more than the federal rate. and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of herForm 2106 or claim any of your expenses on
Form W–2). She would then claim the excessThe following discussions explain where to re-your return.
expenses as an itemized deduction.port your expenses depending upon how the However, if your actual expenses are moreamount of your allowance compares to the fed-than the federal rate, you can complete Formeral rate. 2106 and deduct those excess expenses. YouReturning Excessmust report on Form 2106 your reimbursementsAllowance LESS than or EQUAL to the fed- Reimbursementsup to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of youreral rate.If your allowance is less than or
Form W–2) and all your expenses. You shouldequal to the federal rate, the allowance will not Under an accountable plan, you are required tobe able to prove these amounts to the IRS.be included in box 1 of your Form W–2. You do return any excess reimbursement or other ex-
not need to report the related expenses or the pense allowances for your business expensesExample 1. Laura lives and works in Austin.allowance on your return if your expenses are to the person paying the reimbursement or al-Her employer sent her to Albuquerque for 2 daysequal to or less than the allowance. lowance. Excess reimbursement means anyon business. Laura’s employer paid the hotelHowever, if your actual expenses are more amount for which you did not adequately ac-directly for her lodging and reimbursed Laurathan your allowance, you can complete Form count within a reasonable period of time. For$40 a day ($80 total) for meals and incidental2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched- example, if you received a travel advance andexpenses. Laura’s actual meal expenses wereule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex- you did not spend all the money on business-re-not more than the federal rate for Albuquerque,penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the lated expenses, or you do not have proof of allwhich is $38 per day.total amount of your expenses and reimburse- your expenses, you have an excess reimburse-
Her employer included the $4 that was morements for the entire year. If you are using the ment.
than the federal rate (($40 − $38) × 2) in box 1 ofstandard meal allowance or the standard mile- “Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-
Laura’s Form W–2. Her employer shows $76age rate, you do not have to prove that amount. riod of time” were discussed earlier in this chap-
($38 a day × 2) in box 12 of her Form W–2. Thister.
Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-day amount is not included in Laura’s income. Laura
business trip to Denver. The federal rate for does not have to complete Form 2106; however,Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-
Denver is $154 per day. As required by his she must include the $4 in her gross income as vance if your employer provides you with an
employer’s accountable plan, he accounts for wages (by reporting the total amount shown in expense allowance before you actually have the
the time (dates), place, and business purpose of box 1 of her Form W–2). expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable
plan:
1) Excess reimbursements you fail to return
to your employer, and
2) Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses related to your employer’s busi-
ness. See Reimbursement of
nondeductible expenses, earlier, under Ac-
countable Plans.
An arrangement that repays you for business
expenses by reducing the amount reported as
your wages, salary, or other pay will be treated
as a nonaccountable plan. This is because you
are entitled to receive the full amount of your pay
whether or not you have any business ex-
penses.
If you are not sure if the reimbursement or
expense allowance arrangement is an account-
able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-
ployer.
Reporting your expenses under a nonac-
countable plan.Your employer will combine
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-
countable plan with your wages, salary, or other
pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1
of your Form W–2.
You must complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-
tertainment. Your meal and entertainment
expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis-
cussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenses
will be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-
come limit that applies to most miscellaneous
itemized deductions.
Example 1. Kim’s employer gives her $500
a month ($6,000 total for the year) for her busi-
ness expenses. Kim does not have to provide
any proof of her expenses to her employer, and
Kim can keep any funds that she does not
spend.
Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-
countable plan. Her employer will include the
$6,000 on Kim’s Form W–2 as if it were wages.
Table 5.
IF the type of reimbursement (or
other expense allowance)
arrangement is under:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: 
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
THEN the employer
reports on Form W-2:
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
No reimbursement plan:
Either adequate accounting or
return of excess, or both, not
required by plan
No amount.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
All expenses and
reimbursements only if
excess expenses are
claimed. Otherwise,
form is not filed.
All expenses.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106: *
Per diem or mileage allowance
exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the
federal rate only and
 excess not
returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
All expenses (and
reimbursements
reported on Form W-2,
box 12) only if expenses
in excess of the federal
rate are claimed.
Otherwise, form is not
filed.
No amount.
If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses,pected to be no more than your expense. Under your Form W–2. This excess amount is consid-
she must complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ andan accountable plan, you are required to ade-ered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis-
itemize her deductions.quately account to your employer for this ad-cussed later).
vance and to return any excess within a
Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month byreasonable period of time. Example. Your employer sends you on a
his employer. On days that he travels away from5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you aIf you do not adequately account for or do not home on business, his employer designates $50$225 ($45 × 5 days) advance to cover yourreturn any excess advance within a reasonable a day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travelmeals and incidental expenses. The federal perperiod of time, the amount you do not account expenses. Because his employer would pay Ke-diem for meals and incidental expenses forfor or return will be treated as having been paid vin his monthly salary whether or not he wasPhoenix is $42. Your trip lasts only 3 days.under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). traveling away from home, the arrangement is aUnder your employer’s accountable plan, younonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a dayUnproved amounts. If you do not prove must return the $90 ($45 × 2 days) advance fordesignated by his employer is treated as paidthat you actually traveled on each day for whichthe 2 days you did not travel. You do not have tounder an accountable plan.you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-return the $9 difference between the allowanceing the elements described in Table 4), you must
you received and the federal rate for Phoenixreturn this unproved amount of the travel ad- Rules for Independent(($45 − $42) × 3 days). However, the $9 will bevance within a reasonable period of time. If you Contractors and Clientsreported on your Form W–2 as wages.do not do this, the unproved amount will be
considered paid under a nonaccountable plan This section provides rules for independent con-
(discussed later). Nonaccountable Plans tractors who incur expenses on behalf of a client
or customer. The rules cover the reporting andPer diem allowance MORE than federal A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement orsubstantiation of certain expenses discussed inrate. If your employer’s accountable plan paysexpense allowance arrangement that does notthis publication, and they affect both indepen-you an allowance that is higher than the federalmeet one or more of the three rules listed earlierdent contractors and their clients or customers.rate, you do not have to return the differenceunder Accountable Plans. You are considered an independent contrac-between the two rates for the period you can
In addition, even if your employer has antor if you are self-employed and you performprove business-related travel expenses. How-
services for a customer or client.ever, the difference will be reported as wages on accountable plan, the following payments will be
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Actual expenses. If you claim a deductionAccounting to Your Client
based on actual expenses, you cannot useCompleting FormsIf you received a reimbursement or an allow- Form 2106–EZ. You must complete Section C,
ance for travel, entertainment, or gift expenses Part II, Form 2106. In addition, unless you lease2106 and 2106–EZthat you incurred on behalf of a client, you your car, you must complete Section D to show
your depreciation deduction and any sectionshould provide an adequate accounting of theseThis section briefly describes how employees
179 deduction you can claim.expenses to your client. If you do not account tocomplete Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ. Table 5
If you are still using a car that is fully depreci-your client for these expenses, you must includeexplains what the employer reports on Form
ated, continue to complete Section C. Since youW–2 and what the employee reports on Formany reimbursements or allowances in income. have no depreciation deduction, enter zero on2106. The instructions for the forms have moreYou must keep adequate records of these ex- line 28. In this case, do not complete Section D.information on completing them.penses whether or not you account to your client
Car rentals. If you claim car rental ex-for these expenses. If you are self-employed, do not file
penses on line 24a of Form 2106, you may haveForm 2106 or 2106–EZ. Report yourIf you do not separately account for and seek to reduce that expense by an inclusion amountexpenses on Schedule C, C–EZ, or Freimbursement for meals and entertainment in
CAUTION
!
as described in chapter 4. If so, you can show(Form 1040). See the instructions for the formconnection with providing services for a client, your car expenses and any inclusion amount asthat you must file.you are subject to the 50% limit on those ex- follows.
penses. See 50% Limit in chapter 2.
1) Compute the inclusion amount without
Form 2106–EZ. You may be able to use the taking into account your business use per-Adequate accounting. As a self-employed shorter Form 2106–EZ to claim your employee centage for the tax year.person, you adequately account by reportingbusiness expenses. You can use this form if you2) Report the inclusion amount from (1) onyour actual expenses. You should follow themeet all 3 of the following conditions. line 24b, Part II, Form 2106.recordkeeping rules in chapter 5.
1) You are an employee deducting expenses3) Report on line 24c the net amount of carHow to report. For information on how to attributable to your job. rental expenses (total car rental expensesreport expenses on your tax return, see Self-em- minus the inclusion amount computed in2) You were not reimbursed by your em-ployed at the beginning of this chapter. (1)).ployer for your expenses (amounts in-
cluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are notThe net amount of car rental expenses will be
considered reimbursements).Required Records for adjusted on line 27, Part II, of Form 2106, to
reflect the percentage of business use for the taxClients or Customers 3) If you claim car expenses, you use theyear.standard mileage rate.If you are a client or customer, you generally do
Transportation expenses.Show your trans-not have to keep records to prove the reimburse- portation expenses that did not involve overnightCar expenses. If you used a car to performments or allowances you give, in the course of travel on line 2, Column A, of Form 2106 or onyour job as an employee, you may be able toyour business, to an independent contractor for line 2, Part I, of Form 2106–EZ. Also include ondeduct certain car expenses. These are gener-travel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf. this line business expenses you have for parkingally figured in Part II of Form 2106, and thenHowever, you must keep records if: fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-claimed on line 1, Column A, of Part I of Form
ating your car or expenses of commuting be-2106. Car expenses using the standard mileage1) You reimburse the contractor for entertain- tween your home and work.rate can also be figured on Form 2106–EZ by
ment expenses incurred on your behalf,completing Part II and line 1 of Part I. Employee business expenses other thanand meals and entertainment.Show your otherInformation on use of cars.If you claim
2) The contractor adequately accounts to you employee business expenses on lines 3 and 4,any deduction for the business use of a car, you
for these expenses. Column A, of Form 2106 or on lines 3 and 4 ofmust answer certain questions and provide in-
Form 2106–EZ. Do not include expenses forformation about the use of the car. The informa-
meals and entertainment on those lines. Line 4tion relates to the following items.
Contractor adequately accounts.If the con- is for expenses such as gifts, educational ex-
• Mileage (total, business, commuting, andpenses (tuition and books), office-in-the-hometractor adequately accounts to you for entertain-other personal mileage). expenses, and trade and professional publica-ment expenses, you (the client or customer)
tions.• Percentage of business use.must keep records documenting each element
of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Use If line 4 expenses are the only ones you• Date placed in service.
your records as proof for a deduction on your tax are claiming, you received no reim-• Use of other vehicles. bursements (or the reimbursementsreturn. If entertainment expenses are accounted
TIP
were all included in box 1 of your Form W–2),for separately, you are subject to the 50% limit• After-work use.
and the Special Rules discussed later do noton entertainment. If the contractor adequately• Whether you have evidence to support theapply to you, do not complete Form 2106 oraccounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you dodeduction. 2106–EZ. Claim these amounts directly on linenot have to report the amounts on an information 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040). List the type and• Whether or not the evidence is written.return. amount of each expense on the dotted lines andEmployees must complete Section A, Part II,include the total on line 20.Form 2106, or Part II, Form 2106–EZ, to pro-Contractor does not adequately account.If vide this information.the contractor does not adequately account to
Standard mileage rate.If you claim a de-Meal and entertainment expenses. Showyou for allowances or reimbursements of enter-
duction based on the standard mileage rate in-the full amount of your expenses fortainment expenses, you do not have to keep
stead of your actual expenses, you must business-related meals and entertainment onrecords of these items. You are not subject to
complete Section B, Part II, Form 2106. The line 5, Column B, of Form 2106. Include mealsthe 50% limit on entertainment in this case. Youamount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to line 1, while away from your tax home overnight andcan deduct the reimbursements or allowancesPart I, Form 2106. In addition, on line 2, Part I, other business meals and entertainment. Enteras payment for services if they are ordinary andForm 2106, you can deduct parking fees and 50% of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertain-necessary business expenses. However, youtolls that apply to the business use of the car. If ment expenses on line 9, Column B, of Formmust file Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous In-you file Form 2106–EZ, complete line 1, Part I, 2106.
come, to report amounts paid to the indepen-for the standard mileage rate and line 2 for If you file Form 2106–EZ, enter the full
dent contractor if the total of the reimbursementsparking fees and tolls. See Standard Mileage amount of your meals and entertainment on the
and any other fees is $600 or more during theRate in chapter 4 for information on using this line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by
calendar year. rate. 50%. Enter the result on line 5.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Hours of service limits.If you are subject a disabled employee with impairment-related 3) Your related performing-arts business ex-
to the Department of Transportation’s “hours of work expenses, see Special Rules, later. penses are more than 10% of your gross
service” limits (as explained earlier under Indi- income from the performance of those
Limits on employee business expenses.viduals subject to “hours of service” limits in services.
Your employee business expenses may be sub-chapter 2), use 65% instead of 50%. 4) Your adjusted gross income is not moreject to any of the three limits described next.
than $16,000 before deducting these busi-They are figured in the following order on theReimbursements. Enter on line 7 of Form ness expenses.specified form.2106 (You cannot use Form 2106–EZ.) the
amounts your employer (or third party) reim-1. Limit on meals and entertainment.Cer-bursed you that were not reported to you in box Special rules for married persons.If you aretain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-1 of your Form W–2. This includes any amount married, you must file a joint return unless youject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, youreported under code L in box 12 of Form W–2. lived apart from your spouse at all times duringfigure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 of
the tax year. If you file a joint return, you mustForm 2106–EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.)Allocating your reimbursement. If you
figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separatelywere reimbursed under an accountable plan and2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-for both you and your spouse. However, require-want to deduct excess expenses that were nottions. If you are an employee, deduct yourment (4) applies to your and your spouse’s com-reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-employee business expenses (as figured onbined adjusted gross income.bursement. This is necessary when your em-Form 2106 or 2106–EZ) on line 20 of Scheduleployer pays your reimbursement in the followingA (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemizedmanner: Where to report.If you meet all of the abovedeductions, including employee business ex-
requirements, you should first complete Formpenses, are subject to a 2%-of-1) Pays you a single amount that covers 2106 or 2106–EZ. Then you include youradjusted-gross-income limit. This limit is figuredmeals and/or entertainment, as well as performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 ofon line 25 of Schedule A (Form 1040).other business expenses, and Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in the3. Limit on total itemized deductions.If total on line 34 of Form 1040. Write “QPA” and2) Does not clearly identify how much is foryour adjusted gross income ( line 36 of Formthe amount of your performing-arts-related ex-deductible meals and/or entertainment.1040) is more than $137,300 ($68,650 if you arepenses in the space to the left of line 34 of FormYou must allocate that single payment so thatmarried filing separately), the total of certain1040.you know how much to enter in Column A anditemized deductions, including employee busi-If you do not meet all of the above require-Column B of line 7 of Form 2106. ness expenses, may be limited. See your formments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-instructions for information on how to figure thispenses as an adjustment to gross income.Example. Rob’s employer paid him an ex-limit. Instead, you must complete Form 2106 orpense allowance of $5,000 this year under an
2106–EZ and deduct your employee businessaccountable plan. The $5,000 payment con-Special Rules expenses as an itemized deduction on line 20 ofsisted of $2,000 for airfare and $3,000 for enter-
Schedule A (Form 1040).tainment and car expenses. The employer didThis section discusses special rules that apply
not clearly show how much of the $3,000 was foronly to government officials who are paid on a
the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-fee basis, performing artists, and disabled em-Impairment-Related Workally spent $6,500 during the year ($2,000 forployees with impairment-related work ex- Expenses of Disabled Employeesairfare, $2,000 for entertainment, and $2,500 forpenses.
car expenses). If you are an employee with a physical or mentalSince the airfare allowance was clearly iden- disability, your impairment-related work ex-Officials Paid on a Fee Basistified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the payment penses are not subject to thegoes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. To 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that appliesCertain fee-basis officials can claim their em-allocate the remaining $3,000, Rob uses the to most other employee business expenses. Af-ployee business expenses whether or not theyworksheet from the instructions for Form 2106. ter you complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, enteritemize their other deductions on Schedule AHis completed worksheet follows. your impairment-related work expenses from(Form 1040).
line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ1. Enter the total amount of Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-
on line 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040), andreimbursements your employer ployed by a state or local government and who
gave you that were not identify the type and amount of this expense onare paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. Theyreported to you in box 1 of Form the dotted line next to line 27. Enter your em-can deduct their business expenses in perform-W – 2 ................. 3,000 ployee business expenses that are unrelated toing services in that job as an adjustment to gross2. Enter the total amount of your your disability from line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6income rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedexpenses for the periods of Form 2106–EZ on line 20 of Schedule Adeduction.covered by this reimbursement 4,500
(Form 1040).3. Of the amount on line 2, enter If you are a fee-basis official, include your
your total expense for meals Impairment-related work expenses are youremployee business expenses from line 10 ofand entertainment......... 2,000 allowable expenses for attendant care at yourForm 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in the4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the workplace and other expenses in connectiontotal on line 34 of Form 1040. Print “FBO” andresult as a decimal (rounded to with your workplace that are necessary for youthe amount of your employee business ex-at least three places).......  .444 to be able to work.penses in the space to the left of line 34 of Form5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter
1040.the result here and in Column You are disabled if you have:
B, line 7............... 1,332
• A physical or mental disability (for exam-6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter
the result here and in Column ple, blindness or deafness) that function-Expenses of Certain
A, line 7............... 1,668 ally limits your being employed, orPerforming Artists
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668 • A physical or mental impairment (for ex-If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) in ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatdeduct your employee business expenses as anColumn A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in Column substantially limits one or more of youradjustment to gross income rather than as aB. major life activities, such as performingmiscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-you must meet all of the following requirements.After you complete the form.After you have ing, learning, or working.
completed your Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, follow1) During the tax year, you perform servicesthe directions on that form to deduct your ex- You can deduct impairment-related expensesin the performing arts for at least two em-penses on the appropriate line of your tax return. as business expenses if they are:ployers.For most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule A
• Necessary for you to do your work satis-2) You receive at least $200 each from any(Form 1040). However, if you are a government
factorily,two of these employers.official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, or
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• For goods and services not required or ness use) × 30%). Next, he figures his MACRS Town Department Store, to discuss the new line.
used, other than incidentally, in your per- deduction of $1,813 ($9,065 (remaining basis) × He later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to
sonal activities, and 20%). dinner to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’s
David’s total depreciation deduction would new line of clothing.• Not specifically covered under other in-normally be $5,698 ($3,885 + $1,813). How- Bill purchased his car on January 3, 1999.come tax laws. ever, it is limited in the first year to $5,362 He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-
($7,660 (from the Maximum Depreciation De- pense purposes. He records his total mileage,
Example. You are blind. You must use aduction for Cars table shown in chapter 4) × business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the
reader to do your work. You use the reader both70%). He enters these amounts in Part II, Sec- year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-
during your regular working hours at your placetion D. nent information in his Weekly Traveling Ex-
of work and outside your regular working hoursHis other car expenses included $3,080 forpense and Entertainment Record, shown in
away from your place of work. The reader’sgas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters thisTable 7. He obtains receipts for his expenses for
services are only for your work. You can deductamount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it by lodging and for any other expenses of $75 or
your expenses for the reader as business ex-the 70% business use. He adds this amount more.
penses. ($2,156) to the depreciation deduction ($5,362) During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000
and reports the total ($7,518) on line 1, Part I. miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.
His other transportation expenses for park- Following the instructions for Part II of FormIllustrated Examples
ing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,190. He enters 2106, he answers all the questions and figures
The following examples illustrate the reporting ofthis amount on line 2, Part I. David’s employer his car expense to be $7,300 (20,000 business
travel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex-reimbursed him a total of $2,940 for his car and miles × 361/2 cents standard mileage rate.
penses on Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ. Businesstransportation expenses. This amount was paid His total employee business expenses are
use of a car is shown using actual car expensesfrom an accountable plan and was not shown on shown in the following table.
in Example 1 and the standard mileage rate inDavid’s Form W–2. However, since he is claim-
Type of Expense AmountExample 2. Sample records that prove some ofing expenses that are more than his reimburse-
the claimed expenses are also shown. ments, he must show the entire reimbursementParking fees and tolls.......... $  3 2 5
amount on line 7, Column A, Part I. Since DavidCar expenses............... 7,300
Meals .................... 2,632Example 1. David Pine purchased a new had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en-
Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning.... 8,975car for $18,500 (including sales tax) on Januaryters his excess deductible expenses ($5,768) on
Entertainment............... 1,8706, 2002. In 2002, he used the car 70% for busi-line 10, Part I. He can deduct these expensesGifts, education, etc........... 4 3 0ness purposes. A sample page from David’s(subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeTotal $21,532logbook is illustrated in Table 6. He records his limit) on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040) if he
Bill received an allowance of $3,600 ($300business mileage (but not his personal miles)itemizes his deductions.
per month) to help offset his expenses. Bill didand expenses daily.
not have to account to his employer for theDavid uses Form 2106 to claim actual car Example 2. Bill Wilson is an employee of
reimbursement and the $3,600 was included asexpenses. He completes Part II, Section A, asFashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a
income in box 1 of his Form W–2.shown later on his illustrated form. He does nottypical week, Bill leaves his home on Long Is-
Because Bill’s reimbursement was includedclaim the section 179 deduction. He does claimland on Monday morning and drives to Albany to
in his income and he is using the standard mile-the special depreciation allowance and uses theexhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospective
age rate for his car expenses, he files FormMACRS double declining balance method customers. Then he drives to Troy to show
2106–EZ with his tax return.(200% DB) to determine his depreciation deduc-Fashion’s new line of merchandise to Town De-
tion. partment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,
David figures his special depreciation allow-he talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for
ance of $3,885 ($18,500 (basis) × 70% (busi-
Table 6. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log
Date
6/9/02
Table 6. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name:  David Pine
Destination
(City, Town, or Area)
Business
Purpose Start Stop
Miles
this trip
Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
Odometer Readings
6/10/02
6/11/02
6/12/02
6/13/02
6/14/02
6/15/02
Local
(St. Louis)
Indianapolis
Louisville
Return to
St. Louis
Local
(St. Louis)
Weekly
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Sales calls
Sales calls
See Bob Smith
(Pot. Client)
Sales calls
8,097
8,211
8,486
8,599
8,914
8,097
8,188
8,486
8,599
8,875
9,005
9,005
91
275
113
276
91
846
6,236
Gas
Parking
Gas/Repair
flat tire
Gas
$ 18.25
2.00
16.50
17.25
$ 62.00
$993.00
8.00
Expenses
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
David Pine 559 00 9559Sales
7,518
1,190
8,708
2,940
5,768
5,768
5,768
OMB No. 1545-0139Employee Business Expenses2106Form
/H17075See separate instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements
Column BColumn A
Step 1 Enter Your Expenses Meals and
Entertainment
Other Than Meals
and Entertainment
1
Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See
instructions.)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging,
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not
include meals and entertainment
4
4
5Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions)5
Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5
6
6
Note: If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8.
Step 2 Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see
instructions)
7
7
Step 3 Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040)
8
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if
line 7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as
income on Form 1040, line 7
8
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form
2106 to your return.
9
9
10
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal
expenses by 65% (.65) instead of 50%. For details, see
instructions.)
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. (Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified
performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on
where to enter the total.)
/H1707510
Cat. No. 11700NFor Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Form 2106 (2002)
Part I
(99)
2002
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
/H12011
16 0 2
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
3,080
3,080
2,156
5,362
7,518
18,500
9,065
200DB 20%
1,813
5,698
7,660
5,362
5,362
3,885
Page 2Form 2106 (2002)
Vehicle Expenses
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
//1111 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service
12 milesmiles12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2002
milesmiles1313 Business miles included on line 12
%%1414 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12
milesmiles1515 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance
milesmiles1616 Commuting miles included on line 12
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 milesmiles17
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?18 NoYes
NoYesWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?19
NoYes
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?21 NoYes
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?20
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or
Section C.)
22 Multiply line 13 by 36 1⁄2 ¢ (.365) 22
Section C—Actual Expenses (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle
insurance, etc.
23
23
24a24a Vehicle rentals
24bb Inclusion amount (see instructions)
24cc Subtract line 24b from line 24a
Value of employer-provided
vehicle (applies only if 100% of
annual lease value was included
on Form W-2—see instructions)
25
25
2626 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25
Multiply line 26 by the
percentage on line 14
27
27
28
Depreciation. Enter amount
from line 38 below
28
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total
here and on line 1 29
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C
for the vehicle.)
(a) Vehicle 1 (b) Vehicle 2
Enter cost or other basis (see
instructions)
30
30
Enter section 179 deduction
and special allowance (see
instructions)
31
31
Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see
instructions if you claimed the
section 179 deduction or special
allowance)
32
32
Enter depreciation method and
percentage (see instructions)
33
33
Multiply line 32 by the percentage
on line 33 (see instructions)
34
34
35Add lines 31 and 3435
Enter the limit from the table in
the line 36 instructions
36
36
Multiply line 36 by the
percentage on line 14
37
37
Enter the smaller of line 35 or
line 37. Also enter this amount
on line 28 above
38
38
Part II
//
2106
/H12011
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel and transportation expenses
Table 7. Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
From: August 4, 2002 To: August 10, 2002 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
Travel Expenses:
Airlines
1.
Excess baggage
Bus - Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Hotel and Motel
(Detail in Schedule B)
Entertainment
(Detail in Schedule C)
Other Expenses:
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s)
Trade Shows
2.
3.
4.
Car Expenses: (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
5.
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A - Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B - Lodging
Schedule C - Entertainment
Date
6.
Hotel
or
Motel
Name
City
August 8, 2002 Bar
Dinner
Item Place
John’s Steak House
Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
Troy
Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.15 00
35 00
Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern
Hotel
Albany Albany Albany Troy
57,600
57,445
155
155
57,620
57,600
20
57,650
57,620
57,660
57,650
57,840
57,660
30 10 395
170103020
180
385
40 0
87 25 120 00 117 75 111 50 19 50 456 00
10 0030 0 30 0
20 00 20 00
15 0015 00 30 00
40 00
15 0 10 0 25 0
50 00
22 00
97 5
50 00
18 25
10 00
67 5
50 00
17 50
92 5
60 0 52 5
82 5
45 00
50 00
70 0
85 0
25 00
45 75
195 00
57 75
50 00
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Other reimbursements
TOTAL
N/A
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
7,300
8,975
430
2,251
19,281
139 9
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
4,502
325
OMB No. 1545-1441
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
1Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multipy line 8a by 361⁄2¢ (.365)1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and entertainment4 4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ x 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses by 65%
(.65) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
(Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with
disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2002)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and
appropriate for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2002.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2002, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
General Instructions
Section references are to the Internal
Revenue Code.
Purpose of Form
You may use Form 2106-EZ instead of Form
2106 to claim your unreimbursed employee
business expenses if you meet all the
requirements listed above Part I.
Changes To Note
Standard mileage rate. The standard
mileage rate has been increased to 36 1⁄2
cents for each mile of business use in 2002.
Recordkeeping
You cannot deduct expenses for travel
(including meals, unless you used the
standard meal allowance), entertainment,
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2002 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage
rate for the first year you placed the vehicle in service or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the
portion of the lease period after 1997.
Additional Information
For more details about employee business
expenses, see:
Pub. 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Pub. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions
Pub. 587, Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care Providers)
Pub. 946, How To Depreciate Property
Meal expenses. The percentage of meal
expenses that may be deducted by
employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits
has been increased to 65% for 2002.
2002
Specific Instructions
Part I—Figure Your Expenses
Line 2. See the line 8b instructions for the
definition of commuting.
Line 3. Enter lodging and transportation
expenses connected with overnight travel
away from your tax home (defined below).
You cannot deduct expenses for travel away
from your tax home for any period of
temporary employment of more than 1 year.
Do not include expenses for meals and
entertainment. For more details, including
limits, see Pub. 463.
gifts, or use of a car or other listed property,
unless you keep records to prove the time,
place, business purpose, business
relationship (for entertainment and gifts), and
amounts of these expenses. Generally, you
must also have receipts for all lodging
expenses (regardless of the amount) and any
other expense of $75 or more.
Line 4. Enter other job-related expenses not
listed on any other line of this form. Include
expenses for business gifts, education (tuition
and books), home office, trade publications,
Generally, your tax home is your main
place of business or post of duty regardless
of where you maintain your family home. If
you do not have a regular or main place of
business because of the nature of your work,
then your tax home is the place where you
regularly live. If you do not fit in either of
these categories, you are considered an
itinerant and your tax home is wherever you
work. As an itinerant, you are never away
from home and cannot claim a travel expense
deduction. For more details on your tax
home, see Pub. 463.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Get information on starting and operating• Services. You can walk in to your local
a small business. IRS office to ask tax questions or get help
with a tax problem. Now you can set up an7. You can also reach us with your computer appointment by calling your local IRS of-
using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov. fice number and, at the prompt, leaving a
message requesting Everyday Tax Solu-TaxFax Service. Using the phone at- tions help. A representative will call youHow To Get Tax tached to your fax machine, you can back within 2 business days to schedulereceive forms and instructions by call-an in-person appointment at your conve-ing 703–368–9694. Follow the directions fromHelp nience.the prompts. When you order forms, enter the
catalog number for the form you need. The itemsYou can get help with unresolved tax issues,
Mail. You can send your order foryou request will be faxed to you.order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-
forms, instructions, and publications totions, and get more information from the IRS inFor help with transmission problems, call thethe Distribution Center nearest to youseveral ways. By selecting the method that isFedWorld Help Desk at 703–487–4608. and receive a response within 10 workdays afterbest for you, you will have quick and easy ac-
cess to tax help. your request is received. Find the address that
applies to your part of the country.Phone. Many services are available byContacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you phone. • Western part of U.S.:have attempted to deal with an IRS problem
Western Area Distribution Centerunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001payer Advocate.
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-The Taxpayer Advocate represents your in- • Central part of U.S.:tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order cur-terests and concerns within the IRS by protect- Central Area Distribution Centering your rights and resolving problems that haverent and prior year forms, instructions, andP.O. Box 8903not been fixed through normal channels. Whilepublications. Bloomington, IL 61702–8903Taxpayer Advocates cannot change the tax law• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withor make a technical tax decision, they can clear • Eastern part of U.S. and foreignyour tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.up problems that resulted from previous con- addresses:
tacts and ensure that your case is given a com-• Solving problems. Take advantage of Eve- Eastern Area Distribution Centerplete and impartial review. ryday Tax Solutions service by calling yourP.O. Box 85074To contact your Taxpayer Advocate: local IRS office to set up an in-person ap-Richmond, VA 23261–5074
pointment at your convenience. Check• Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
1–877–777–4778. your local directory assistance or CD-ROM for tax products. You can
www.irs.gov for the numbers. order IRS Publication 1796, Federal• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate
Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain:office in your area. • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
to TTY/TDD equipment, call• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a TTY/
1–800–829–4059 to ask tax questions or• Current tax forms, instructions, and publi-TDD user.
to order forms and publications. cations.
For more information, see Publication 1546,• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to • Prior-year tax forms and instructions.The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS. listen to pre-recorded messages covering• Popular tax forms that may be filled invarious tax topics.Free tax services.To find out what services electronically, printed out for submission,
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free and saved for recordkeeping.Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-• Internal Revenue Bulletins.cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-ices. To ensure that IRS representatives givescribes other free tax information services,accurate, courteous, and professional answers,The CD-ROM can be purchased from Na-including tax education and assistance pro-we use several methods to evaluate the qualitytional Technical Information Service (NTIS) bygrams and a list of TeleTax topics.
of our telephone services. One method is for acalling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet atPersonal computer. With your per- second IRS representative to sometimes listenhttp://www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first releasesonal computer and modem, you can in on or record telephone calls. Another is to askis available in early January and the final releaseaccess the IRS on the Internet at some callers to complete a short survey at theis available in late February.www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, youend of the call.can:
CD-ROM for small businesses. IRS• See answers to frequently asked tax ques- Publication 3207, Small Business Re-Walk-in. Many products and servicestions or request help by e-mail. source Guide, is a must for every smallare available on a walk-in basis. business owner or any taxpayer about to start a• Download forms and publications or
business. This handy, interactive CD containssearch for forms and publications by topic
or keyword. all the business tax forms, instructions and pub-• Products. You can walk in to many postlications needed to successfully manage a busi-• Order IRS products on-line. offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upness. In addition, the CD provides ancertain forms, instructions, and publica-• View forms that may be filled in electroni- abundance of other helpful information, such astions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocerycally, print the completed form, and then how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-save the form for recordkeeping. stores, copy centers, city and county gov-ing for your business, and much more. The de-ernments, credit unions, and office supply• View Internal Revenue Bulletins published sign of the CD makes finding information easystores have an extensive collection ofin the last few years. and quick and incorporates file formats andproducts available to print from a CD-ROMbrowsers that can be run on virtually any• Search regulations and the Internal Reve-or photocopy from reproducible proofs.desktop or laptop computer.nue Code. Also, some IRS offices and libraries have
It is available in March. You can get a free• Receive our electronic newsletters on hotthe Internal Revenue Code, regulations,
copy by calling 1–800–829–3676  or by visitingtax issues and news. Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-
the website at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.tive Bulletins available for research pur-• Learn about the benefits of filing electroni-
poses.cally (IRS e-file).
Page 38 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 39 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendices
There are ten appendices. car) for 30 days or more. The tables If any of these apply to you, use
Appendices A–1 through A–6 are numbered. the appendix for the year you first
show the lease inclusion amounts Appendices B–1 through B–6 leased the car. (See chapter 4.)
that you may need to report if you show the lease inclusion amounts
leased a car (other than an electric that you may need to report if you
leased an electric car.
■
Page 39

Page 40 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1993 through 1997
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
40
48
55
63
73
87
99
112
125
137
150
163
175
189
207
233
259
285
310
335
362
387
412
438
464
490
515
540
566
591
617
643
669
695
720
746
771
796
822
847
874
899
925
950
975
39
49
58
68
81
97
113
129
145
161
176
193
208
225
248
280
312
344
376
408
440
471
503
535
567
599
631
662
694
726
757
790
822
854
886
918
950
981
1,013
1,045
1,077
1,109
1,141
1,172
1,204
28
43
56
71
89
113
136
159
184
207
230
254
277
301
336
383
429
477
524
570
617
665
711
758
804
851
899
946
992
1,039
1,086
1,133
1,180
1,227
1,274
1,320
1,367
1,415
1,462
1,508
1,556
1,603
1,649
1,696
1,743
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1993
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1994
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1995
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1996
$$ $$$ $
5th and Later
21
32
42
53
67
84
102
119
136
154
171
189
207
225
250
286
320
355
390
425
460
495
531
565
600
635
670
705
740
775
810
844
880
915
950
985
1,020
1,054
1,089
1,125
1,159
1,195
1,230
1,264
1,299
$
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1997
10
21
32
44
58
77
95
114
132
151
169
187
205
224
252
288
326
362
399
435
473
509
546
583
620
657
693
731
767
804
841
878
915
951
989
1,026
1,062
1,098
1,136
1,172
1,209
1,246
1,282
1,320
1,356
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
2
1,002
1,027
1,052
1,078
1,104
1,130
1,155
1,194
1,245
1,295
1,347
1,398
1,450
1,500
1,551
1,236
1,268
1,299
1,331
1,363
1,395
1,427
1,475
1,538
1,602
1,666
1,730
1,793
1,857
1,921
1,790
1,837
1,884
1,931
1,977
2,024
2,072
2,142
2,235
2,330
2,423
2,517
2,611
2,704
2,799
1,334
1,370
1,404
1,440
1,474
1,509
1,544
1,597
1,667
1,737
1,807
1,876
1,947
2,016
2,086
1,394
1,430
1,467
1,504
1,540
1,578
1,615
1,670
1,743
1,817
1,890
1,964
2,038
2,112
2,186
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,801, see the document listed for the first year of th e lease.
For 1994, Revenue Procedure 94-53 (1994-2 CB 712)
For 1993, Revenue Procedure 93-35 (1993-2 CB 472)
For 1995, Revenue Procedure 95-9 (1995-1 CB 498)
For 1996, Revenue Procedure 96-25 (1996-1 CB 681)
For 1997, Revenue Procedure 97-20 (1997-1 CB 647)
If you leased an electric car after August 5, 1987, use Appendix B.
Page 40

Page 41 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
1
4
6
9
12
5
10
15
20
28
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
55
63
71
79
88
96
104
112
120
128
137
145
153
161
169
178
186
194
202
210
218
227
235
243
251
259
268
276
284
292
300
308
317
325
333
341
349
358
370
386
403
419
435
452
468
484
501
517
546
587
627
668
37
46
55
64
73
82
91
99
108
122
140
158
176
193
211
229
247
265
283
301
319
337
355
373
391
409
427
445
463
481
498
516
534
552
570
588
606
624
642
660
678
695
713
732
750
768
785
812
848
884
920
956
991
1,027
1,063
1,099
1,135
1,198
1,287
1,377
1,467 2,178 3,018 2,613
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
$$ $$$$ $ 8
16
25
33
43
56
70
83
96
110
123
136
150
163
183
210
236
263
290
317
343
370
396
423
449
476
502
529
556
582
608
635
662
688
715
742
769
795
822
849
875
901
928
955
981
1,008
1,035
1,062
1,087
1,114
1,140
1,168
1,207
1,261
1,313
1,367
1,420
1,474
1,527
1,580
1,633
1,686
1,779
1,913
2,046
12
22
31
41
53
70
85
101
117
133
149
165
181
197
221
252
285
316
348
380
412
444
476
508
540
571
604
635
667
699
731
763
794
827
859
891
922
955
986
1,018
1,050
1,082
1,114
1,145
1,178
1,209
1,241
1,273
1,305
1,337
1,369
1,400
1,449
1,512
1,577
1,640
1,704
1,767
1,832
1,896
1,959
2,023
2,134
2,294
2,453
14
25
36
47
62
80
99
117
136
154
173
191
209
228
255
292
329
366
403
439
477
513
550
587
624
661
697
735
771
808
845
882
919
955
992
1,028
1,066
1,102
1,140
1,176
1,213
1,250
1,286
1,324
1,360
1,398
1,434
1,471
1,508
1,544
1,582
1,619
1,674
1,747
1,821
1,894
1,968
2,042
2,115
2,189
2,263
2,337
2,466
2,649
2,834
Page 41

Page 42 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
16
19
22
26
29
32
39
47
53
61
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
32
35
39
42
47
53
60
66
73
79
85
92
98
105
111
118
124
131
137
144
150
157
163
170
176
183
189
196
202
208
215
221
228
234
241
247
254
260
267
273
280
286
296
309
322
335
348
361
374
387
399
412
435
467
500
532
68
75
82
89
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
199
214
227
242
256
270
284
299
313
327
341
355
369
384
398
412
426
441
455
469
483
497
512
526
540
554
569
582
597
611
625
646
675
703
732
760
788
817
845
874
902
952
1,023
1,094
1,165 1,729 2,394 2,073
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
$$ $$$$ $
48
59
69
80
90
101
111
122
132
148
169
190
212
233
253
275
296
316
338
359
380
402
423
443
464
486
507
528
549
570
591
612
633
654
675
696
718
739
759
780
802
823
843
865
886
907
928
960
1,002
1,044
1,086
1,128
1,171
1,212
1,255
1,297
1,339
1,413
1,518
1,623
58
71
83
96
108
121
134
146
160
178
204
229
254
279
305
330
355
381
406
431
456
481
506
532
557
582
607
633
658
683
708
734
759
784
810
835
860
885
911
936
961
986
1,012
1,037
1,062
1,087
1,113
1,151
1,201
1,252
1,302
1,353
1,403
1,454
1,504
1,555
1,606
1,694
1,821
1,947
68
82
96
111
126
140
155
169
183
206
235
264
293
322
351
380
410
439
468
497
527
556
585
614
643
672
702
731
760
789
819
848
877
906
935
964
993
1,023
1,052
1,081
1,110
1,140
1,169
1,198
1,227
1,256
1,285
1,329
1,387
1,446
1,504
1,563
1,621
1,679
1,738
1,796
1,854
1,956
2,102
2,248
2
4
6
8
10
13
3
7
11
15
20
25
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
4
10
17
23
29
38
4
13
20
28
35
45
6
14
23
32
41
53
Page 42

Page 43 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
23
28
9
17
25
33
42
10
20
30
40
49
12
23
34
45
57
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
49,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
25
29
33
37
41
45
50
54
60
68
77
85
93
102
110
119
127
135
144
152
160
169
177
185
194
202
210
219
227
235
244
252
260
269
277
285
294
302
311
319
327
336
344
352
361
369
381
398
415
432
448
465
482
498
515
532
561
603
644
686
36
45
54
63
72
81
91
100
109
118
132
150
168
187
205
223
241
259
278
296
314
333
351
369
388
406
424
443
461
479
497
516
534
552
571
589
607
626
644
662
680
699
717
735
754
772
790
808
836
873
909
945
982
1,019
1,055
1,092
1,129
1,165
1,229
1,320
1,412
1,504
52
66
79
93
107
121
133
147
160
174
194
222
249
276
303
330
358
385
412
439
467
493
521
548
574
602
629
656
683
710
738
765
792
819
846
873
901
927
954
982
1,009
1,036
1,063
1,090
1,117
1,145
1,172
1,199
1,240
1,294
1,348
1,403
1,457
1,511
1,566
1,620
1,673
1,728
1,823
1,959
2,095
2,230
62
78
95
111
127
143
160
176
193
209
234
266
298
331
364
396
429
461
493
527
558
591
623
656
689
721
754
786
819
852
884
916
949
982
1,014
1,047
1,079
1,112
1,145
1,177
1,210
1,242
1,275
1,308
1,340
1,372
1,405
1,438
1,486
1,551
1,617
1,681
1,747
1,811
1,876
1,942
2,007
2,072
2,186
2,349
72
91
109
128
147
166
185
204
222
241
269
306
345
381
419
457
494
532
570
607
645
683
720
757
795
833
870
908
946
983
1,021
1,058
1,095
1,133
1,171
1,208
1,246
1,284
1,321
1,359
1,396
1,433
1,471
1,508
1,546
1,584
1,621
1,659
1,715
1,790
1,865
1,941
2,016
2,092
2,166
2,241
2,317
2,392
2,523
2,711
2,899
3,087
2,511
2,674
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 I.R.B. 274).
$$ $$$$ $
Page 43

Page 44 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
22
27
9
16
24
33
41
10
20
30
39
48
11
22
33
44
56
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
53
59
67
75
83
91
100
108
116
124
132
140
149
157
165
173
181
189
198
206
214
222
230
238
247
255
263
271
279
287
296
304
312
320
328
336
345
353
361
373
390
406
422
439
455
471
488
504
520
549
590
631
671
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
97
106
115
129
147
165
183
201
218
236
254
272
290
308
326
343
361
379
397
415
433
451
469
487
505
523
540
558
576
594
612
630
648
666
684
702
720
738
755
773
791
818
854
890
926
961
997
1,033
1,068
1,104
1,140
1,203
1,292
1,382
1,472
51
64
78
91
104
117
131
144
158
171
190
217
243
270
296
324
350
377
403
430
456
482
510
536
563
590
616
642
669
695
722
748
775
802
828
855
881
908
935
961
987
1,014
1,040
1,067
1,093
1,120
1,147
1,173
1,213
1,266
1,319
1,372
1,426
1,479
1,532
1,585
1,638
1,692
1,784
1,917
2,049
2,182
61
77
92
109
125
141
156
173
188
204
229
260
292
324
356
387
419
451
483
515
547
579
610
643
674
705
738
770
801
833
865
897
929
961
993
1,024
1,057
1,088
1,119
1,151
1,184
1,215
1,248
1,279
1,311
1,343
1,375
1,407
1,455
1,518
1,582
1,645
1,709
1,772
1,836
1,901
1,964
2,027
2,139
2,298
70
89
107
125
143
162
181
199
217
236
263
300
337
373
410
447
484
520
557
594
631
667
705
741
778
815
851
888
925
962
998
1,036
1,072
1,108
1,145
1,183
1,219
1,256
1,293
1,330
1,366
1,403
1,439
1,476
1,514
1,550
1,586
1,624
1,678
1,752
1,825
1,900
1,972
2,047
2,120
2,193
2,267
2,341
2,469
2,653
2,837
3,020
2,458
2,617
$$ $$$$ $
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732).
Page 44

Page 45 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
2
3
4
6
7
5
9
14
18
23
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
9
11
14
16
18
21
23
25
28
30
33
38
43
47
52
57
61
66
71
75
80
85
89
94
99
103
108
112
117
122
126
131
136
140
145
150
154
159
164
168
173
177
182
187
191
196
201
205
212
222
231
240
250
259
268
277
287
296
312
335
359
382
29
37
44
52
60
67
75
82
90
97
108
123
139
154
169
185
199
214
230
245
260
276
290
305
321
336
351
366
381
396
411
426
441
457
472
487
502
517
532
548
904
934
964
1,017
1,092
1,169
1,245
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
3
7
10
13
16
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
56
60
66
74
84
94
104
114
124
135
145
155
165
175
185
196
206
216
226
236
247
257
267
278
288
298
308
318
328
339
349
359
369
379
390
400
410
420
430
440
451
466
486
507
527
547
568
589
609
629
650
686
737
787
838
6
11
17
22
29
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
98
108
117
130
149
166
185
203
220
239
258
275
294
312
329
348
367
384
403
421
439
457
475
493
512
530
548
566
584
602
620
639
657
675
693
711
729
747
766
784
802
829
866
902
938
974
1.011
1,047
1,083
1,120
1,156
1,219
1,311
1,401
1,491
6
13
19
26
31
40
50
61
72
82
93
103
114
123
134
150
171
192
213
234
255
276
296
318
338
360
381
402
422
443
464
485
506
527
549
570
590
611
632
653
674
695
717
737
758
779
800
821
842
863
883
905
925
957
999
1,041
1,083
1,125
1,166
1,208
1,250
1,292
1,334
1,408
1,512
1,617
1,722100,000
2
$$$$ $
563
578
593
608
624
639
654
669
692
722
752
783
813
843
873
Page 45

Page 46 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1997
1
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
1
This table only applies to lease terms beginning after August 5, 1997.
2
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-24 (1998-10 IRB 31).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
1
9
17
25
34
42
50
58
66
74
83
91
99
111
128
144
160
177
193
209
226
242
259
287
328
369
410
4
22
40
58
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
201
219
246
282
318
354
389
425
461
497
533
568
632
721
811
900
7
33
60
87
114
140
167
194
220
247
273
300
326
366
419
472
525
579
632
686
738
792
845
938
1,071
1,204
1,337
9
41
73
104
136
169
200
232
264
296
328
359
392
440
503
567
631
695
759
822
887
950
1,014
1,125
1,285
1,444
1,604
11
48
84
122
159
195
232
269
306
342
379
417
453
508
582
656
730
803
876
950
1,023
1,097
1,171
1,300
1,484
1,669
1,853
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
4
5
13
21
29
38
46
54
62
70
79
87
95
103
115
132
148
164
181
197
214
230
246
263
291
332
373
414
11
29
47
65
83
101
119
137
155
172
190
208
226
253
289
325
361
396
432
468
504
540
576
639
728
818
908
18
45
71
98
124
151
177
204
231
258
284
311
338
378
430
484
537
591
644
697
750
803
856
949
1,083
1,215
1,348
21
52
85
116
148
180
212
244
275
307
340
372
403
451
515
578
643
706
770
834
898
962
1,025
1,137
1,296
1,456
1,615
23
60
96
134
171
207
244
281
318
355
391
428
465
520
594
668
741
815
888
962
1,035
1,109
1,183
1,312
1,496
1,681
1,865
4
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
Page 46

Page 47 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
14
28
43
57
71
86
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
206
235
263
291
320
348
377
405
433
462
511
582
654
724
21
42
62
83
105
126
147
168
189
211
232
252
273
305
347
389
432
473
516
558
600
643
684
758
864
968
1,075
26
51
77
102
127
151
177
202
228
253
278
304
329
367
417
468
518
569
619
669
720
771
822
910
1,036
1,163
1,289
30
59
88
118
147
177
205
235
264
292
322
351
380
424
483
541
600
658
716
775
833
891
949
1,052
1,198
1,343
1,489
Appendix B-4. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
17
31
45
59
74
88
102
116
130
145
159
173
187
208
237
266
294
322
351
379
407
436
464
514
585
656
727
26
47
69
90
110
132
153
174
195
216
237
258
279
311
353
394
437
480
521
564
606
648
690
763
869
975
1,080
32
57
82
107
133
157
183
209
234
259
284
310
335
373
423
474
524
574
625
675
727
777
828
916
1,042
1,168
1,295
36
66
95
124
153
183
211
240
270
299
328
357
387
430
489
547
606
664
723
781
838
897
955
1,058
1,204
1,350
1,495
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 726).
Page 47

Page 48 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-5. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
9
17
25
33
42
50
58
66
74
82
91
99
107
119
136
152
168
185
201
217
234
250
266
295
336
377
417
21
39
57
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
200
218
236
263
298
334
370
406
442
478
513
549
585
648
737
826
916
33
60
86
113
139
165
192
218
245
272
299
325
352
391
445
498
551
604
657
710
764
817
870
962
1,095
1,229
1,361
40
71
104
135
167
199
231
263
295
326
358
390
422
470
533
597
661
724
788
852
915
979
1,043
1,155
1,314
1,472
1,632
46
83
119
157
193
230
266
304
340
377
414
451
487
543
616
690
763
837
910
984
1,057
1,131
1,204
1,332
1,517
1,701
1,885
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732).
Appendix B-6. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
3
7
12
17
21
26
31
35
40
45
49
54
59
63
70
79
89
98
107
117
126
135
145
154
170
193
217
240
6
16
26
36
47
57
67
77
87
98
108
118
128
139
154
276
297
317
337
373
424
475
526
10
26
41
56
71
86
101
117
132
146
161
177
192
206
229
260
290
320
350
381
411
441
472
502
555
631
706
782
102
120
138
156
174
193
211
229
248
275
311
347
384
420
456
493
529
564
602
665
756
847
937
117
138
159
180
201
222
242
264
284
316
358
400
442
484
525
567
609
652
693
767
871
976
1,081
174
195
215
236
256
11
29
47
66
83
12
33
54
74
96
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
Page 48

Page 49 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Disposition of car....... 17, 23 Depreciation deduction . . . 18A R
Depreciation of car...... 2 0Documentary evidence..... 2 4Accountable plan......... 2 7 Reasonable period........ 2 7
Employee businessAccounting to employer.... 2 8 Recordkeeping .......... 2 4
expenses ........... 3 2Actual car expenses..... 16, 31 Recovery period of car . . . 19, 22E Exceptions to 50% limit . . . 12Actual cost.............. 5 Regular federal per diemElectric cars.......... 15, 20 Gifts................ 1 3 rate ................ 2 8Adequate accounting...... 2 8 Employer-provided vehicles . . . 2Luxury water travel....... 8 Reimbursements:Adequate records........ 2 4 Entertainment: Meals and Excess .............. 2 7Advances, travel....... 27, 29 50% limit............. 1 2 entertainment........ 1 2 For personalDeductibleAdvertising........... 13, 14 Section 179 expenses ......... 27, 28expenses ....... 9 ,  10, 31Allocating between deduction......... 16, 21 General rules.......... 2 7Facilities............. 1 0business and Skyboxes ............ 1 0 Reporting............ 3 2Tickets............ 10, 26nonbusiness expenses . . 7, 10 Local transportation....... 1 3 Unclaimed............ 2 7Exceptions to the 50%Allocation of Luxury skyboxes......... 1 0 Related to employer........ 6limit................ 1 2reimbursement......... 3 2 Luxury water travel........ 8 Reporting businessExcess depreciation of car . . 22Allowances and expenses ............ 2 6Excessreimbursements........ 2 7
Returning excessMreimbursements...... 27, 29Armed Forces..........3 ,  1 4 reimbursement......... 2 9M&IE .................. 5Expenses for others......4 ,  1 2Artists, performing........ 3 2 Rural mail carriers........ 1 5MACRS depreciation...... 1 9Extravagant expenses....5 ,  1 0Assistance (See Tax help)
MACRS depreciation chart . . 20Associated entertainment . . . 11
Main place of business or SAway from home .......... 3 F work ................. 3 Section 179 deduction . . . 16, 21Fair market value of car.... 2 3 Meal allowance........... 5 Self-employed person.... 13, 26FAVR allowance ......... 2 9B Meal allowance, standard . . . 28Skyboxes .............. 1 0Federal crime investigations orBasis of car.......... 17, 18 Meal expenses .......... 3 1 Special depreciation allowance:prosecutions........... 4Business and nonbusiness Actual cost............ 5 Amount .............. 1 7Federal rate............ 2 8entertainment.......... 1 0 Standard meal allowance . . . 5Election not to claim..... 1 7Fee-basis officials........ 3 2Business associate........ 5 Meals and entertainment: Qualified property....... 1 7Forms:Business trip........... 6 ,  7 50% limit............. 1 2 Spouse, expenses for.....4 ,  1 22106 ............. 31, 33Business use of Meals and incidental Standard meal2 1 0 6 – E Z ..........31, 33c a r..........16, 17, 22, 23 expenses ............ 2 8 allowance...........5 ,  2 84562 ............... 2 6More-than-50%-use test . . 18 Meetings, expenses of Amount ............... 64797 ............... 2 2Qualified business use . . . 18 attending........... 10, 11 Standard mileage rate:Free tax services......... 3 8 Membership fees.......... 9 Amount .............. 1 5
Military personnel.......3 ,  1 4C Depreciation adjustment . . 24G More information (See Tax help)Car allowance......... 28, 29 How to report........ 29, 31
Gifts, business.......... 1 3Car defined............ 1 6 Substantiation of
expenses ............ 2 4Car expenses........... 1 5 NH Suggestions for publication . . . 2Car pools.............. 1 4 Necessary expense........ 2Hauling tools............ 1 5Car rentals........... 23, 31 Nonaccountable plan...... 3 0Help (See Tax help)Clean-fuel cars........ 15, 20 North American area....... 9 THigh-low rate........... 2 8Client, expenses paid for.... 3 0 Tax help............... 3 8Home used as office...... 1 5Club dues............... 9 Tax home ............... 3OHours of service limits..... 1 3Comments on publication.... 2 Taxpayer Advocate....... 3 8Office in the home........ 1 5How to report businessCommuting ............. 1 4 Temporary assignment....4 ,  1 4Officials paid on a feeexpenses ............ 2 6Conventions...........9 ,  1 1 Temporary work location.... 1 4basis ............... 3 2Cost of car............. 1 7 Tickets:Ordinary expense......... 2Cruise ships............. 9 I Charity event.......... 1 0
Customer, expenses paid Impairment-related work Entertainment....... 10, 26
f o r ................. 3 0 Pexpenses ............ 3 2 Traffic violations........ 1 6
Per diem allowances:Incidental expenses........ 5 Trade-in of car........ 18, 23
High-low rate.......... 2 8Inclusion amount......... 2 3 Traffic tickets........... 1 6D Meals and incidentalIncomplete records....... 2 5 Transient............... 3Depreciation deduction: expenses rate........ 2 8Indefinite assignment....... 4Limits............... 1 8 Transportation........... 3 1Regular rate.......... 2 8Independent contractor..... 3 0Depreciation of car: Transportation expenses.... 1 3Reporting expenses . . . 28, 29Itinerant................ 3Chart, MACRS ......... 2 0 Transportation workers...... 6Performing artists........ 3 2Excess .............. 2 2 Travel:Personal trip........... 6 ,  8General Advance ............. 2 9K Personal userules....... 16, 17, 19, 20 Allocation rules......... 7Keeping records....... 24, 26 o f  c a r .....16, 18, 20, 22, 23Limits............... 2 0 Away from home ........ 3Placed in service, car...... 1 6Standard mileage rate.... 2 4 Deductible expenses.... 3 ,  4
L Probationary work period.... 4Year of disposition...... 2 4 Expenses for others...... 4
Lavish expenses........5 ,  1 0Prorating standard mealDirectly–related In the United States...... 6
allowance............ 2 8entertainment.......... 1 1 Leasing a car......... 23, 31 Luxury water........... 8
Proving expenses........ 2 4Disabled employees, Limits: Meals expense .......... 5
expenses of........... 3 2 50% limit............. 1 2 Publications (See Tax help) Outside the United States . . 7
Page 49

Page 50 of 50 of Publication 463 11:17 - 28-MAY-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
TTY/TDD information...... 3 8 Union hall, trips from...... 1 5 VW
Unrecovered basis of car . . . 22Vehicle provided by Water travel ............. 8
employer............. 2 7U ■Volunteers.............. 2Unadjusted basis......... 1 8
Unclaimed reimbursement . . . 27
Page 50