Userid: SD_T81KB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: ...s and Instruct\2010 Cycle Year\P 527\10P527 - 02-10-11 - EPIC - 2.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 527 ContentsCat. No. 15052W
What's New .................... . 1Department
of the Reminders ..................... . 2Treasury Residential
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue 1. Rental Income and Expenses (IfRentalService No Personal Use of Dwelling) .... . 3
Rental Income ................. . 3
Rental Expenses ............... . 3Property
2. Depreciation of Rental Property .... . 6
The Basics ................... . 6
Claiming the Special Depreciation(Including Rental of Allowance ................ . 8
MACRS Depreciation ............ . 8Vacation Homes) Claiming the Correct Amount of
Depreciation .............. . 11
For use in preparing 3. Reporting Rental Income,
Expenses, and Losses ......... . 12
Which Forms To Use ........... . 122010 Returns Limits on Rental Losses ......... . 13
At-Risk Rules ............. . 13
Passive Activity Limits ........ . 13
Casualties and Thefts ........... . 14
Illustrated Example ............. . 14
4. Special Situations .............. . 16
Condominiums ............... . 16
Cooperatives ................. . 16
Property Changed to Rental Use ... . 16
Renting Part of Property ......... . 17
Not Rented for Profit ............ . 17
Illustrated Example ............. . 17
5. Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
(Including Vacation Home) ...... . 21
What Is a Day of Personal Use ..... . 21
Dwelling Unit Used as a Home ..... . 21
Figuring Rental Income and
Deductions ............... . 22
Reporting Income and
Deductions ............... . 23
Illustrated Example ............. . 23
Worksheet for Figuring Rental
Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a Home ........ . 27
6. How To Get Tax Help ........... . 29
Index ......................... . 30
What's New
Special depreciation allowance. For quali-
fied property acquired after September 8, 2010,
and placed in service before the end of the year,
the additional first year depreciation is 100% of
the depreciable basis of the property instead of
50%. See Publication 946, How To Depreciate
Property, for more information.
Treatment of rental property expense pay-
ments. Beginning with payments made after
December 31, 2010, if you make payments ofGet forms and other information
$600 or more for certain rental property ex-faster and easier by: penses, the payments are to be reported in box
7 on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income.
Internet IRS.gov For more information, see Rental property ex-
pense payments, later.
Feb 10, 2011

Page 2 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction for qualified disaster clean-up We respond to many letters by telephone.
costs in a Midwestern disaster area. You Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-Reminders can deduct, rather than capitalize, 50% of quali- clude your daytime phone number, including the
fied disaster recovery assistance clean-up costs area code, in your correspondence.Tax-free exchange of rental property used paid or incurred on or after the applicable disas- You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Thefor personal purposes. You may qualify for a ter date, and before January 1, 2011. Refer to asterisk must be included in the address.)
tax-free exchange (a like-kind or section 1031 Publication 4492-B, Information for Affected Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
exchange) of one piece of rental property you Taxpayers in the Midwestern Disaster Areas, to ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
own for a similar piece of rental property, even if see if your rental property is in a qualifying area ally to each email, we do appreciate your
you have used the rental property for personal and for details on the deduction. feedback and will consider your comments as
purposes. You must meet the following criteria. we revise our tax products.
Photographs of missing children. The Inter-• You own the rental property for at least 24 Ordering forms and publications. Visitnal Revenue Service is a proud partner with themonths before the exchange. www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to thedren. Photographs of missing children selected• During the 2 years before the exchange address below and receive a response within 10by the Center may appear in this publication onyou rent the property to another person at days after your request is received.pages that would otherwise be blank. You cana fair rental price for 14 days or more.
help bring these children home by looking at the Internal Revenue Service• Your personal use of the rental property photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayduring each of the two years before the (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. Bloomington, IL 61705-6613exchange does not exceed the greater of
14 days or 10% of the number of days the
Tax questions. If you have a tax question,property is rented.
check the information available on IRS.gov orIntroductionFor information on like-kind exchanges, see call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxPublication 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of Do you own a second house that you rent out all questions sent to either of the above addresses.Assets, chapter 1. the time? Do you own a vacation home that you
rent out when you or your family isn't using it? Useful ItemsAdditional first-year depreciation for certain These are two common types of residential You may want to see:MACRS property. If, prior to September 9, rental activities discussed in this publication.2010, you placed in service certain longer-lived Generally, all rental income must be reported on Publicationand transportation property with a recovery pe- your tax return, but there are differences in theriod of 20 years or less, you can elect a 50% ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carexpenses you are allowed to deduct and in thespecial depreciation allowance (in addition to Expensesway the rental activity is reported on your return.your regular MACRS depreciation deduction). First, this publication will look at the ❏ 523 Selling Your HomeFor certain longer-lived and transportation prop- rental-for-profit activity in which there is no per-erty with a recovery period of 20 years or less ❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed insonal use of the property. We will look at types ofacquired after September 8, 2010, and placed in Service Before 1987income and when each is reported, and at typesservice before the end of the year, your special of expenses and which are deductible. ❏ 535 Business Expensesdepreciation allowance is 100% unless you Chapter 2  discusses depreciation as it ap-choose not to take the special depreciation al- ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofplies to your rental real estate activity Ðwhatlowance. See Publication 946 for more informa- Assetsproperty can be depreciated and how to figure it.tion. Chapter 3 covers the actual reporting of your ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
rental income and deductions, including casual-Special depreciation allowance for Gulf Op- ❏ 551 Basis of Assetsties and thefts, limitations on losses, and claim-portunity (GO) Zone. You can take a special ing the correct amount of depreciation. ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rulesdepreciation allowance for qualified property lo- Special rental situations are grouped to-cated in areas damaged by the hurricanes oc- ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertygether in chapter 4. These include condomini-curring during 2005. To be qualified, the ums and cooperatives, property changed to ❏ 4492-A Information for Taxpayersproperty must be located in specified counties or rental use, renting only part of your property, and Affected by the May 7, 2007,parishes, acquired after August 27, 2005, and a not-for-profit rental activity. Kansas Storms and Tornadoesplaced in service before January 1, 2012. For Finally, in chapter 5, we will look at the rulesmore information, see chapter 3 in Publication ❏ 4492-B Information for Affectedfor rental income and expenses when there is Taxpayers in the Midwestern946. also personal use of the dwelling unit, such as a Disaster Areasvacation home.Special depreciation allowance for disaster
assistance property. You can take a special Form (and Instructions)Sale of rental property. For information ondepreciation allowance for qualified property how to figure and report any gain or loss from ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortizationplaced in service in federally declared disaster the sale or other disposition of your rental prop-areas in which the disaster occurred after De- ❏ 5213 Election To Postponeerty, see Publication 544.cember 31, 2007, and before January 1, 2010. Determination as To Whether theSale of main home used as rental property.The qualifying property must be placed in serv- Presumption Applies That anFor information on how to figure and report anyice on or before the last day of the third calendar Activity Is Engaged in for Profitgain or loss from the sale or other disposition ofyear following the applicable disaster date (the ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsyour main home that you also used as rentalfourth calendar year in the case of nonresiden-
property, see Publication 523, Selling Yourtial real property and residential rental property). ❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) SupplementalHome. Income and LossA list of the federally declared disaster areas is
available at the FEMA website at www.fema. Comments and suggestions. We welcome See chapter 6 , How To Get Tax Help , forgov. For more information, see chapter 3 in your comments about this publication and your information about getting these publications andPublication 946. suggestions for future editions. forms.
You can write to us at the following address:Expensing of qualified expenses allowed in
federally declared disaster areas. You can Internal Revenue Service
generally deduct, rather than capitalize, quali- Individual Forms and Publications Branch
fied disaster expenses paid or incurred after SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
December 31, 2007. See Publication 535, Busi- 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
ness Expenses, for more information. Washington, DC 20224
Page 2 Publication 527 (2010)

Page 3 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Advance rent. Advance rent is any amount Other Sources of Rental Income
you receive before the period that it covers.
Include advance rent in your rental income in the Lease with option to buy. If the rental agree-1. year you receive it regardless of the period cov- ment gives your tenant the right to buy your
ered or the method of accounting you use. rental property, the payments you receive under
the agreement are generally rental income. If
Example. On March 18, 2010, you signed a your tenant exercises the right to buy the prop-
Rental Income 10-year lease to rent your property. During erty, the payments you receive for the period
2010, you received $9,600 for the first year's after the date of sale are considered part of the
rent and $9,600 as rent for the last year of the selling price.and Expenses (If lease. You must include $19,200 in your rental
Part interest. If you own a part interest inincome in the first year.
rental property, report your percentage of theNo Personal Use rental income from the property.Canceling a lease. If your tenant pays you to
cancel a lease, the amount you receive is rent. Rental of property also used as your home.of Dwelling) Include the payment in your income in the year If you rent property that you also use as your
you receive it regardless of your method of ac- home and you rent it fewer than 15 days during
This chapter discusses the various types of counting. the tax year, do not include the rent you receive
rental income and expenses for a residential in your income and do not deduct rental ex-
rental activity with no personal use of the dwell- Expenses paid by tenant. If your tenant pays penses. However, you can deduct on Schedule
ing. Generally, each year you will report all in- A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions, the inter-any of your expenses, those payments are
come and deduct all out-of-pocket expenses in est, taxes, and casualty and theft losses that arerental income. Because you are including this
full. The deduction to recover the cost of your allowed for nonrental property. See chapter 5,amount in income, you can also deduct the ex-
rental property ÐdepreciationÐis taken over a Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vaca-penses if they are deductible rental expenses.
prescribed number of years, and is discussed in tion Home).For more information, see Rental Expenses be-
chapter 2 Rental Income and Expenses (If No ginning on this page.
Personal Use of Dwelling).
Example 1. Your tenant pays the water andIf your rental income is from property
sewage bill for your rental property and deducts Rental Expensesyou also use personally or rent to
the amount from the normal rent payment.someone at less than a fair rental price,
CAUTION
!
Under the terms of the lease, your tenant does Generally, the expenses of renting your prop-first read the information in chapter 5 Personal
not have to pay this bill. Include the utility bill erty, such as maintenance, insurance, taxes,Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home).
paid by the tenant and any amount received as a and interest, can be deducted from your rental
rent payment in your rental income. You can income.
deduct the utility payment made by your tenant Personal use of rental property. If youas a rental expense. sometimes use your rental property for personalRental Income
purposes, you must divide your expenses be-Example 2. While you are out of town, the tween rental and personal use. Also, your rentalGenerally, you must include in your gross in- furnace in your rental property stops working. expense deductions may be limited. See chap-come all amounts you receive as rent. Rental Your tenant pays for the necessary repairs and ter 5, Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Includingincome is any payment you receive for the use deducts the repair bill from the rent payment. Vacation Home).or occupation of property. In addition to amounts Include the repair bill paid by the tenant and any
you receive as normal rental payments, there amount received as a rent payment in your Part interest. If you own a part interest in
are other amounts that may be rental income. rental income. You can deduct the repair pay- rental property, you can deduct expenses you
ment made by your tenant as a rental expense. paid according to your percentage of ownership.
When To Report
Example. Roger owns a one-half undividedProperty or services. If you receive property
When you report rental income on your tax re- interest in a rental house. Last year he paid $968or services as rent, instead of money, include
turn generally depends on whether you are a for necessary repairs on the property. Roger canthe fair market value of the property or services
cash basis taxpayer or use an accrual method. deduct $484 (50% ×  $968) as a rental expense.in your rental income.
Most individual taxpayers use the cash method. He is entitled to reimbursement for the remain-If the services are provided at an agreed
ing half from the co-owner.upon or specified price, that price is the fairCash method. You are a cash basis taxpayer market value unless there is evidence to theif you report income on your return in the year contrary. When To Deductyou actually or constructively receive it, regard-
less of when it was earned. You constructively You generally deduct your rental expenses inExample. Your tenant is a house painter.receive income when it is made available to you, the year you pay them.He offers to paint your rental property instead offor example, by being credited to your bank If you use the accrual method, see Publica-paying 2 months' rent. You accept his offer.account.   tion 538 for more information.Include in your rental income the amount the
tenant would have paid for 2 months' rent. YouAccrual method.  If you are an accrual basis can deduct that same amount as a rental ex- Types of Expensestaxpayer, you generally report income when you pense for painting your property.earn it, rather than when you receive it. You Listed below are the most common rental ex-generally deduct your expenses when you incur penses.Security deposits. Do not include a securitythem, rather than when you pay them.
deposit in your income when you receive it if you • Advertising.
plan to return it to your tenant at the end of theMore information. See Publication 538, Ac- • Cleaning and maintenance.lease. But if you keep part or all of the securitycounting Periods and Methods, for more infor-
deposit during any year because your tenantmation about when you constructively receive • Commissions.
does not live up to the terms of the lease, includeincome and accrual methods of accounting. • Depreciation.the amount you keep in your income in that year.
If an amount called a security deposit is to be • Insurance.Types of Income
used as a final payment of rent, it is advance • Interest (other).rent. Include it in your income when you receiveThe following are common types of rental in-
it.come. • Legal fees.
Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling) Page 3

Page 4 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Local transportation expenses. Local transportation expenses. You can de- your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-
duct your ordinary and necessary local transpor- ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or• Management fees. tation expenses if you incur them to collect rental maintaining the property while the property is
• Mortgage interest. income or to manage, conserve, or maintain vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss of
your rental property. rental income for the period the property is va-• Points. Generally, if you use your personal car, cant.
• Rental payments. pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you Vacant while listed for sale. If you sellcan deduct the expenses using one of two meth-• Repairs. property you held for rental purposes, you canods: actual expenses or the standard mileage deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses for• Tax return preparation fees. rate. For 2010, the standard mileage rate for managing, conserving, or maintaining the prop-each mile of business use is 50 cents per mile.• Taxes. erty until it is sold.For more information, see chapter 4 of Publica-
• Travel expenses. tion 463.  
• Utilities. To deduct car expenses under either Points
method, you must keep records thatSome of these expenses, as well as other less The term ªpointsº is often used to describe somefollow the rules in chapter 5 of Publica-
RECORDScommon ones, are discussed below. of the charges paid, or treated as paid, by ation 463. In addition, you must complete Form
borrower to take out a loan or a mortgage.4562, Part V, and attach it to your tax return.Depreciation. Depreciation is a capital ex- These charges are also called loan originationpense. It is the mechanism for recovering your Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct your fees, maximum loan charges, or premiumcost in an income producing property and must ordinary and necessary expenses for managing, charges. Any of these charges (points) that arebe taken over the expected life of the property. conserving, or maintaining rental property from solely for the use of money are interest. Be-
You can begin to depreciate rental property the time you make it available for rent. cause points are prepaid interest, you generally
when it is ready and available for rent. See cannot deduct the full amount in the year paid,Rental of equipment. You can deduct thePlaced in Service under When Does Deprecia- but must deduct the interest over the term of therent you pay for equipment that you use fortion Begin and End in chapter 2. loan.rental purposes. However, in some cases, lease
The method used to figure the amount ofcontracts are actually purchase contracts. If so,Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you points you can deduct each year follows theyou cannot deduct these payments. You canpay an insurance premium for more than one original issue discount (OID) rules. In this case,recover the cost of purchased equipmentyear in advance, for each year of coverage you points are equivalent to OID, which is the differ-through depreciation.can deduct the part of the premium payment that ence between:will apply to that year. You cannot deduct the Rental of property. You can deduct the rent
total premium in the year you pay it. See Publi- • The amount borrowed (redemption priceyou pay for property that you use for rental
cation 535, chapter 6, for information on deducti- at maturity, or principal) andpurposes. If you buy a leasehold for rental pur-
ble premiums. poses, you can deduct an equal part of the cost • The proceeds (issue price).each year over the term of the lease.
Interest expense. You can deduct mortgage The first step is to determine whether yourTax return preparation fees. You can de-interest you pay on your rental property. Chapter total OID (which you may have on bonds orduct, as a rental expense, the part of tax return4 of Publication 535 explains mortgage interest other investments in addition to the mortgagepreparation fees you paid to prepare Schedulein detail. loan), including the OID resulting from theE, Part I. For example, on your 2010 Schedule E
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage. points, is insignificant or de minimis. If the OID isyou can deduct fees paid in 2010 to prepare Part
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage not de minimis, you must use the constant-yieldI of your 2009 Schedule E. You can also deduct,
on your rental property cannot be deducted as method to figure how much you can deduct.as a rental expense, any expense (other than
interest. These expenses, which include mort- federal taxes and penalties) you paid to resolve
gage commissions, abstract fees, and recording De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it isa tax underpayment related to your rental activi-
fees, are capital expenses. However, you can less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the statedties.
amortize them over the life of the mortgage. See redemption price at maturity (principal amount ofTravel expenses. You can deduct the ordi-Publication 535, chapter 8, for information about the loan) multiplied by the number of full yearsnary and necessary expenses of traveling awayamortization. from the date of original issue to maturity (termfrom home if the primary purpose of the trip is to of the loan).Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement. collect rental income or to manage, conserve, or If the OID is de minimis, you can choose oneIf you paid $600 or more of mortgage interest on maintain your rental property. You must properly of the following ways to figure the amount ofyour rental property to any one person, you allocate your expenses between rental and points you can deduct each year.should receive a Form 1098 or similar statement nonrental activities. You cannot deduct the cost
showing the interest you paid for the year. If you • On a constant-yield basis over the term ofof traveling away from home if the primary pur-
and at least one other person (other than your the loan.pose of the trip is to improve the property. The
spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for, cost of improvements is recovered by taking • On a straight line basis over the term ofand paid interest on, the mortgage, and the depreciation. For information on travel ex- the loan.other person received the Form 1098, report penses, see chapter 1 of Publication 463.
your share of the interest on Schedule E (Form • In proportion to stated interest payments.To deduct travel expenses, you must1040), line 13. Attach a statement to your return • In its entirety at maturity of the loan.keep records that follow the rules inshowing the name and address of the other chapter 5 of Publication 463.
RECORDSperson. In the left margin of Schedule E, next to You make this choice by deducting the OID
line 13, enter ªSee attached.º (points) in a manner consistent with the methodUncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax- chosen on your timely filed tax return for the taxpayer, do not deduct uncollected rent. BecauseLocal benefit taxes. Generally, you cannot year in which the loan is issued.you have not included it in your income, it is notdeduct charges for local benefits that increase deductible.the value of your property, such as charges for Example. Carol Madison took out aIf you use an accrual method, report incomeputting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewer $100,000 mortgage loan on January 1, 2010, towhen you earn it. If you are unable to collect thesystems. These charges are nondepreciable buy a house she will use as a rental during 2010.rent, you may be able to deduct it as a businesscapital expenditures, and must be added to the The loan is to be repaid over 30 years. Duringbad debt. See chapter 10 of Publication 535 forbasis of your property. However, you can deduct 2010, Carol paid $10,000 of mortgage interestmore information about business bad debts.local benefit taxes that are for maintaining, re- (stated interest) to the lender. When the loan
pairing, or paying interest charges for the bene- was made, she paid $1,500 in points to theVacant rental property. If you hold property
fits. lender. The points reduced the principal amountfor rental purposes, you may be able to deduct
Page 4 Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling)

Page 5 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Issue price ............... . $98,500of the loan from $100,000 to $98,500, resulting  If you make repairs as part of an extensive
Plus: Points (OID) deducted in $1,500 of OID. Carol determines that the remodeling or restoration of your property, the
in 2010 ................ . + 93points (OID) she paid are de minimis based on whole job is an improvement.
Adjusted issue price ......... . $98,593the following computation.
Multiplied by: YTM .......... . ×  .102467
Improvements. An improvement adds to theTotal ................... . 10,103Redemption price at maturity value of property, prolongs its useful life, orMinus: QSI ............... . ± 10,000(principal amount of the loan) .. . $100,000
adapts it to new uses. Table 1-1 shows exam-Points (OID) deductible in 2011 $ 103Multiplied by: The term of the 
ples of many improvements.loan in complete years ....... . × 30
Multiplied by ............... . × .0025  If you make an improvement to property, the
De minimis amount ......... . $ 7,500 cost of the improvement must be capitalized.Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan or mort-
The capitalized cost can generally be depreci-gage ends, you may be able to deduct anyThe points (OID) she paid ($1,500) are less than ated as if the improvement were separate prop-remaining points (OID) in the tax year in whichthe de minimis  amount ($7,500). Therefore, erty.the loan or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgageCarol has de minimis OID and she can choose
may end due to a refinancing, prepayment, fore-one of the four ways discussed earlier to figure
closure, or similar event. However, if the refi-the amount she can deduct each year. Under Example. You repair a small section on one
nancing is with the same lender, the remainingthe straight line method, she can deduct $50 corner of the roof of a rental house. You deduct
points (OID) generally are not deductible in theeach year for 30 years. the cost of the repair as a rental expense. How-
year in which the refinancing occurs, but may be ever, if you completely replace the roof, the new
deductible over the term of the new mortgage orConstant-yield method. If the OID is not de roof is an improvement because it increases the
loan.minimis , you must use the constant-yield value and lengthens the life of the property. You
method to figure how much you can deduct each depreciate the cost of the new roof.
year. Points when loan refinance is more than the Separate the costs of repairs and im-You figure your deduction for the first year in previous outstanding balance. When you provements, and keep accurate rec-the following manner. refinance a rental property for more than the ords. You will need to know the cost of
RECORDS
previous outstanding balance, the portion of the improvements when you sell or depreciate your1. Determine the issue price of the loan. If points allocable to loan proceeds not related to property.you paid points on the loan, the issue price
rental use generally cannot be deducted as agenerally is the difference between the
rental expense. For example, if an individualprincipal and the points. Rental property expense payments. Gener-refinanced a loan with a balance of $100,000,
2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to ally, if you receive rental income from real es-the amount of the new loan was $120,000, and
maturity (defined below). tate, you are considered to be engaged in athe taxpayer used $20,000 to purchase a car,
trade or business of renting property and havepoints allocable to the $20,000 would be treated3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay- the same Form 1099-MISC reporting require-as nondeductible personal interest.ments (defined below) from the result in ments as other taxpayers engaged in a trade or(2). This is the OID you can deduct in the business. Accumulative payments of $600 orfirst year. more made for rental property expenses afterRepairs and Improvements
December 31, 2010, must be reported on aYield to maturity (YTM). This rate is gener- You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rental Form 1099-MISC for each payee. See Generalally shown in the literature you receive from your property, but you cannot deduct the cost of im- Instructions for Forms 1097, 1099, 1098, 3921,lender. If you do not have this information, con- provements. The cost of improvements is recov- 3922, 5498, and W-2G for more information.sult your lender or tax advisor. In general, the ered by taking depreciation (see chapter 2 , If you are an active member of the ArmedYTM is the discount rate that, when used in Depreciation of Rental Property). Forces or an employee of the intelligence com-computing the present value of all principal and
munity (as defined in section 121(d)(9)(C)) andinterest payments, produces an amount equal to
substantially all your rental income is from rent-the principal amount of the loan. Repairs. A repair keeps your property in good
ing your main home on a temporary basis, dooperating condition. It does not materially add toQualified stated interest (QSI). In general, not provide the payee with a Form 1099-MISC.the value of your property or substantially pro-this is the stated interest that is unconditionally Other exceptions may be provided in the future.long its life. Repainting your property inside orpayable in cash or property (other than another For the latest information, go to www.irs.gov/out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster-loan of the issuer) at least annually over the term form1099misc.ing, and replacing broken windows are exam-of the loan at a fixed rate.
ples of repairs.
ExampleÐYear 1. The facts are the same
Table 1-1. Examples of Improvementsas in the previous example. The yield to maturity
on Carol's loan is 10.2467%, compounded an- Caution. Work you do (or have done) on your home that does not add much tonually. either the value or the life of the property, but rather keeps the property in good
She figured the amount of points (OID) she condition, is considered a repair, not an improvement.
could deduct in 2010 as follows.
Additions Miscellaneous Plumbing
Principal amount of the loan .... . $100,000 Bedroom Storm windows, doors Septic system
Minus: Points (OID) ......... . ± 1,500 Bathroom New roof Water heater
Issue price of the loan ........ . $ 98,500 Deck Central vacuum Soft water system
Multiplied by: YTM .......... . ×  .102467 Garage Wiring upgrades Filtration system
Total ................... . 10,093 Porch Satellite dish
Minus: QSI ............... . ± 10,000 Patio Security system Interior Improvements
Points (OID) deductible in 2010 $ 93 Built-in appliances
Lawn & Grounds Heating & Air Conditioning Kitchen modernization
To figure your deduction in any subsequent Landscaping Heating system Flooring
year, you start with the adjusted issue price. To Driveway Central air conditioning Wall-to-wall carpeting
get the adjusted issue price, add to the issue Walkway Furnace
price figured in Year 1 any OID previously de- Fence Duct work Insulation
Retaining wall Central humidifier Atticducted. Then follow steps (2) and (3) above.
Sprinkler system Filtration system Walls, floor
Swimming pool Pipes, duct workExampleÐYear 2. Carol figured the de-
duction for 2011 as follows.
Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling) Page 5

Page 6 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You own the property. under What Rental Property Can Be Depreci-
ated, you cannot depreciate the following prop-• You use the property in your business or erty.income-producing activity (such as rental2. property). • Property placed in service and disposed of
(or taken out of business use) in the same• The property has a determinable useful year.life.
Depreciation of • Equipment used to build capital improve-• The property is expected to last more than ments. You must add otherwise allowableone year.
depreciation on the equipment during theRental Property
period of construction to the basis of your
Property you own. To claim depreciation, improvements.
you usually must be the owner of the property.You recover the cost of income producing prop-
For more information, see Publication 946,You are considered as owning property even if iterty through yearly tax deductions. You do this
chapter 1.is subject to a debt.by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-
ing some of the cost each year on your tax Rented property. Generally, if you pay rent When Does Depreciationreturn. for property, you cannot depreciate that prop-
Three basic factors determine how much de- Begin and End?erty. Usually, only the owner can depreciate it.
preciation you can deduct: (1) your basis in the However, if you make permanent improvements
You begin to depreciate your rental propertyproperty, (2) the recovery period for the prop- to leased property, you may be able to depreci-
when you place it in service for the production oferty, and (3) the depreciation method used. You ate the improvements. See Additions or im-
income. You stop depreciating it either whenprovements to property , later in this chapter,cannot simply deduct your mortgage or principal
you have fully recovered your cost or other ba-under Recovery Periods Under GDS.payments, or the cost of furniture, fixtures and
sis, or when you retire it from service, whicheverequipment, as an expense. Cooperative apartments. If you are a ten- happens first.You can deduct depreciation only on the part ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing corpo-
of your property used for rental purposes. De- ration and rent your cooperative apartment to
preciation reduces your basis for figuring gain or others, you can deduct depreciation on your Placed in Serviceloss on a later sale or exchange. stock in the corporation. See chapter 4, Special
Situations.You may have to use Form 4562 to figure You place property in service in a rental activity
and report your depreciation. See Which Forms when it is ready and available for a specific useProperty having a determinable useful life.To Use in chapter 3. Also see Publication 946. in that activity. Even if you are not using theTo be depreciable, your property must have a
property, it is in service when it is ready anddeterminable useful life. This means that it must
Section 179 deduction. The section 179 de- available for its specific use.be something that wears out, decays, gets used
duction is a means of recovering part or all of the up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value from
Example 1. On November 22 of last year,cost of certain qualifying property in the year you natural causes.
you purchased a dishwasher for your rentalplace the property in service. This deduction is
property. The appliance was delivered on De-not allowed for property used in connection with
cember 7, but was not installed and ready forresidential rental property. See chapter 2 of What Rental Property 
use until January 3 of this year. Because thePublication 946. Cannot Be Depreciated?
dishwasher was not ready for use last year, it is
Certain property cannot be depreciated. This not considered placed in service until this year.Alternative minimum tax (AMT). Using a
includes land and certain excepted property. If the appliance had been installed and readymethod of accelerated depreciation may affect
for use when it was delivered in December ofyour being subject to the alternative minimum Land. You cannot depreciate the cost of land
last year, it would have been considered placedtax. Accelerated depreciation allows you to de- because land generally does not wear out, be-
in service in December, even if it was not actu-duct more depreciation earlier in the recovery come obsolete, or get used up. But if it does, the
ally used until this year.period than you could deduct using a straight loss is accounted for upon disposition. The costs
line method (same deduction each year). of clearing, grading, planting, and landscaping
Example 2. On April 6, you purchased aare usually all part of the cost of land and cannotThe prescribed depreciation methods for
house to use as residential rental property. Yoube depreciated.rental real estate are not accelerated, so the
made extensive repairs to the house and had itAlthough you cannot depreciate land, youdepreciation deduction is not adjusted for the
ready for rent on July 5. You began to advertisecan depreciate certain land preparation costs,AMT. However, accelerated methods are gener-
such as landscaping costs, incurred in preparing the house for rent in July and actually rented itally used for other property connected with
land for business use. These costs must be so beginning September 1. The house is consid-rental activities (for example, appliances and
closely associated with other depreciable prop- ered placed in service in July when it was readywall-to-wall carpeting). erty that you can determine a life for them along and available for rent. You can begin to depreci-To find out if you are subject to the AMT, see with the life of the associated property. ate the house in July.the Instructions for Form 6251, Alternative Mini-
mum TaxÐIndividuals. Example. You built a new house to use as a Example 3. You moved from your home in
rental and paid for grading, clearing, seeding, July. During August and September you made
and planting bushes and trees. Some of the several repairs to the house. On October 1, you
bushes and trees were planted right next to the listed the property for rent with a real estate
The Basics house, while others were planted around the company, which rented it on December 1. The
outer border of the lot. If you replace the house, property is considered placed in service on Oc-
The following section discusses the information you would have to destroy the bushes and trees tober 1, the date when it was available for rent.
you will need to have about the rental property right next to it. These bushes and trees are
and the decisions to be made before figuring closely associated with the house, so they have Conversion to business use. If you placea determinable useful life. Therefore, you canyour depreciation deduction. property in service in a personal activity, youdepreciate them. Add your other land prepara- cannot claim depreciation. However, if yoution costs to the basis of your land because theyWhat Rental Property change the property's use to business or thehave no determinable life and you cannot depre- production of income, you can begin to depreci-Can Be Depreciated? ciate them. ate it at the time of the change. You place the
You can depreciate your property if it meets all property in service for business or in-Excepted property. Even if the property
the following requirements. come-producing use on the date of the change.meets all the requirements listed on this page
Page 6 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

Page 7 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You bought a home and used it 1987 and changed to business or in- Real property. If you buy real property, such
as your personal home several years before you as a building and land, certain fees and othercome-producing use after 1986. This includes
converted it to rental property. Although its spe- expenses you pay are part of your cost basis inyour residence that you changed to rental use.
cific use was personal and no depreciation was the property.See Property Owned or Used in 1986 in Publica-
allowable, you placed the home in service when tion 946, chapter 1, for those situations in which Real estate taxes. If you buy real propertyyou began using it as your home. You can begin MACRS is not allowed. and agree to pay real estate taxes on it that wereto claim depreciation in the year you converted it owed by the seller and the seller does not reim-to rental property because at that time its use Improvements made after 1986. Treat an im- burse you, the taxes you pay are treated as partchanged to the production of income. provement made after 1986 to property you of your basis in the property. You cannot deduct
placed in service before 1987 as separate them as taxes paid.
depreciable property. Therefore, you can depre- If you reimburse the seller for real estateIdle Property ciate that improvement as separate property taxes the seller paid for you, you can usuallyunder MACRS if it is the type of property that deduct that amount. Do not include that amountContinue to claim a deduction for depreciation otherwise qualifies for MACRS depreciation. For in your basis in the property.on property used in your rental activity even if it more information about improvements, see Ad-is temporarily idle (not in use). For example, if Settlement fees and other costs. The fol-ditions or improvements to property, later in thisyou must make repairs after a tenant moves out, lowing settlement fees and closing costs that arechapter under Recovery Periods Under GDS.you still depreciate the rental property during the for buying the property are part of your basis intime it is not available for rent. This publication discusses MACRS de- the property.
preciation only. If you need information
• Abstract fees.about depreciating property placed in
CAUTION
!
Cost or Other Basis service before 1987, see Publication 534. • Charges for installing utility services.Fully Recovered
• Legal fees.
Basis of DepreciableYou must stop depreciating property when the • Recording fees.total of your yearly depreciation deductions Property
equals your cost or other basis of your property. • Surveys.
The basis of property used in a rental activity isFor this purpose, your yearly depreciation de- • Transfer taxes.generally its adjusted basis when you place it inductions include any depreciation that you were
service in that activity. This is its cost or otherallowed to claim, even if you did not claim it. See • Title insurance.
basis when you acquired it, adjusted for certainBasis of Depreciable Property on this page. • Any amounts the seller owes that youitems occurring before you place it in service in agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-the rental activity. est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesRetired From Service If you depreciate your property under for improvements or repairs, and salesMACRS, you may also have to reduce your commissions.You stop depreciating property when you retire it basis by certain deductions and credits with re-from service, even if you have not fully recov- spect to the property. The following are settlement fees and closingered its cost or other basis. You retire property Basis and adjusted basis are explained in costs you cannot include in your basis in thefrom service when you permanently withdraw it the following discussions. property.from use in a trade or business or from use in the
production of income because of any of the If you used the property for personal 1. Fire insurance premiums.following events. purposes before changing it to rental
use, its basis for depreciation is the 2. Rent or other charges relating to occu-
CAUTION
!• You sell or exchange the property. lesser of its adjusted basis or its fair market pancy of the property before closing.
• You convert the property to personal use. value when you change it to rental use. See 3. Charges connected with getting or refi-Basis of Property Changed to Rental Use  in• You abandon the property. nancing a loan, such as:chapter 4.
• The property is destroyed. a. Points (discount points, loan origination
fees),
Cost BasisDepreciation Methods b. Mortgage insurance premiums,
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.Generally, you must use the Modified Acceler- c. Loan assumption fees,The cost is the amount you pay for it in cash, inated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) to depre- debt obligation, in other property, or in services. d. Cost of a credit report, andciate residential rental property placed in service Your cost also includes amounts you pay for:after 1986. e. Fees for an appraisal required by a
If you placed rental property in service before • Sales tax charged on the purchase (but lender.
1987, you are using one of the following meth- see Exception below),
ods. Also, do not include amounts placed in es-• Freight charges to obtain the property, and
crow for the future payment of items such as• ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys- • Installation and testing charges. taxes and insurance.tem) for property placed in service after
1980 but before 1987. Assumption of a mortgage. If you buyException. if you deducted state and local
property and become liable for an existing mort-• Straight line or declining balance method general sales taxes as an itemized deduction on
gage on the property, your basis is the amountover the useful life of property placed in Schedule A (Form 1040), do not include those
you pay for the property plus the amount remain-service before 1981. sales taxes as part of your cost basis. Such
ing to be paid on the mortgage.taxes were deductible before 1987 and afterSee MACRS Depreciation, later for more infor- 2003.mation. Example. You buy a building for $60,000
cash and assume a mortgage of $240,000 on it.Loans with low or no interest. If you buyRental property placed in service before Your basis is $300,000.property on any time-payment plan that charges2010. Continue to use the same method of
little or no interest, the basis of your property is Separating cost of land and buildings. Iffiguring depreciation that you used in the past.
your stated purchase price, less the amount you buy buildings and your cost includes the
considered to be unstated interest. See Un-Use of real property changed. Generally, cost of the land on which they stand, you must
stated Interest and Original Issue Discountyou must use MACRS to depreciate real prop- divide the cost between the land and the build-
(OID) in Publication 537, Installment Sales.erty that you acquired for personal use before ings to figure the basis for depreciation of the
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Page 7

Page 8 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
buildings. The part of the cost that you allocate improvement actually cost you, including any • Exclusion from income of subsidies for en-
to each asset is the ratio of the fair market value amount you borrowed to make the addition or ergy conservation measures.
of that asset to the fair market value of the whole improvement. This includes all direct costs, such • Special depreciation allowance claimed onproperty at the time you buy it. as material and labor, but not your own labor. It qualified property.also includes all expenses related to the additionIf you are not certain of the fair market values
or improvement.of the land and the buildings, you can divide the • Depreciation you deducted, or could have
cost between them based on their assessed For example, if you had an architect draw up deducted, on your tax returns under the
values for real estate tax purposes. plans for remodeling your property, the archi- method of depreciation you chose. If you
tect's fee is a part of the cost of the remodeling. did not deduct enough or deducted tooExample. You buy a house and land for Or, if you had your lot surveyed to put up a much in any year, see Depreciation under$200,000. The purchase contract does not fence, the cost of the survey is a part of the cost Decreases to Basis in Publication 551.specify how much of the purchase price is for the of the fence.
house and how much is for the land. Keep separate accounts for depreciable ad- If your rental property was previously used asThe latest real estate tax assessment on the ditions or improvements made after you place your main home, you must also decrease theproperty was based on an assessed value of the property in service in your rental activity. For basis by the following.$160,000, of which $136,000 was for the house information on depreciating additions or im-
and $24,000 was for the land. provements, see Additions or improvements to • Gain you postponed from the sale of your
property, later in this chapter, under RecoveryYou can allocate 85% ($136,000 ÷ main home before May 7, 1997, if the re-
Periods Under GDS.$160,000) of the purchase price to the house placement home was converted to your
and 15% ($24,000 ÷  $160,000) of the purchase rental property.The cost of landscaping improvementsprice to the land. is usually treated as an addition to the • District of Columbia first-time homebuyerYour basis in the house is $170,000 (85% of basis of the land, which is not deprecia-
CAUTION
! credit allowed on the purchase of your$200,000) and your basis in the land is $30,000 ble. However, see What Rental Property Cannot main home after August 4, 1997 and(15% of $200,000). Be Depreciated, earlier. before January 1, 2012.
Assessments for local improvements. • Amount of qualified principal residence in-Basis Other Than Cost Assessments for items which tend to increase debtedness discharged on or after Janu-the value of property, such as streets and side- ary 1, 2007.You cannot use cost as a basis for property that walks, must be added to the basis of the prop-you received: erty. For example, if your city installs curbing on
the street in front of your house, and assesses• In return for services you performed,
you and your neighbors for its cost, you must• In an exchange for other property, add the assessment to the basis of your prop- Claiming the Specialerty. Also add the cost of legal fees paid to• As a gift,
obtain a decrease in an assessment levied Depreciation• From your spouse, or from your former against property to pay for local improvements.spouse as the result of a divorce, or You cannot deduct these items as taxes or de- Allowancepreciate them.• As an inheritance.
 However, you can deduct as taxes, charges For 2010, your residential rental property may
If you received property in one of these ways, or assessments for maintenance, repairs, or in- qualify for a special depreciation allowance. Thissee Publication 551 for information on how to terest charges related to the improvements. Do allowance is figured before you figure your regu-figure your basis. not add them to your basis in the property. lar depreciation deduction. See Publication 946,
Deducting vs. capitalizing costs. Do not chapter 3, for details. Also see the Instructions
add to your basis costs you can deduct as cur- for Form 4562, Line 14.Adjusted Basis rent expenses. However, there are certain costs If you qualify for, but choose not to take, ayou can choose either to deduct or to capitalize.To figure your property's basis for depreciation, special depreciation allowance, you must attachIf you capitalize these costs, include them inyou may have to make certain adjustments (in- a statement to your return. The details of thisyour basis. If you deduct them, do not includecreases and decreases) to the basis of the prop- election are in Publication 946, chapter 3, andthem in your basis.erty for events occurring between the time you the Instructions for Form 4562, Line 14.The costs you may be able to choose toacquired the property and the time you placed it
deduct or capitalize include carrying charges,in service for business or the production of in-
such as interest and taxes, that you must pay tocome. The result of these adjustments to the
own property.basis is the adjusted basis.
For more information about deducting or MACRS Depreciation
Increases to basis. You must increase the capitalizing costs and how to make the election,
basis of any property by the cost of all items see Carrying Charges in Publication 535, chap- Most business and investment property placed
properly added to a capital account. These in- ter 7. in service after 1986 is depreciated using
clude the following. MACRS. 
Decreases to basis. You must decrease the• The cost of any additions or improvements This section explains how to determinebasis of your property by any items that repre-made before placing your property into which MACRS depreciation system applies tosent a return of your cost. These include theservice as a rental that have a useful life your property. It also discusses other informa-following.of more than 1 year. tion you need to know before you can figure• Insurance or other payment you receive depreciation under MACRS. This information in-• Amounts spent after a casualty to restore as the result of a casualty or theft loss. the damaged property. cludes the property's:
• Casualty loss not covered by insurance for• The cost of extending utility service lines • Recovery class,which you took a deduction.to the property. • Applicable recovery period,• Amount(s) you receive for granting an• Legal fees, such as the cost of defending easement. • Convention,and perfecting title, or settling zoning is-
• Residential energy credits you were al- • Placed-in-service date,sues.
lowed before 1986, or after 2005, if you • Basis for depreciation, andAdditions or improvements. Add to the added the cost of the energy items to the
• Depreciation method.basis of your property the amount an addition or basis of your home. 
Page 8 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

Page 9 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• 5-year property. This class includes com- on a transient basis. If you live in any partDepreciation Systems
puters and peripheral equipment, office ma- of the building or structure, the gross
chinery (typewriters, calculators, copiers, rental income includes the fair rental valueMACRS consists of two systems that determine
etc.), automobiles, and light trucks. of the part you live in. how you depreciate your propertyÐthe General
Depreciation System (GDS) and the Alternative This class also includes appliances, car-
Depreciation System (ADS). You must use GDS peting, furniture, etc., used in a residential The other property classes do not gen-rental real estate activity.unless your are specifically required by law to erally apply to property used in rental
use ADS or you elect to use ADS. Depreciation on automobiles, other prop- activities. These classes are not dis-
CAUTION
!
erty used for transportation, computers and cussed in this publication. See Publication 946
related peripheral equipment, and property for more information.Excluded Property of a type generally used for entertainment,
recreation, or amusement is limited. SeeYou cannot use MACRS for certain personal Recovery Periods chapter 5 of Publication 946.property (such as furniture or appliances) placed Under GDS• 7-year property. This class includes officein service in your rental property in 2010 if it had
furniture and equipment (desks, file cabi-been previously placed in service before 1987 The recovery period of property is the number of
nets, etc.). This class also includes anywhen MACRS became effective. years over which you recover its cost or other
property that does not have a class life basis. The recovery periods are generally longerGenerally, personal property is excluded
and that has not been designated by law under ADS than GDS.from MACRS if you (or a person related to you)
as being in any other class. The recovery period of property depends onowned or used it in 1986 or if your tenant is a
its property class. Under GDS, the recovery pe-person (or someone related to the person) who • 15-year property. This class includes riod of an asset is generally the same as itsowned or used it in 1986. However, the property roads, fences, and shrubbery (if deprecia- property class.is not excluded if your 2010 deduction under ble). Class lives and recovery periods for mostMACRS (using a half-year convention) is less • Residential rental property. This class assets are listed in Appendix B  of Publicationthan the deduction you would have under includes any real property that is a rental 946. See Table 2-1 for recovery periods of prop-ACRS. For more information, see What Method building or structure (including a mobile erty commonly used in residential rental activi-Can You Use To Depreciate Your Property?  in home) for which 80% or more of the gross ties.Publication 946, chapter 1. rental income for the tax year is from
dwelling units. It does not include a unit in Qualified Indian reservation property.
a hotel, motel, inn, or other establishment Shorter recovery periods are provided underElecting ADS where more than half of the units are used MACRS for qualified Indian reservation property
If you choose, you can use the ADS method for
most property. Under ADS, you use the straight Table 2-1. MACRS Recovery Periods forline method of depreciation. Property Used in 
The election of ADS for one item in a class of Rental Activities Keep for Your Records
property generally applies to all property in that
MACRS Recovery Periodclass that is placed in service during the tax year
of the election. However, the election applies on General Alternativea property-by-property basis for residential Depreciation Depreciation
rental property and nonresidential real property. Type of Property System System
If you choose to use ADS for your residential
Computers and their peripheral equipment ............ . 5 years 5 yearsrental property, the election must be made in the
Office machinery, such as:first year the property is placed in service. Once Typewritersyou make this election, you can never revoke it. CalculatorsFor property placed in service during 2010, Copiers ................................ . 5 years 6 years
you make the election to use ADS by entering Automobiles ................................ . 5 years 5 yearsthe depreciation on Form 4562, Part III, Section Light trucks ................................. . 5 years 5 yearsC, line 20c. Appliances, such as:
Stoves
Property Classes Under GDS Refrigerators ............................ . 5 years 9 years
Carpets ................................... . 5 years 9 years
Each item of property that can be depreciated Furniture used in rental property ................... . 5 years 9 years
under MACRS is assigned to a property class,
Office furniture and equipment, such as:determined by its class life. The property class
Desksgenerally determines the depreciation method,
Files .................................. . 7 years 10 yearsrecovery period, and convention.
Any property that does not have a class life and that has notThe property classes under GDS are: been designated by law as being in any other class ... . 7 years 12 years
• 3-year property, Roads .................................... . 15 years 20 years
• 5-year property, Shrubbery .................................. . 15 years 20 years
Fences .................................... . 15 years 20 years• 7-year property,
Residential rental property (buildings or structures)• 10-year property,
and structural components such as furnaces,
• 15-year property, waterpipes, venting, etc. ..................... . 27.5 years 40 years
• 20-year property, Additions and improvements, such as a new roof ........ . The same recovery period as
that of the property to which• Nonresidential real property, and the addition or improvement is
• Residential rental property. made, determined as if the
property were placed in
Under MACRS, property that you placed in service at the same time as
the addition or improvement.service during 2010 in your rental activities gen-
erally falls into one of the following classes.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Page 9

Page 10 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
placed in service on Indian reservations. For Tom uses the calendar year as his tax year. The class of property applies to all property in that
more information, see chapter 4 of Publication total basis of all property placed in service that class that is placed in service during the tax year
946. year is $1,300. The $800 basis of the refrigerator of the election. You elect the straight line method
placed in service during the last 3 months of his on Form 4562. In Part III, column (f), enter ªS/L.º
Additions or improvements to property. tax year exceeds $520 (40% ×  $1,300). Tom Once you make this election, you cannot
Treat additions or improvements you make to must use the mid-quarter convention instead of change to another method.
your depreciable rental property as separate the half-year convention for all three items.
property items for depreciation purposes.
Half-year convention.  The half-year conven- MACRS Percentage TablesThe property class and recovery period of
tion is used if neither the mid-quarter conventionthe addition or improvement is the one that
You can use the percentages in Table 2-2 (onnor the mid-month convention applies. Underwould apply to the original property if you had
the next page) to compute annual depreciationthis convention, you treat all property placed inplaced it in service at the same time as the
under MACRS. The tables show the percent-service, or disposed of, during a tax year asaddition or improvement.
ages for the first few years or until the change toplaced in service, or disposed of, at the midpointThe recovery period for an addition or im- the straight line method is made. See Appendixof that tax year.provement to property begins on the later of: A of Publication 946 for complete tables. TheIf this convention applies, you deduct a half• The date the addition or improvement is percentages in Tables 2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2cyear of depreciation for the first year and the lastplaced in service, or make the change from declining balance toyear that you depreciate the property. You de-
straight line in the year that straight line will giveduct a full year of depreciation for any other year• The date the property to which the addi- a larger deduction.during the recovery period.tion or improvement was made is placed
If you elect to use the straight line method forin service.
5-, 7-, or 15-year property, or the 150% decliningFiguring Your Depreciation balance method for 5- or 7-year property, use
DeductionExample. You own a residential rental the tables in Appendix A of Publication 946.
house that you have been renting since 1986
You can figure your MACRS depreciation de-and depreciating under ACRS. You built an ad- How to use the percentage tables. You mustduction in one of two ways. The deduction isdition onto the house and placed it in service in apply the table rates to your property's unad-substantially the same both ways. You can ei-2010. You must use MACRS for the addition. justed basis (defined below) each year of thether:Under GDS, the addition is depreciated as resi- recovery period.
dential rental property over 27.5 years. Once you begin using a percentage table to• Actually compute the deduction using the
figure depreciation, you must continue to use itdepreciation method and convention that
for the entire recovery period unless there is anapply over the recovery period of the prop-Conventions
adjustment to the basis of your property for aerty, or
A convention is a method established under reason other than:• Use the percentage from the MACRS per-MACRS to set the beginning and end of the centage tables, shown later. 1. Depreciation allowed or allowable, orrecovery period. The convention you use deter-
mines the number of months for which you can 2. An addition or improvement that is depreci-In this publication we will use the percentageclaim depreciation in the year you place property ated as a separate item of property.tables. For instructions on how to compute thein service and in the year you dispose of the deduction, see chapter 4 of Publication 946. If there is an adjustment for any reason otherproperty.
than (1) or (2), for example, because of a de-Residential rental property. You must use ductible casualty loss, you can no longer use theMid-month convention.  A mid-month con- the straight line method and a mid-month con- table. For the year of the adjustment and for thevention is used for all residential rental property vention for residential rental property. In the first remaining recovery period, figure depreciationand nonresidential real property. Under this con- year that you claim depreciation for residential using the property's adjusted basis at the end ofvention, you treat all property placed in service, rental property, you can claim depreciation only the year and the appropriate depreciationor disposed of, during any month as placed in for the number of months the property is in use, method, as explained earlier on this page underservice, or disposed of, at the midpoint of that and you must use the mid-month convention Figuring Your Depreciation Deduction. See Fig-month. (explained under Conventions, earlier on this uring the Deduction Without Using the Tables inpage). Publication 946, chapter 4.Mid-quarter convention. A mid-quarter con-
vention must be used if the mid-month conven- Unadjusted basis. This is the same basis5-, 7-, or 15-year property. For property in thetion does not apply and the total depreciable you would use to figure gain on a sale (see Basis5- or 7-year class, use the 200% declining bal-basis of MACRS property placed in service in of Depreciable Property earlier), but without re-ance method and a half-year convention. How-the last 3 months of a tax year (excluding non- ducing your original basis by any MACRS de-ever, in limited cases you must use theresidential real property, residential rental prop- preciation taken in earlier years.mid-quarter convention, if it applies. For prop-erty, and property placed in service and erty in the 15-year class, use the 150% declining However, you do reduce your original basisdisposed of in the same year) is more than 40% balance method and a half-year convention. by other amounts claimed on the property, in-of the total basis of all such property you place in You can also choose to use the 150% declin- cluding:service during the year. ing balance method for property in the 5- or • Any amortization,Under this convention, you treat all property 7-year class. The choice to use the 150%placed in service, or disposed of, during any • Any section 179 deduction, andmethod for one item in a class of property ap-quarter of a tax year as placed in service, or plies to all property in that class that is placed in • Any special depreciation allowance.disposed of, at the midpoint of the quarter. service during the tax year of the election. You
For more information, see Publication 946,make this election on Form 4562. In Part III,Example. During the tax year, Tom Martin chapter 4.column (f), enter ª150 DB.º Once you make thispurchased the following items to use in his rental election, you cannot change to another method.property. He elects not to claim the special de- If you use either the 200% or 150% declining Tables 2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c. The percent-preciation allowance discussed earlier. balance method, you figure your deduction us- ages in these tables take into account the
ing the straight line method in the first tax year half-year and mid-quarter conventions. Use Ta-• A dishwasher for $400 that he placed in
that the straight line method gives you an equal ble 2-2a for 5-year property, Table 2-2b forservice in January.
or larger deduction. 7-year property, and Table 2-2c for 15-year• Used furniture for $100 that he placed in You can also choose to use the straight line property. Use the percentage in the second col-service in September. method with a half-year or mid-quarter conven- umn (half-year convention) unless you are re-
• A refrigerator for $800 that he placed in tion for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property. The choice to quired to use the mid-quarter convention
service in October. use the straight line method for one item in a (explained earlier). If you must use the
Page 10 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

Page 11 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax year, and its basis ($1,000) is more than
40% of the total basis of all property placed in
service during the year ($1,600 ×  .40 = $640),
you are required to use the mid-quarter conven-
tion to figure depreciation on both the stove and
refrigerator.
Because you placed the refrigerator in serv-
ice in October, you use the fourth quarter col-
umn of Table 2-2a and find the depreciation
percentage for Year 1 is 5%. Your depreciation
deduction for the refrigerator is $50 ($1,000 ×
.05).
Because you placed the stove in service in
June, you use the second quarter column of
Table 2-2a and find the depreciation percentage
for Year 1 is 25%. For that year, your deprecia-
tion deduction for the stove is $150 ($600 ×  .25).
Table 2-2d.  Use this table when you are using
the GDS 27.5 year option for residential rental
property. Find the row for the month that you
placed the property in service. Use the percent-
ages listed for that month to figure your depreci-
ation deduction. The mid-month convention is
taken into account in the percentages shown in
the table. Continue to use the same row (month)
under the column for the appropriate year.
Example. You purchased a single family
rental house for $185,000 and placed it in serv-
ice on February 8. The sales contract showed
that the building cost $160,000 and the land cost
$25,000. Your basis for depreciation is its origi-
nal cost, $160,000. This is the first year of serv-
ice for your residential rental property and you
decide to use GDS which has a recovery period
of 27.5 years. Using Table 2-2d, you find that the
percentage for property placed in service in Feb-
ruary of Year 1 is 3.182%. That year's deprecia-
tion deduction is $5,091 ($160,000 ×  .03182).
Figuring MACRS
Depreciation Under ADS
Table 2-1, earlier, shows the ADS recovery peri-
ods for property used in rental activities.
See Appendix B in Publication 946 for other
property. If your property is not listed in Appen-
dix B , it is considered to have no class life.
Under ADS, personal property with no class life
is depreciated using a recovery period of 12
years.
Use the mid-month convention for residential
rental property and nonresidential real property.
For all other property, use the half-year or
mid-quarter convention, as appropriate. 
See Publication 946 for ADS depreciation
tables.
Claiming the Correct
Table 2-2. Optional MACRS GDS Percentage Tables
a. MACRS 5-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
20.00%
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
b. MACRS 7-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
c. MACRS 15-Year Property (150% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
d. Residential Rental Property-GDS  (27.5-year S/L with mid-month convention)
14.29%
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
5.00%
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
3.485% 3.636%
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
1.970
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
7 5.90 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90
8 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90 5.90
7 8.93 8.75 8.87 8.86 8.73
Amount ofmid-quarter convention, use the column that deduction is $120 ($600 ×  .20) for the stove and
$200 ($1,000 ×  .20) for the refrigerator.corresponds to the calendar year quarter in Depreciationwhich you placed the property in service. For Year 2, the depreciation percentage is
32%. That year's depreciation deduction will be You should claim the correct amount of depreci-Example 1. You purchased a stove and re- $192 ($600 ×  .32) for the stove and $320 ation each tax year. If you did not claim all the
frigerator and placed them in service in June. ($1,000 ×  .32) for the refrigerator. depreciation you were entitled to deduct, you
Your basis in the stove is $600 and your basis in must still reduce your basis in the property by
the refrigerator is $1,000. Both are 5-year prop- Example 2. Assume the same facts as in the full amount of depreciation that you could
erty. Using the half-year convention column in Example 1 , except you buy the refrigerator in have deducted. For more information, see De-
Table 2-2a, the depreciation percentage for October instead of June. Since the refrigerator preciation under Decreases to Basis in Publica-
was placed in service in the last 3 months of theYear 1 is 20%. For that year your depreciation tion 551.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Page 11

Page 12 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report incomeIf you deducted an incorrect amount of de-
or loss from partnerships, S corporations, es-preciation for property in any year, you may be
tates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-able to make a correction by filing Form 1040X,
ment conduits. If you need to use page 2 of3.Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. If
Schedule E, use page 2 of the same Schedule Eyou are not allowed to make the correction on an
you used to enter the combined totals in Part I.amended return, you can change your account-
Also, include the amount from line 26 (Part I) ining method to claim the correct amount of depre- the ªTotal income or (loss)º on line 41 (Part V).ciation. Reporting 
Filing an amended return. You can file an Form 4562. You must complete and attach
amended return to correct the amount of depre- Form 4562 for rental activities only if you areRental Income,ciation claimed for any property in any of the claiming:
following situations. • Depreciation, including the special depre-Expenses, and ciation allowance, on property placed in• You claimed the incorrect amount be-
service during 2010;cause of a mathematical error made in
any year. Losses • Depreciation on listed property (such as a
car), regardless of when it was placed in• You claimed the incorrect amount be-
service; orFiguring the net income or loss for a residentialcause of a posting error made in any year.
rental activity may involve more than just listing • Any other car expenses, including the• You have not adopted a method of ac- the income and deductions on Schedule E standard mileage rate or lease expenses.counting for property placed in service by (Form 1040). First, there are those activities
you in tax years ending after December Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your ownwhich do not qualify to use Schedule E.
29, 2003. worksheet. You do not have to attach theseThen there are the limitations which may computations to your return, but you shouldneed to be applied if you have a net loss on• You claimed the incorrect amount on prop- keep them in your records for future reference.Schedule E. There are two: (1) the limitationerty placed in service by you in tax years
based on the amount of investment you have at See Publication 946 for information on prepar-ending before December 30, 2003.
risk in your rental activity, and (2) the special ing Form 4562.
limits imposed on passive activities.Generally, you adopt a method of accounting
You may also have a loss (or gain) related tofor depreciation by using a permissible method Schedule C (Form 1040),
your rental property from a casualty or theft. Thisof determining depreciation when you file your Profit or Loss Fromis considered separately from the income andfirst tax return for the property used in your rental Businessexpense information on Schedule E.activity. This also occurs when you use the
same impermissible method of determining de- Generally, Schedule C is used when you materi-
preciation (for example, using the wrong ally participate in your residential rental activity.
MACRS recovery period) in two or more consec-
utively filed tax returns. Providing substantial services. If you pro-Which Forms To Use
vide substantial services that are primarily forIf an amended return is allowed, you must The basic form for reporting residential rental your tenant's convenience, such as regularfile it by the later of the following dates. income and expenses is Schedule E (Form cleaning, changing linen, or maid service, you
1040). However, do not use that schedule to report your rental income and expenses on• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-
report a not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented Schedule C, Profit or Loss From Business, ornal return for the year in which you did not
for Profit , in chapter 4. There are also other Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit From Business. Usededuct the correct amount. A return filed
rental situations in which forms other than Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership Income,before an unextended due date is consid-
Schedule E would be used. if your rental activity is a partnership (including aered filed on that due date.
partnership with your spouse unless it is a quali-
• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for fied joint venture). Substantial services do notSchedule E (Form 1040)that year. include the furnishing of heat and light, cleaning
of public areas, trash collection, etc. For infor-If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and
mation, see Publication 334, Tax Guide forprovide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,Changing your accounting method. To Small Business. Also, you may have to payyou normally report your rental income and ex-change your accounting method, you generally self-employment tax on your rental income us-penses on Schedule E, Part I.must file Form 3115, Application for Change in ing Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-EmploymentList your total income, expenses, and depre-Accounting Method, to get the consent of the Tax. For a discussion of ªsubstantial services,ºciation for each rental property. Be sure to an-IRS. In some instances, that consent is auto- see Real Estate Rents in Publication 334, chap-swer the question on line 2.matic. For more information, see Changing Your ter 5.If you have more than three rental or royaltyAccounting Method in Publication 946, 
properties, complete and attach as manychapter 1. Qualified joint venture. If you and yourSchedules E as are needed to list the properties. spouse each materially participate (see MaterialComplete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How- participation, later) as the only members of aever, fill in the ªTotalsº column on only one jointly owned and operated rental real estateSchedule E. The figures in the ªTotalsº column business, and you file a joint return for the taxon that Schedule E should be the combined year, you can make a joint election to be treatedtotals of all Schedules E. as a qualified joint venture instead of a partner-
On Schedule E, page 1, line 20, enter the ship. This election, in most cases, will not in-
depreciation you are claiming for each property. crease the total tax owed on the joint return, but
To find out if you need to attach Form 4562, see it does give each of you credit for social security
Form 4562, later. earnings on which retirement benefits are based
and for Medicare coverage.If you have a loss from your rental real estate
If you make this election, instead of filingactivity, you also may need to complete one or
Schedule E or Form 1065, U.S. Return of Part-both of the following forms.
nership Income, you and your spouse must• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. See each file a separate Schedule C or C-EZ report-At-Risk Rules, later. Also see Publication ing the appropriate share of income and deduc-925. tions. Rental real estate income generally is not
• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita- included in net earnings from self-employment
tions. See Passive Activity Limits, later. subject to self-employment tax and generally is
Page 12 Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses

Page 13 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
subject to the passive loss limitation rules, un- discussion of activities that are not considered you are a real estate professional. This is true
less it is a trade or business. Electing qualified rental activities, see Rental Activities in Publica- even if you are not a real estate professional in
joint venture status and using the Schedule C or tion 925. any intervening year. (For that year, the excep-
C-EZ does not alter the application of the tion for real estate professionals will not apply inDeductions for losses from passive activities
self-employment tax or the passive loss limita- determining whether your activity is subject toare limited. You generally cannot offset income,
tion rules. the passive activity rules.)other than passive income, with losses from
If you and your spouse filed a Form 1065 for See the instructions for Schedule E for infor-passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes on
the year prior to the election, the partnership mation about making this choice.income, other than passive income, with credits
terminates at the end of the tax year immediately resulting from passive activities. Any excess Material participation. Generally, you materi-preceding the year the election takes effect. loss or credit is carried forward to the next tax ally participated in an activity for the tax year ifFor more information on qualified joint ven- year. Two exceptions to the rules for figuring you were involved in its operations on a regular,tures, go to IRS.gov. Enter ªQJV electionº in the passive activity limits are discussed on this continuous, and substantial basis during thesearch box and select ªBenefits of Qualified page. year. For details, see Publication 925 or theJoint Ventures for Family Businesses.º For a detailed discussion of these rules, see instructions for Schedule C.Publication 925.
Participating spouse. If you are married,
Real estate professional. If you meet the determine whether you materially participated in
qualifications discussed on this page, report an activity by also counting any participation inLimits on
your rental income and expenses on Schedule the activity by your spouse during the year. Do
C or C-EZ (or Form 1065 if a partnership). UseRental Losses this even if your spouse owns no interest in the
Schedule SE to figure your self-employment tax. activity or files a separate return for the year.
Also, complete line 43 of Schedule E.If you have a loss from your rental real estate Form 8582. You may have to complete Formactivity, two sets of rules may limit the amount of You qualify as a real estate professional for 8582 to figure the amount of any passive activityloss you can deduct. You must consider these the tax year if you meet both of the following loss for the current tax year for all activities andrules in the order shown below. Both are dis- requirements. the amount of the passive activity loss allowedcussed in this section. • More than half of the personal services on your tax return. See Form 8582 not required,
you perform in all trades or businesses later in this chapter, to determine if you must1. At-risk rules. These rules are applied first if
during the tax year are performed in real complete Form 8582.there is investment in your rental real es-
property trades or businesses in which If you are required to complete Form 8582tate activity for which you are not at risk.
you materially participate. and are also subject to the at-risk rules, includeThis applies only if the real property was
the amount from Form 6198, line 21 (deductibleplaced in service after 1986. • You perform more than 750 hours of serv- loss) in column (b) of Form 8582, Worksheet 1ices during the tax year in real property2. Passive activity limits. Generally, rental or 3, as required.trades or businesses in which you materi-real estate activities are considered pas-
ally participate.sive activities and losses are not deducti-
ble unless you have income from other For purposes of meeting these qualifications, Exception for Personal Use ofpassive activities to offset them. However, each interest in rental real estate is a separate Dwelling Unitthere are exceptions. activity, unless you elect to treat all your inter-
If you used the rental property as a home duringests in rental real estate as one activity.
the year, any income, deductions, gain, or lossDo not count personal services you performAt-Risk Rules allocable to such use shall not be taken intoas an employee in real property trades or busi- account for purposes of the passive activity lossYou may be subject to the at-risk rules if you nesses unless you are a 5% owner of your limitation. Instead, follow the rules explained inhave: employer. You are a 5% owner if you own (or are chapter 5 , Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (In-considered to own) more than 5% of your em-• A loss from an activity carried on as a cluding Vacation Home).ployer's outstanding stock, or capital or profitstrade or business or for the production of interest.income, and Do not count your spouse's personal serv- Exception for Rental Real Estate• Amounts invested in the activity for which ices to determine whether you met the require- With Active Participationyou are not fully at risk. ments listed above. However, you can count
your spouse's participation in an activity in de- If you or your spouse actively participated in aLosses from holding real property (other than termining if you materially participated. passive rental real estate activity, you can de-mineral property) placed in service before 1987 duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity fromReal property trades or businesses. Aare not subject to the at-risk rules. your nonpassive income. This special allowancereal property trade or business is a trade orGenerally, any loss from an activity subject is an exception to the general rule disallowingbusiness that does any of the following with realto the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of losses in excess of income from passive activi-property.the total amount you have at risk in the activity at ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from thethe end of the tax year. You are considered at • Develops or redevelops it. activity against the tax on up to $25,000 ofrisk in an activity to the extent of cash and the nonpassive income after taking into account any• Constructs or reconstructs it.adjusted basis of other property you contributed losses allowed under this exception.to the activity and certain amounts borrowed for • Acquires it.
use in the activity. Any loss that is disallowed Example. Jane is single and has $40,000 in• Converts it.because of the at-risk limits is treated as a de- wages, $2,000 of passive income from a limitedduction from the same activity in the next tax • Rents or leases it. partnership, and $3,500 of passive loss from ayear. See Publication 925 for a discussion of the rental real estate activity in which she actively• Operates or manages it.at-risk rules. participated. $2,000 of Jane's $3,500 loss off-
• Brokers it. sets her passive income. The remaining $1,500Form 6198. If you are subject to the at-risk
loss can be deducted from her $40,000 wages.rules, file Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, with
your tax return. Choice to treat all interests as one activity. The special allowance is not available
If you were a real estate professional and had if you were married, lived with your
more than one rental real estate interest duringPassive Activity Limits spouse at any time during the year,
CAUTION
!
the year, you can choose to treat all the interests and are filing a separate return.
as one activity. You can make this choice for anyGenerally, all rental real estate activities (except
year that you qualify as a real estate profes-those meeting the exception for real estate pro- Active participation. You actively partici-
sional. If you forgo making the choice for onefessionals, later) are passive activities. For this pated in a rental real estate activity if you (and
year, you can still make it for a later year.purpose, a rental activity is an activity from your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental
If you make the choice, it is binding for thewhich you receive income mainly for the use of property and you made management decisions
tax year you make it and for any later year thattangible property, rather than for services. For a or arranged for others to provide services (such
Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses Page 13

Page 14 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as repairs) in a significant and bona fide sense. 7. Any overall loss from a publicly traded tax year in which any part of your gain is real-
partnership (see Publicly Traded Partner-Management decisions that may count as active ized. Generally, the replacement period is 5
ships (PTPs) in the Instructions for Formparticipation include approving new tenants, de- years for property located in disaster areas. The
8582),ciding on rental terms, approving expenditures, cost of the replacement property must be equal
and other similar decisions. to or more than the net insurance or other pay-8. The deduction allowed for one-half of ment you received.self-employment tax,Example. Mike is single and had the follow-
9. The deduction allowed for interest paid oning income and losses during the tax year: More information. For information on busi-student loans, ness and nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,Salary .................. . $42,300 see Publication 547.10. The deduction for qualified tuition and re-Dividends ............... . 300 lated fees, andInterest ................. . 1,400 How to report.    If you had a casualty or theftRental loss ............... . (4,000) 11. The domestic production activities deduc- that involved property used in your rental activ-tion (see the Instructions for Form 8903, ity, figure the net gain or loss in Section B ofThe rental loss was from the rental of a Domestic Production Activities Deduction). Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. Follow thehouse Mike owned. Mike had advertised and
Instructions for Form 4684 for where to carryrented the house to the current tenant himself. Form 8582 not required. Do not complete your net gain or loss.He also collected the rents, which usually came Form 8582 if you meet all of the following condi-
by mail. All repairs were either made or con- tions.
tracted out by Mike.
• Your only passive activities were rentalAlthough the rental loss is from a passive real estate activities in which you actively Illustrated Exampleactivity, because Mike actively participated in participated.the rental property management he can use the
In February 2005, Marie Pfister bought a rental• Your overall net loss from these activitiesentire $4,000 loss to offset his other income.
house for $135,000 (house $120,000 and landis $25,000 or less ($12,500 or less if mar-
$15,000) and immediately began renting it out.ried filing separately).Maximum special allowance. The maximum
In 2010, she rented it all 12 months for a monthlyspecial allowance is: • If married filing separately, you lived apart rental fee of $1,125. In addition to her rentalfrom your spouse all year.• $25,000 for single individuals and married income of $13,500 (12 x $1,125), Marie had theindividuals filing a joint return for the tax • You have no prior year unallowed losses following expenses.year, from these activities.
Mortgage interest ............. . $8,000• $12,500 for married individuals who file • You have no current or prior year unal- Fire insurance (1-year policy) ..... . 250separate returns for the tax year and lived lowed credits from passive activities. Miscellaneous repairs .......... . 400apart from their spouses at all times during Real estate taxes imposed and paid 500• Your MAGI is $100,000 or less ($50,000the tax year, and Maintenance ................ . 200or less if married filing separately and you
• $25,000 for a qualifying estate reduced by lived apart from your spouse all year). Marie depreciates the residential rental prop-the special allowance for which the surviv- • You do not hold any interest in a rental erty under MACRS GDS. This means using theing spouse qualified. real estate activity as a limited partner or straight line method over a recovery period of
as a beneficiary of an estate or a trust. 27.5 years.If your modified adjusted gross income
She uses Table 2-2d to find her depreciation(MAGI) is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if If you meet all of the conditions listed above, percentage. Because she placed the property inmarried filing separately), you can deduct your your rental real estate activities are not limited service in February 2005, she continues to useloss up to the amount specified above. If your by the passive activity rules and you do not have that row of Table 2-2d. For year 6, the rate isMAGI is more than $100,000 (more than to complete Form 8582. On line 23 of your 3.636%.$50,000 if married filing separately), your spe- Schedule E, enter each rental real estate losscial allowance is limited to 50% of the difference Marie figures her net rental income or loss forshown on line 22.between $150,000 ($75,000 if married filing sep- the house as follows:If you do not meet all of the conditions listedarately) and your MAGI. above, see the Instructions for Form 8582 to find Total rental income received Generally, if your MAGI is $150,000 or more out if you must complete and attach that form to ($1,125 ×  12) ............... . $13,500($75,000 or more if you are married filing sepa- your tax return. Minus: Expensesrately), there is no special allowance. Mortgage interest ...... . $8,000
Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI). Fire insurance ........ . 250
This is your adjusted gross income from Form Miscellaneous repairs ... . 400
Casualties and Thefts Real estate taxes ...... . 5001040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, line
Maintenance ......... . 20038, or Form 1040NR, U.S. Nonresident Alien
As a result of a casualty or theft, you may have a Total expenses ............. . ±9,350Income Tax Return, line 37, figured without tak-
Balance ................... . 4,150loss related to your rental property. You may being into account: Minus: Depreciation ($120,000 xable to deduct the loss on your income tax re-
3.636%) ................. . −4,3631. The taxable amount of social security or turn.
equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement bene- Net rental loss for house ....... . $213Casualty. This is the damage, destruction, orfits, loss of property resulting from an identifiable
2. The deductible contributions to traditional event that is sudden, unexpected, or unusual. Marie had a net loss for the year. Becauseindividual retirement accounts (IRAs) and Such events include a storm, fire, or earthquake. she actively participated in her passive rentalsection 501(c)(18) pension plans, real estate activity and her loss was less thanTheft. This is defined as the unlawful taking
3. The exclusion from income of interest from $25,000, she can deduct the loss on her return.and removing of your money or property with the
Series EE and I U.S. savings bonds used Marie also meets all of the requirements for notintent to deprive you of it.
to pay higher educational expenses, having to file Form 8582. She uses Schedule E,Gain from casualty or theft. It is also possi- Part I, to report her rental income and expenses.4. The exclusion of amounts received under ble to have a gain from a casualty or theft if you She enters her income, expenses, and depreci-an employer's adoption assistance pro- receive money, including insurance, that is more ation for the house in the column for Property Agram, than your adjusted basis in the property. Gener- and enters her loss on line 23. Marie's Scheduleally, you must report this gain. However, under5. Any passive activity income or loss in- E is shown next. Form 4562 is not required. Seecertain circumstances, you may defer paying taxcluded on Form 8582, Publication 946 for information on how to pre-by choosing to postpone reporting the gain. To pare Form 4562.6. Any rental real estate loss allowed to real do this, you generally must buy replacement
estate professionals, property within 2 years after the close of the first
Page 14 Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses

Page 15 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE E  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Supplemental Income and Loss
(From rental real estate, royalties, partnerships,  
S corporations, estates, trusts, REMICs, etc.)
a Attach to Form 1040, 1040NR, or Form 1041.  a See Instructions for Schedule E (Form 1040). 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 13
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Income or Loss From Rental Real Estate and Royalties  Note.  If you are in the business of renting personal property, use  
Schedule C or C-EZ  (see page E-3). If you are an individual, report farm rental income or loss from Form 4835 on page 2, line 40. 
1 List the type and address of each rental real estate property: 
A  
B  
C  
2 For each rental real estate property 
listed on line 1, did you or your family 
use it during the tax year for personal 
purposes for more than the greater of: 
• 14 days  or 
• 10% of the total days rented at  fair 
rental value? 
(See page E-3) 
Yes No 
A
B
C
Income: Properties Totals 
(Add columns A, B, and C.)       A   B   C   
3 Rents received ...... 3 3 
4 Royalties received ..... 4 4 
Expenses:                       
5 Advertising ....... 5 
6 Auto and travel (see page E-4) . 6 
7 Cleaning and maintenance . . 7 
8 Commissions....... 8 
9 Insurance ........ 9 
10 Legal and other professional fees 10 
11 Management fees ..... 11 
12 Mortgage interest paid to 
banks,  etc. (see page E-5) . . 12 12 
13 Other interest....... 13 
14 Repairs......... 14 
15 Supplies ........ 15 
16 Taxes ......... 16 
17 Utilities . ........ 17 
18 Other (list)  a
18 
19 Add lines 5 through 18.... 19 19 
20 Depreciation expense or 
depletion  (see page E-5) . . . 20 20 
21 Total expenses. Add lines 19 and 20 21 
22 Income or (loss) from rental real  
estate or royalty properties.  
Subtract line 21 from line 3 (rents)  
or line 4 (royalties). If the result is 
a  (loss), see page E-5 to find out 
if  you must file Form 6198 .. 22 
23 Deductible rental real estate loss.  
Caution. Your rental real estate loss 
on line 22 may be limited. See page 
E-5 to find out if you must file Form 
8582.  Real estate professionals 
must complete line 43 on page 2 . 23 (                                ) (                                ) (                                )
24 Income.  Add positive amounts shown on line 22.  Do not include any losses ....... 24 
25 Losses.  Add royalty losses from line 22 and rental real estate losses from line 23. Enter total losses here 25 ( )
26 Total rental real estate and royalty income or (loss).  Combine lines 24 and 25. Enter the result here.  If 
Parts II, III, IV, and line 40 on page 2 do not apply to you, also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 17, or 
Form 1040NR, line 18. Otherwise, include this amount in the total on line 41 on page 2 . . .... 26 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11344L Schedule E (Form 1040) 2010 
Marie Pfister 444 00 8888
Rental house
444 Maple Ave, Anywhere, WI 55555
✔
13,500 13,500
200
250
8,000 8,000
400
500
9,350 9,350
4,363 4,363
13,713
(213)
213
213
(213)
Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses Page 15

Page 16 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Multiply your cost per share by the total the property was used or held for rental pur-
poses.number of outstanding shares.
You cannot deduct depreciation or insuranceb. Add to the amount figured in (a) any4. for the part of the year the property was held formortgage debt on the property on the personal use. However, you can include thedate you bought the stock. home mortgage interest, qualified mortgage in-
surance premiums, and real estate tax ex-c. Subtract from the amount figured in (b)
Special penses for the part of the year the property wasany mortgage debt that is not for the
held for personal use as an itemized deductiondepreciable real property, such as the
on Schedule A (Form 1040).   part for the land.Situations
Example. Your tax year is the calendar2. Subtract from the amount figured in (1) any
This chapter discusses some rental real estate year. You moved from your home in May anddepreciation for space owned by the cor-
activities that are subject to additional rules. started renting it out on June 1. You can deductporation that can be rented but cannot be
as rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearlylived in by tenant-stockholders.
expenses, such as taxes and insurance.
3. Divide the number of your shares of stock Starting with June, you can deduct as rental
by the total number of shares outstanding, expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-Condominiums including any shares held by the corpora- ally billed monthly, such as utilities.
tion. When figuring depreciation, treat the prop-A condominium is most often a dwelling unit in a
erty as placed in service on June 1.multi-unit building, but can also take other forms, 4. Multiply the result of (2) by the percentage
you figured in (3). This is your depreciationsuch as a townhouse or garden apartment.
on the stock. Basis of PropertyIf you own a condominium, you also own a
share of the common elements, such as land, Changed to Rental UseYour depreciation deduction for the year
lobbies, elevators, and service areas. You and cannot be more than the part of your adjusted When you change property you held for per-the other condominium owners may pay dues or basis (defined in chapter 2) in the stock of the sonal use to rental use (for example, you rentassessments to a special corporation that is corporation that is allocable to your rental prop- your former home), the basis for depreciationorganized to take care of the common elements. erty. will be the lesser of fair market value or adjustedSpecial rules apply if you rent your condo- basis on the date of conversion.minium to others. You can deduct as rental ex- Payments added to capital account. Pay-
penses all the expenses discussed in chapters 1 ments earmarked for a capital asset or improve- Fair market value. This is the price at which
and 2. In addition, you can deduct any dues or ment, or otherwise charged to the corporation's the property would change hands between a
assessments paid for maintenance of the com- capital account are added to the basis of your willing buyer and a willing seller, neither having
mon elements. stock in the corporation. For example, you can- to buy or sell, and both having reasonable
not deduct a payment used to pave a community knowledge of all the relevant facts. Sales ofYou cannot deduct special assessments you
parking lot, install a new roof, or pay the principal similar property, on or about the same date, maypay to a condominium management corporation
of the corporation's mortgage. be helpful in figuring the fair market value of thefor improvements. However, you may be able to
property.Treat as a capital cost the amount you wererecover your share of the cost of any improve-
assessed for capital items. This cannot be morement by taking depreciation. Figuring the basis. The basis for deprecia-than the amount by which your payments to the tion is the lesser of:corporation exceeded your share of the corpora-
tion's mortgage interest and real estate taxes. • The fair market value of the property on
the date you changed it to rental use, orYour share of interest and taxes is theCooperatives
amount the corporation elected to allocate to • Your adjusted basis on the date of the
you, if it reasonably reflects those expenses forIf you live in a cooperative, you do not own your changeÐthat is, your original cost or
your apartment. Otherwise, figure your share inapartment. Instead, a corporation owns the other basis of the property, plus the cost of
the following manner. apartments and you are a tenant-stockholder in permanent additions or improvements
the cooperative housing corporation. If you rent since you acquired it, minus deductions for1. Divide the number of your shares of stockyour apartment to others, you usually can de- any casualty or theft losses claimed onby the total number of shares outstanding,duct, as a rental expense, all the maintenance earlier years' income tax returns and otherincluding any shares held by the corpora-fees you pay to the cooperative housing corpo- decreases to basis. For other increasestion. and decreases to basis, see Adjusted Ba-ration.
2. Multiply the corporation's deductible inter- sis in chapter 2.In addition to the maintenance fees paid to
est by the number you figured in (1). Thisthe cooperative housing corporation, you can
is your share of the interest.deduct your direct payments for repairs, upkeep, Example. Several years ago you built your
and other rental expenses, including interest home for $140,000 on a lot that cost you3. Multiply the corporation's deductible taxes
paid on a loan used to buy your stock in the $14,000. Before changing the property to rentalby the number you figured in (1). This is
corporation. use this year, you added $28,000 of permanentyour share of the taxes.
improvements to the house and claimed a
$3,500 casualty loss deduction for damage toDepreciation
the house. Part of the improvements qualified
You will be depreciating your stock in the corpo- for a $500 residential energy credit, which you
Property Changed claimed on your 2006 tax return. Because landration rather than the apartment itself. Figure
is not depreciable, you can only include the costyour depreciation deduction as follows.
to Rental Use of the house when figuring the basis for depreci-
1. Figure the depreciation for all the deprecia- ation.
If you change your home or other property (or able real property owned by the corporation. The adjusted basis of the house at the time
part of it) to rental use at any time other than the(Depreciation methods are discussed in of the change in its use was $164,000 ($140,000
beginning of your tax year, you must dividechapter 2 of this publication and Publica- + $28,000 − $3,500 − $500).
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance,tion 946.) If you bought your cooperative On the date of the change in use, your prop-
between rental use and personal use.stock after its first offering, figure the erty had a fair market value of $168,000, of
depreciable basis of this property as fol- You can deduct as rental expenses only the which $21,000 was for the land and $147,000
part of the expense that is for the part of the yearlows. was for the house.
Page 16 Chapter 4 Special Situations

Page 17 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The basis for depreciation on the house is nondeductible personal expenses, such as ex- Where to report. Report your not-for-profit
penses for electricity, or painting the outside of rental income on Form 1040 or 1040NR, line 21.the fair market value on the date of the change
the house.  For example, if you are filing Form 1040, you($147,000), because it is less than your adjusted
There is no change in the types of expenses can include your mortgage interest and anybasis ($164,000).
deductible for the personal-use part of your qualified mortgage insurance premiums (if you
property. Generally, these expenses may be use the property as your main home or second
deducted only if you itemize your deductions on home), real estate taxes, and casualty losses onCooperatives
Schedule A. the appropriate lines of Schedule A if you item-
If you change your cooperative apartment to You cannot deduct any part of the cost of the ize your deductions.
rental use, figure your allowable depreciation as first phone line even if your tenants have unlim- Claim your other rental expenses, subject to
explained earlier. (Depreciation methods are ited use of it. the rules explained in chapter 1 of Publication
discussed in chapter 2  of this publication and You do not have to divide the expenses that 535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions on
Publication 946.) The basis of all the deprecia- belong only to the rental part of your property. Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, or Schedule A
For example, if you paint a room that you rent, or (Form 1040NR), line 11. You can deduct theseble real property owned by the cooperative
if you pay premiums for liability insurance in expenses only if they, together with certain otherhousing corporation is the smaller of the follow-
connection with renting a room in your home, miscellaneous itemized deductions, total moreing amounts.
your entire cost is a rental expense. If you install than 2% of your adjusted gross income.• The fair market value of the property on a second phone line strictly for your tenant'sthe date you change your apartment to Presumption of profit. If your rental incomeuse, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-
rental use. This is considered to be the is more than your rental expenses for at least 3ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-
same as the corporation's adjusted basis years out of a period of 5 consecutive years, youciation on the part of the house used for rental
are presumed to be renting your property tominus straight line depreciation, unless purposes as well as on the furniture and equip-
make a profit.this value is unrealistic. ment you use for rental purposes.
Postponing decision. If you are starting• The corporation's adjusted basis in the How to divide expenses. If an expense is for
your rental activity and do not have 3 yearsproperty on that date. Do not subtract de- both rental use and personal use, such as mort-
showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-preciation when figuring the corporation's gage interest or heat for the entire house, you
sumption made after you have the 5 years ofadjusted basis. must divide the expense between rental use and
experience required by the test. You maypersonal use. You can use any reasonable
choose to postpone the decision of whether theIf you bought the stock after its first offering, method for dividing the expense. It may be rea-
rental is for profit by filing Form 5213. You mustthe corporation's adjusted basis in the property sonable to divide the cost of some items (for
file Form 5213 within 3 years after the due dateexample, water) based on the number of peopleis the amount figured in (1) under Depreciation
of your return (determined without extensions)using them. The two most common methods for(under Cooperatives, near the beginning of this
for the year in which you first carried on thedividing an expense are (1) the number of roomschapter). The fair market value of the property is activity or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiv-in your home, and (2) the square footage of yourconsidered to be the same as the corporation's ing written notice from the Internal Revenuehome.adjusted basis figured in this way minus straight Service proposing to disallow deductions attrib-line depreciation, unless the value is unrealistic. utable to the activity.Example. You rent a room in your house.
The room is 12 ×  15 feet, or 180 square feet.Figuring the Depreciation More information. For more informationYour entire house has 1,800 square feet of floor about the rules for an activity not engaged in forDeduction space. You can deduct as a rental expense 10% profit, see Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 ofof any expense that must be divided between Publication 535.To figure the deduction, use the depreciation rental use and personal use. If your heating billsystem in effect when you convert your resi- for the year for the entire house was $600, $60dence to rental use. Generally, that will be ($600 ×  .10) is a rental expense. The balance,
MACRS for any conversion after 1986. Treat the $540, is a personal expense that you cannot Illustrated ExampleÐproperty as placed in service on the conversion deduct.
date.
Duplex. A common situation is the duplex Property Changed to
where you live in one unit and rent out the other.Example. Your converted residence (see
Rental UseCertain expenses apply to the entire property,previous example) was available for rent on Au-
such as mortgage interest and real estate taxes,gust 1. Using Table 2-2d (see chapter 2 ), the In January, Eileen Johnson bought a condomin-and must be split to determine rental and per-percentage for Year 1 beginning in August is ium apartment to live in. Instead of selling thesonal expenses.1.364% and the depreciation deduction for Year house she had been living in, she decided to1 is $2,005 ($147,000 ×  .01364). change it to rental property. Eileen selected aExample. You own a duplex and live in one
tenant and started renting the house on Febru-half, renting the other half. Both units are ap-
ary 1. Eileen charges $750 a month for rent andproximately the same size. Last year, you paid a
collects it herself. Eileen also received a $750total of $10,000 mortgage interest and $2,000
Renting Part of security deposit from her tenant. Because shereal estate taxes for the entire property. You can
plans to return it to her tenant at the end of thededuct $5,000 mortgage interest and $1,000Property lease, she does not include it in her income. Herreal estate taxes on Schedule E, and if you
rental expenses for the year are as follows.itemize your deductions, you can deduct theIf you rent part of your property, you must divide other $5,000 mortgage interest and $1,000 realcertain expenses between the part of the prop- Mortgage interest .......... . $1,800estate taxes on Schedule A.erty used for rental purposes and the part of the Fire insurance (1-year policy) .. . 100
property used for personal purposes, as though Miscellaneous repairs (after
you actually had two separate pieces of prop- renting) ............... . 297
Real estate taxes imposed anderty. Not Rented for Profit paid .................. . 1,200You can deduct the expenses related to the
part of the property used for rental purposes, If you do not rent your property to make a profit, Eileen must divide the real estate taxes,
such as home mortgage interest, qualified mort- you can deduct your rental expenses only up to mortgage interest, and fire insurance between
gage insurance premiums, and real estate the amount of your rental income. You cannot the personal use of the property and the rental
taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Form deduct a loss or carry forward to the next year use of the property. She can deduct
1040). You can also deduct as rental expenses any rental expenses that are more than your eleven-twelfths of these expenses as rental ex-
a portion of other expenses that normally are rental income for the year. penses. She can include the balance of the
Chapter 4 Special Situations Page 17

Page 18 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgage interest ($1,800 ×allowable taxes and mortgage interest on As specified for residential rental property,
11/12) ............... . $1,650Schedule A if she itemizes. She cannot deduct Eileen must use the straight line method of de- Fire insurance ($100 ×  11/12) 92the balance of the fire insurance because it is a preciation over the GDS or ADS recovery pe- Miscellaneous repairs .... . 297personal expense. riod. She chooses the GDS recovery period of Real estate taxes ($1,200 ×Eileen bought this house in 1984 for 27.5 years. 11/12) ............... . 1,100$35,000. Her property tax was based on as- Total expenses .............. . 3,139She uses Table 2-2d to find her depreciationsessed values of $10,000 for the land and Balance .................... . $5,111percentage. Since she placed the property in$25,000 for the house. Before changing it to Minus: Depreciationservice in February, the percentage is 3.182%.rental property, Eileen added several improve- House ($39,000 ×  .03182) . . $1,241ments to the house. She figures her adjusted On April 1, Eileen bought a new dishwasher Dishwasher ($425 ×  .20) .. . 85basis as follows: for the rental property at a cost of $425. The Furnace ($4,000 ×  .02273) . . 91
Total depreciation ............ . 1,417dishwasher is personal property used in a rentalImprovements Cost Net rental income for house $3,694real estate activity, which has a 5-year recoveryHouse ................. . $25,000 period. She uses Table 2-2a to find the percent-Remodeled kitchen ........ . 4,200 Eileen uses Schedule E, Part I, to report herage for Year 1 under ªHalf-year conventionºRecreation room .......... . 5,800 rental income and expenses. She enters her(20%) to figure her depreciation deduction.New roof ............... . 1,600
income, expenses, and depreciation for thePatio and deck ........... . 2,400 On May 1, Eileen paid $4,000 to have a house in the column for Property A. Since allfurnace installed in the house. The furnace isAdjusted basis .......... . $39,000 property was placed in service this year, Eileenresidential rental property. Because she placed must use Form 4562 to figure the depreciation.On February 1, when Eileen changed her the property in service in May, the percentage Eileen's Schedule E and Form 4562 are shownhouse to rental property, the property had a fair from Table 2-2d is 2.273%. next. See the Instructions for Form 4562 formarket value of $152,000. Of this amount,
more information on preparing the form.Eileen figures her net rental income or loss$35,000 was for the land and $117,000 was for
for the house as follows:the house.
Because Eileen's adjusted basis is less than
Total rental income received the fair market value on the date of the change,
($750 ×  11) ................ . $8,250Eileen uses $39,000 as her basis for deprecia-
Minus: Expensestion.
Page 18 Chapter 4 Special Situations

Page 19 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE E  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Supplemental Income and Loss
(From rental real estate, royalties, partnerships,  
S corporations, estates, trusts, REMICs, etc.)
a Attach to Form 1040, 1040NR, or Form 1041.  a See Instructions for Schedule E (Form 1040). 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 13
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Income or Loss From Rental Real Estate and Royalties  Note.  If you are in the business of renting personal property, use  
Schedule C or C-EZ  (see page E-3). If you are an individual, report farm rental income or loss from Form 4835 on page 2, line 40. 
1 List the type and address of each rental real estate property: 
A  
B  
C  
2 For each rental real estate property 
listed on line 1, did you or your family 
use it during the tax year for personal 
purposes for more than the greater of: 
• 14 days  or 
• 10% of the total days rented at  fair 
rental value? 
(See page E-3) 
Yes No 
A
B
C
Income: Properties Totals 
(Add columns A, B, and C.)       A   B   C   
3 Rents received ...... 3 3 
4 Royalties received ..... 4 4 
Expenses:                       
5 Advertising ....... 5 
6 Auto and travel (see page E-4) . 6 
7 Cleaning and maintenance . . 7 
8 Commissions....... 8 
9 Insurance ........ 9 
10 Legal and other professional fees 10 
11 Management fees ..... 11 
12 Mortgage interest paid to 
banks,  etc. (see page E-5) . . 12 12 
13 Other interest....... 13 
14 Repairs......... 14 
15 Supplies ........ 15 
16 Taxes ......... 16 
17 Utilities . ........ 17 
18 Other (list)  a
18 
19 Add lines 5 through 18.... 19 19 
20 Depreciation expense or 
depletion  (see page E-5) . . . 20 20 
21 Total expenses. Add lines 19 and 20 21 
22 Income or (loss) from rental real  
estate or royalty properties.  
Subtract line 21 from line 3 (rents)  
or line 4 (royalties). If the result is 
a  (loss), see page E-5 to find out 
if  you must file Form 6198 .. 22 
23 Deductible rental real estate loss.  
Caution. Your rental real estate loss 
on line 22 may be limited. See page 
E-5 to find out if you must file Form 
8582.  Real estate professionals 
must complete line 43 on page 2 . 23 (                                ) (                                ) (                                )
24 Income.  Add positive amounts shown on line 22.  Do not include any losses ....... 24 
25 Losses.  Add royalty losses from line 22 and rental real estate losses from line 23. Enter total losses here 25 ( )
26 Total rental real estate and royalty income or (loss).  Combine lines 24 and 25. Enter the result here.  If 
Parts II, III, IV, and line 40 on page 2 do not apply to you, also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 17, or 
Form 1040NR, line 18. Otherwise, include this amount in the total on line 41 on page 2 . . .... 26 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11344L Schedule E (Form 1040) 2010 
Eileen Johnson 123 00 4567
Brick House
123 Main Street, Hometown, MN 56200 ✔
8,250 8,250
92
1,650 1,650
297
1,100
3,139 3,139
1,417 1,417
4,556
3,694
3,694
3,694
Chapter 4 Special Situations Page 19

Page 20 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 4562
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service    (99)
Depreciation and Amortization  
(Including Information on Listed Property)
a See separate instructions. a Attach to your tax return.
OMB No. 1545-0172
2010
Attachment            
Sequence No. 67
Name(s) shown on return Business or activity to which this form relates Identifying number
Part I Election To Expense Certain Property Under Section 179  
Note: If you have any listed property, complete Part V before you complete Part I.
1 Maximum amount (see instructions) ....................... 1
2 Total cost of section 179 property placed in service (see instructions) ........... 2
3 Threshold cost of section 179 property before reduction in limitation (see instructions) ...... 3
4 Reduction in limitation. Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0- .......... 4
5 Dollar limitation for tax year. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. If married filing 
separately, see instructions ......................... 5
6 (a)  Description of property (b)  Cost (business use only) (c)  Elected cost
7 Listed property. Enter the amount from line 29 ......... 7
8 Total elected cost of section 179 property. Add amounts in column (c), lines 6 and 7 ...... 8
9 Tentative deduction. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 8 ................ 9
10 Carryover of disallowed deduction from line 13 of your 2009 Form 4562 ........... 10
11 Business income limitation. Enter the smaller of business income (not less than zero) or line 5 (see instructions)  11
12 Section 179 expense deduction. Add lines 9 and 10, but do not enter more than line 11 ..... 12
13 Carryover of disallowed deduction to 2011. Add lines 9 and 10, less line 12   a 13
Note:  Do not use Part II or Part III below for listed property. Instead, use Part V.
Part II Special Depreciation Allowance and Other Depreciation (Do not  include listed property.)  (See instructions.)
14 Special depreciation allowance for qualified property (other than listed property) placed in service 
during the tax year (see instructions) ...................... 14
15 Property subject to section 168(f)(1) election .................... 15
16 Other depreciation (including ACRS) ...................... 16
Part III MACRS Depreciation (Do not include listed property.) (See instructions.)
Section A
17 MACRS deductions for assets placed in service in tax years beginning before 2010 ....... 17
18 If you are electing to group any assets placed in service during the tax year into one or more general 
asset accounts, check here .................... a
Section B—Assets Placed in Service During 2010 Tax Year Using the General Depreciation System
  
(a) Classification of property
(b)  Month and year 
 placed in  
service
(c)  Basis for depreciation 
 (business/investment use  
only—see instructions)
(d)  Recovery 
period (e)  Convention (f)  Method (g)  Depreciation deduction
19a 3-year property
b 5-year property
c 7-year property
d 10-year property
e 15-year property
f 20-year property
g 25-year property
h Residential rental 
property   
i Nonresidential real 
property
   
Section C—Assets Placed in Service During 2010 Tax Year Using the Alternative Depreciation System
20a Class life
b 12-year
c 40-year
Part IV Summary  (See instructions.)
21 Listed property. Enter amount from line 28 .................... 21
22 Total.  Add amounts from line 12, lines 14 through 17, lines 19 and 20 in column (g), and line 21. Enter here 
and on the appropriate lines of your return. Partnerships and S corporations—see instructions . . . . . 22
23 For assets shown above and placed in service during the current year, enter the
portion of the basis attributable to section 263A costs ....... 23
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see separate instructions. Cat. No. 12906N    Form 4562 (2010)
Eileen Johnson Rental house 123-00-4567
425 5 years HY 200% DB 85
25 yrs. S/L
2/2010 39,000 27.5 yrs. MM S/L 1,241
5/2010 4,000 27.5 yrs. MM S/L 91
39 yrs. MM S/L
MM S/L
S/L
12 yrs. S/L
40 yrs. MM S/L
1,417
Page 20 Chapter 4 Special Situations

Page 21 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home and pays a fair rental price (defined your house is used by Rosa under an arrange-
later on this page). Family includes only ment that allows you to use her cabin.
your spouse, brothers and sisters,
5. Example 5. You rent an apartment to yourhalf-brothers and half-sisters, ancestors
mother at less than a fair rental price. You are(parents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal
using the apartment for personal purposes ondescendants (children, grandchildren,
the days that your mother rents it because youetc.).Personal Use of rent it for less than a fair rental price.3. Anyone under an arrangement that lets
you use some other dwelling unit.
Days Used for Repairs andDwelling Unit
4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price. Maintenance
(Including Any day that you spend working substantially fullMain home. If the other person or member of
time repairing and maintaining (not improving)the family in (1) or (2) above has more than one
your property is not counted as a day of personalhome, his or her main home is ordinarily the oneVacation Home)
use. Do not count such a day as a day of per-he or she lived in most of the time.
sonal use even if family members use the prop-In chapter 1, we looked at the rules for residen- Shared equity financing agreement. This is erty for recreational purposes on the same day.tial rental activities where the rental dwelling unit an agreement under which two or more personswas separate from where you lived. In this chap- Example. Corey owns a cabin in the moun-acquire undivided interests for more than 50ter, we are looking at rental activities where the tains that he rents for most of the year. Heyears in an entire dwelling unit, including thesame dwelling unit is used both as your home spends a week at the cabin with family mem-land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-(or is considered to be your home) and as a bers. Corey works on maintenance of the cabintled to occupy the unit as his or her main homerental. This might be a vacation home or your 3 or 4 hours each day during the week andupon payment of rent to the other co-owner ormain home, a recreational vehicle or a boat. In spends the rest of the time fishing, hiking, andowners.this case, expenses must be divided between relaxing. Corey's family members, however,rental use and personal use, and you will not be Donation of use of the property. You use a work substantially full time on the cabin eachable to deduct rental expenses that are more dwelling unit for personal purposes if: day during the week. The main purpose of beingthan your rental income for that dwelling unit. at the cabin that week is to do maintenance• You donate the use of the unit to a charita- work. Therefore, the use of the cabin during theble organization,Dwelling unit. A dwelling unit includes a week by Corey and his family will not be consid-house, apartment, condominium, mobile home, • The organization sells the use of the unit ered personal use by Corey. boat, vacation home, or similar property. It also at a fund-raising event, andincludes all structures or other property belong-
• The ªpurchaserº uses the unit.ing to the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit has basic
living accommodations, such as sleeping space,
Dwelling Unit Used asa toilet, and cooking facilities. Examples. The following examples show how
A dwelling unit does not include property (or to determine if you have days of personal use. a Homepart of the property) used solely as a hotel,
motel, inn, or similar establishment. Property is Example 1. You and your neighbor are The tax treatment of rental income and ex-used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar co-owners of a condominium at the beach. Last penses for a dwelling unit that you also use forestablishment if it is regularly available for occu- year, you rented the unit to vacationers when- personal purposes depends on whether you usepancy by paying customers and is not used by ever possible. The unit was not used as a main it as a home. (See Figuring Rental Income andan owner as a home during the year. home by anyone. Your neighbor used the unit Deductions, later).
for 2 weeks last year; you did not use it at all. You use a dwelling unit as a home during theExample. You rent a room in your home Because your neighbor has an interest in the tax year if you use it for personal purposes morethat is always available for short-term occu- unit, both of you are considered to have used the than the greater of:pancy by paying customers. You do not use the unit for personal purposes during those 2room yourself and you allow only paying cus- weeks. 1. 14 days, ortomers to use the room. This room is used solely
2. 10% of the total days it is rented to othersas a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment Example 2. You and your neighbors are at a fair rental price.and is not a dwelling unit. co-owners of a house under a shared equity
financing agreement. Your neighbors live in the See What Is a Day of Personal Use, earlier.
house and pay you a fair rental price. If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur-
Even though your neighbors have an interest poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price,
What Is a Day of in the house, the days your neighbors live there do not count that day as a day of rental use in
are not counted as days of personal use by you. applying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day of
Personal Use? This is because your neighbors rent the house personal use in applying both (1) and (2) above
as their main home under a shared equity fi- (see Example 3 under Fair rental price , next).
A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is any nancing agreement. However, this rule does not apply when dividing
day that the unit is used by any of the following expenses between rental and personal use (see
persons. Example 3. You own a rental property that Dividing Expenses, later, for details).  
you rent to your son. Your son does not own any1. You or any other person who owns an in- interest in this property. He uses it as his main Fair rental price. A fair rental price for yourterest in it, unless you rent it to another home and pays you a fair rental price. property generally is the amount of rent that aowner as his or her main home under a person who is not related to you would be willingYour son's use of the property is not personalshared equity financing agreement (de- to pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rentaluse by you because your son is using it as hisfined on this page). However, see Excep- price if it is substantially less than the rentsmain home, he owns no interest in the property,tion for Use as Main Home Before or After charged for other properties that are similar toand he is paying you a fair rental price.Renting under Dwelling Unit Used As a your property in your area.Home, later. Example 4. You rent your beach house to Ask yourself the following questions when
Rosa. Rosa rents her cabin in the mountains to2. A member of your family or a member of comparing another property with yours.
you. You each pay a fair rental price.the family of any other person who owns • Is it used for the same purpose?an interest in it, unless the family member You are using your beach house for personal
uses the dwelling unit as his or her main purposes on the days that Rosa uses it because • Is it approximately the same size?
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home) Page 21

Page 22 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Is it in approximately the same condition? Exception for Use as Main Home Dividing Expenses
Before or After Renting• Does it have similar furnishings? If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and
For purposes of determining whether a dwelling• Is it in a similar location? personal purposes, divide your expenses be-
unit was used as a home, you may not have to tween the rental use and the personal use basedIf any of the answers are no, the properties on the number of days used for each purpose.count days you used the property as your mainprobably are not similar. home before or after renting it or offering it for When dividing your expenses, follow these
rent as days of personal use. Do not count them rules.Examples. The following examples show how
as days of personal use if:to determine whether you used your rental prop- • Any day that the unit is rented at a fair
erty as a home. rental price is a day of rental use even if• You rented or tried to rent the property for
you used the unit for personal purposes12 or more consecutive months.Example 1. You converted the basement of that day. (This rule does not apply when• You rented or tried to rent the property foryour home into an apartment with a bedroom, a determining whether you used the unit asbathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the a period of less than 12 consecutive a home.)basement apartment at a fair rental price to months and the period ended because
• Any day that the unit is available for rentcollege students during the regular school year. you sold or exchanged the property. but not actually rented is not a day ofYou rented to them on a 9-month lease (273
However, this special rule does not apply when rental use.days). You figured 10% of the total days rented
dividing expenses between rental and personalto others at a fair rental price is 27 days.
use. See Property Changed to Rental Use  inDuring June (30 days), your brothers stayed Example. Your beach cottage was avail-chapter 4.with you and lived in the basement apartment able for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92
rent free. days). Your family used the cottage during theExample 1. On February 28, 2009, youYour basement apartment was used as a last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unablemoved out of the house you had lived in for 6home because you used it for personal pur- to find a renter for the first week in August (7
poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your broth- years because you accepted a job in another days). The person who rented the cottage for
ers is considered personal use. Your personal town. You rented your house at a fair rental price July allowed you to use it over a weekend (2
use (30 days) is more than the greater of 14 from March 15, 2009, to May 14, 2010 (14 days) without any reduction in or refund of rent.
days or 10% of the total days it was rented (27 months). On June 1, 2010, you moved back into The cottage was not used at all before May 17 or
days). after August 31.your old house.
You figure the part of the cottage expensesThe days you used the house as your mainExample 2. You rented the guest bedroom to treat as rental expenses as follows.home from January 1 to February 28, 2009, andin your home at a fair rental price during the local
from June 1 to December 31, 2010, are notcollege's homecoming, commencement, and • The cottage was used for rental a total of
counted as days of personal use. Therefore, youfootball weekends (a total of 27 days). Your 85 days (92 − 7). The days it was avail-
would use the rules in chapter 1 when figuringsister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for the able for rent but not rented (7 days) are
last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10% not days of rental use. The July weekendyour rental income and expenses.
of the total days rented to others at a fair rental (2 days) you used it is rental use because
price is 3 days. Example 2. On January 31, you moved out you received a fair rental price for the
The room was used as a home because you weekend.of the condominium where you had lived for 3
used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That is years. You offered it for rent at a fair rental price • You used the cottage for personal pur-more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of the beginning on February 1. You were unable to poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in27 days it was rented (3 days). rent it until April. On September 15, you sold the May).
condominium.Example 3. You own a condominium apart- • The total use of the cottage was 99 days
The days you used the condominium as yourment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rental (14 days personal use + 85 days rental
main home from January 1 to January 31 are notprice for a total of 170 days during the year. For use).
counted as days of personal use when deter-12 of these days, the tenant was not able to use • Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) ofmining whether you used it as a home.the apartment and allowed you to use it even the cottage expenses.though you did not refund any of the rent. Your
family actually used the apartment for 10 of When determining whether you used the cot-those days. Therefore, the apartment is treated tage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) youas having been rented for 160 (170 ± 10) days. Figuring Rental used it is personal use even though you re-You figured 10% of the total days rented to ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-others at a fair rental price is 16 days. Your Income and fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83family also used the apartment for 7 other days days of rental use for this purpose. Because youduring the year. Deductions used the cottage for personal purposes moreYou used the apartment as a home because than 14 days and more than 10% of the days ofyou used it for personal purposes for 17 days. If you use a dwelling unit as a home during the rental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If youThat is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% year, how you figure your rental income and have a net loss, you may not be able to deductof the 160 days it was rented (16 days). deductions depends on how many days the unit all of the rental expenses. See Limit on Deduc-
tions, next.was rented at a fair rental price.
Exceptions to Use as a Home
Limit on DeductionsDiscussed below are exceptions to the rules for Rented 15 days or more. If you use a dwell-
personal use of a rented dwelling unit. ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or more The rental activity discussed in this chapter Ðduring the year, include all your rental income in using the same dwelling unit for both rental and
your income. See Reporting Income and Deduc- personal purposes Ðis not a passive activity.Exception for Minimal Rental Use tions, later. If you had a net profit from the rental Instead, the limitation is based on the rental
property for the year (that is, if your rental in- income from this activity.If you use the dwelling unit as a home and you
come is more than the total of your rental ex-rent it fewer than 15 days during the year, that If your rental expenses are more than your
penses, including depreciation), deduct all ofperiod is not treated as rental activity. Do not rental income, you cannot use the excess ex-
your rental expenses. However, if you had a netinclude any of the rent in your income and do not penses to offset income from other sources. The
loss, your deduction for certain rental expensesdeduct any of the rental expenses. See Dwelling excess can be carried forward to the next year
is limited.Unit Used as a Home, earlier. and treated as rental expenses for the same
Page 22 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Page 23 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property. Any expenses carried forward to the Deductions not allowed due to the limitations enter 42 days (31 days in July + 11 days in
next year will be subject to any limits that apply of the rental income for the property are carried December).
for that year. You can deduct the expenses over to subsequent years and may be used Line C. Total days of rental use equals 142carried over to a year only up to the amount of when the property has sufficient income to cover (184 − 42).your rental income for that year, even if you do the expenses or is sold.
not use the property as your home for that year. Line D. Their days of personal use totaledRented at least 15 days and personal use testTo figure your deductible rental expenses 52 (10 days in June + 31 days in July + 11 daysis not met. If your personal use of your prop-and any carryover to next year, use Worksheet in December). They must include in their per-erty is less than the greater of:5-1 at the end of this chapter. sonal use any use by family and friends.
• 14 days, or
Line E. Total use of the property equals 194
• 10% of total days rented to others at fair days (142 + 52).rental price.
Reporting Income and Line F. Rental use of the property is 73%Your property is rental property and your rental (142 ÷  194) of its total use for the year. Inexpenses, which are proportional to the portionDeductions completing this worksheet, they will multiply anyof rental use, will be reported on Schedule E of their expenses that apply to both personal and(Form 1040). Your rental losses for this propertyWhen you use a dwelling unit both as a home rental use by 73% (.73).this year are subject to passive loss limitations.and a rental unit, you must first determine if the
See Passive Activity Limits, earlier.property qualifies as rental property. If it is rental
property, how much it is used as a rental com- Part II. Allowable Rental ExpensesThe personal portion of expenses, includingpared to how much it is used as personal will qualified mortgage interest, property taxes, anddetermine where the rental property's income Line 1. The Donovans enter $6,000 (20qualified casualty loss (if any), will be reportedand expenses should be reported on your re- weeks ×  $300 per week), the total amount of rentas normally allowed on Schedule A (Formturn. they received for the year.1040). The personal portion of the remaining
rental expenses are not deductible because Lines 2a ±2e. They enter $7,665 ($10,500Property rented less than 15 days. If a prop-
they are personal expenses.erty is rented less than 15 days, it's primary mortgage interest ×  .73) on line 2a and $219See Worksheet 5-1, later.function is not considered to be rental and it ($300 real estate taxes ×  .73) on line 2b. On line
should not be reported on Schedule E (Form 2d they enter the full $150 spent on advertising
1040). You are not required to report the rental because it is a direct rental expense that does
income and rental expenses from this activity. not have to be divided. On line 2e, they enter
Illustrated ExampleThe expenses, including qualified mortgage in- $8,034 ($7,665 + $219 + $150).
terest, property taxes, and any qualified casualty Next, they enter the amounts from line 2aOn June 1, Tim and Emily Donovan bought aloss will be reported as normally allowed on ($7,665), line 2b ($219), and line 2d ($150) onvacation condominium to use as rental property.Schedule A (Form 1040). See the instructions the appropriate lines of Schedule E (see theThey began advertising in June that the propertyfor Schedule A for more information on deduct- illustrated form).would be available for rent beginning July 1. Theing these expenses.
Donovans used the property for 10 days during Line 3. Because $6,000 minus $8,034 is
Rented at least 15 days and personal use test June. They didn't have any tenants in July, so less than zero, the Donovans enter -0- on line 3.is met. If your personal use of your property is family and friends used it for the 15 days they This shows that no additional rental expensesmore than the greater of: weren't using the property themselves. On Au- can be deducted on this year's return. They
gust 3, they began renting it for $300 per week need to complete the rest of the worksheet to• 14 days, or (a fair rental price) and rented it continuously see what expenses can be carried over and• 10% of total days rented to others at fair through December 20. They had no tenants for deducted the following year if they have enoughrental price. the rest of December, so the Donovans used the rental income.property for the rest of the year.Your property is rental property, but your ex- Lines 4a ±4e. The Donovans enter $380They had the following costs associated withpenses this year will be limited to the amount of (($400 repairs + $120 insurance) ×  .73) on linesthe vacation property for the 7 months theyyour rental income for this property. You will 4a and 4d. They enter -0- on line 4e (the smallerowned it.report your income on Schedule E (Form 1040). of $0 and $380).
You will allocate your expenses based on the Mortgage interest ....... . $10,500 They do not make an entry on Schedule E for
number of personal days as compared to the Real estate taxes ....... . 300 the direct expenses entered on line 4a becausenumber of rental days. Repairs ............. . 400 all of their rental income has been offset by theFire insurance ......... . 120The personal portion of expenses, including expenses listed on lines 2a ±2d. But see LinesAdvertising ........... . 150qualified mortgage interest, property taxes, and 7a±7b below.qualified casualty loss (if any), will be reported The property was ready and available for Line 5.  They enter -0- on line 5.as normally allowed on Schedule A (Form rental use on July 1, so it was considered placed1040). in service at that time. They figured $1,200 de- Lines 6a ±6e.  The Donovans enter $876The rental portion of the expenses will be preciation for the 6 months it was available for (($1,200 depreciation from 7/1 through 12/31) ×reported on Schedule E (Form 1040) in the fol- rent. .73) on lines 6b and 6d. Their entry on line 6e islowing order. -0-, the smaller of $0 and $876.
Completing Worksheet 5-1 They do not make an entry on Schedule E for1. Advertising and other fees directly related
the depreciation listed on line 6b, again becauseto obtaining tenants for this rental property.
The Donovans answer ªYesº to each of the all of their rental income has been offset. See2. The rental portion of qualified home mort- questions at the top of Worksheet 5-1 and con- Lines 7a±7b below.gage interest, property taxes, and qualified tinue to Part I.
casualty loss (if any).
Part III. Carryover of Unallowed3. Rental operating expenses for this prop-
Part I. Rental Use Percentageerty up to the amount of the rental income Expenses to Next Year
for this property (minus 1 and 2). Line A. The property was available for rent Lines 7a ±7b. The Donovans enter $3804. Depreciation for this property up to the beginning July 1, so they enter the total number ($380 − $0) on line 7a. On line 7b, they enteramount of the rental income for this prop- of days (184) from July 1 through December 31. $876 ($876 − $0). This means that they haveerty (minus 1, 2, and 3). operating expenses of $380 and depreciation ofLine B. They had no tenants during the
See Worksheet 5-1, later. month of July or from December 21 ±31. They $876 to carry over to next year.
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home) Page 23

Page 24 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 21. This is the same as line 19 because for Schedule E to see if they must file FormSchedule E (Form 1040)
there is no entry on line 20. 8582. They determined that they can deduct the
full loss shown on line 22 and that they meet allThe Donovans have entered the rental portion of Line 22. The Donovans have a net loss of the criteria for not filing Form 8582 (see Limitstheir deductible expenses from Worksheet 5-1 $2,034 from this rental property. As instructed, on Rental Losses  in chapter 3). Their line 23on the appropriate lines of Schedule E (Form they enter the amount in parentheses to show entry is (2,034).1040), as follows. that it is a loss. Next, they read the instructions
for Schedule E to see if they must file Form Lines 25 and 26. The Donovans do notLine 5 .............. . $  150 6198. Since they are fully responsible for the have any other rental or royalty property, so theyLine 12 ............. . 7,665 investment in their vacation condominium, their enter their $2,034 loss on lines 25 and 26. TheyLine 16 ............. . 219 investment is considered to be at-risk and they also enter the loss on line 17 of their Form 1040.
do not need to file Form 6198.Line 19. This is the total of lines 5 through
18. Line 23. To find out how much loss they can
deduct, the Donovans refer to the instructionsLine 20. No entry is made because no de-
preciation deduction is allowed this year.
Page 24 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Page 25 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 5-1. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a HomeÐIllustrated Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer ªyesº to all of the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price ............................... . A. 184
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ............................ . B. 42
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ........................... . C. 142
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ........ . D. 52
E. Total use of the property. Add lines C and D ............................... . E. 194
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E ................ . F. .73
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ............................................................... . 1. 6,000
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified 
mortgage insurance premiums (see instructions) .............................. . 2a. 7,665
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes .................................. . b. 219
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ........ . c.
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) ............................... . d. 150
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a±2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E (see instructions) ...................................... . 2e. 8,034
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 3. 0
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ....................... . 4a. 380
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums (see instructions) ............................................ . b.
c. Carryover of operating expenses from 2009 worksheet ......................... . c.
d. Add lines 4a±4c .................................................... . d. 380
e. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4d (see instructions) ........................ . 4e. 0
5. Subtract line 4e from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 5. 0
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) .......... . 6a.
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit ....................... . b. 876
c. Carryover of excess casualty losses and depreciation from 2009 worksheet ........... . c.
d. Add lines 6a±6c .................................................... . d. 876
e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d (see instructions) ...................................................... . 6e. 0
PART III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4e from line 4d ................... . 7a. 380
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. 
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .......................................................... . b. 876
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home) Page 25

Page 26 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE E  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Supplemental Income and Loss
(From rental real estate, royalties, partnerships,  
S corporations, estates, trusts, REMICs, etc.)
a Attach to Form 1040, 1040NR, or Form 1041.  a See Instructions for Schedule E (Form 1040). 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 13
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Income or Loss From Rental Real Estate and Royalties  Note.  If you are in the business of renting personal property, use  
Schedule C or C-EZ  (see page E-3). If you are an individual, report farm rental income or loss from Form 4835 on page 2, line 40. 
1 List the type and address of each rental real estate property: 
A  
B  
C  
2 For each rental real estate property 
listed on line 1, did you or your family 
use it during the tax year for personal 
purposes for more than the greater of: 
• 14 days  or 
• 10% of the total days rented at  fair 
rental value? 
(See page E-3) 
Yes No 
A
B
C
Income: Properties Totals 
(Add columns A, B, and C.)       A   B   C   
3 Rents received ...... 3 3 
4 Royalties received ..... 4 4 
Expenses:                       
5 Advertising ....... 5 
6 Auto and travel (see page E-4) . 6 
7 Cleaning and maintenance . . 7 
8 Commissions....... 8 
9 Insurance ........ 9 
10 Legal and other professional fees 10 
11 Management fees ..... 11 
12 Mortgage interest paid to 
banks,  etc. (see page E-5) . . 12 12 
13 Other interest....... 13 
14 Repairs......... 14 
15 Supplies ........ 15 
16 Taxes ......... 16 
17 Utilities . ........ 17 
18 Other (list)  a
18 
19 Add lines 5 through 18.... 19 19 
20 Depreciation expense or 
depletion  (see page E-5) . . . 20 20 
21 Total expenses. Add lines 19 and 20 21 
22 Income or (loss) from rental real  
estate or royalty properties.  
Subtract line 21 from line 3 (rents)  
or line 4 (royalties). If the result is 
a  (loss), see page E-5 to find out 
if  you must file Form 6198 .. 22 
23 Deductible rental real estate loss.  
Caution. Your rental real estate loss 
on line 22 may be limited. See page 
E-5 to find out if you must file Form 
8582.  Real estate professionals 
must complete line 43 on page 2 . 23 (                                ) (                                ) (                                )
24 Income.  Add positive amounts shown on line 22.  Do not include any losses ....... 24 
25 Losses.  Add royalty losses from line 22 and rental real estate losses from line 23. Enter total losses here 25 ( )
26 Total rental real estate and royalty income or (loss).  Combine lines 24 and 25. Enter the result here.  If 
Parts II, III, IV, and line 40 on page 2 do not apply to you, also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 17, or 
Form 1040NR, line 18. Otherwise, include this amount in the total on line 41 on page 2 . . .... 26 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11344L Schedule E (Form 1040) 2010 
Tim and Emily Donovan 666 00 7777
Vacation condo
333 Oak Ave. Somewhere, GA 66666
✔
6,000 6,000
150
7,665 7,665
8,034 8,034
8,034
(2,034)
2,034
2,034
(2,034)
EPS File Name:15052w07 Size: Width = 44 picas, Depth = page
Page 26 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Page 27 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 5-1. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer ªyesº to all of the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price ............................... . A.
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ............................ . B.
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ........................... . C.
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ........ . D.
E. Total use of the property. Add lines C and D ............................... . E.
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E ................ . F. .
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ............................................................... . 1.
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified 
mortgage insurance premiums (see instructions) .............................. . 2a.
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes .................................. . b.
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ........ . c.
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) ............................... . d.
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a±2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E (see instructions) ...................................... . 2e.
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 3.
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ....................... . 4a.
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums (see instructions) ............................................ . b.
c. Carryover of operating expenses from 2009 worksheet ......................... . c.
d. Add lines 4a±4c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4d (see instructions) ........................ . 4e.
5. Subtract line 4e from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 5.
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) .......... . 6a.
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit ....................... . b.
c. Carryover of excess casualty losses and depreciation from 2009 worksheet ........... . c.
d. Add lines 6a±6c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d (see instructions) ...................................................... . 6e.
PART III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4e from line 4d ................... . 7a.
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. 
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .......................................................... . b.
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home) Page 27

Page 28 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 5-1 Instructions. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for
a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Caution. Use the percentage determined in Part I, line F, to figure the rental portions to enter on lines 2a ±2c, 4a±4b, and 6a±6b of 
Part II.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (as if you were itemizing your
deductions) if you had not rented the unit. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example,
do not include interest on a home equity loan used to pay off credit cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or pay college
tuition. Include interest on a loan used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such a loan. Include the rental
portion of this interest in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Figure the qualified mortgage insurance premiums on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on line 13 of Schedule A, if you
had not rented the unit. See page A-7 of the Schedule A instructions. However, figure your adjusted gross income (Form 1040,
line 38) without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. See Line 4b below to deduct the part of the qualified
mortgage insurance premiums not allowed because of the adjusted gross income limit. Include the rental portion of the amount
from Schedule A, line 13, in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Schedule A or use it to figure the amount to deduct on line 13 of that schedule. Instead, figure the
personal portion on a separate Schedule A. If you have deducted mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums
on the dwelling unit on other forms, such as Schedule C or F, remember to reduce your Schedule A deduction by that amount.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the
dwelling unit. To do this, complete Section A of Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts, treating the losses as personal losses. If
any of the loss is due to a federally declared disaster, see the Instructions for Form 4684. On Form 4684, line 19, enter 10% of
your adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the rental portion of
the result from Form 4684, line 21, on line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to figure your personal losses on Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal portion
on a separate Form 4684.
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used
for rental activities other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also include rental agency fees, advertising, office
supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses on Schedule E even if your rental expenses are
more than your rental income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental portion of the mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the dwelling unit. If you had additional mortgage interest and qualified mortgage
insurance premiums that would not be deductible on Schedule A because of limits imposed on them, enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of those excess amounts. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit 
(as explained in the line 2a instructions).
Line 4e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a, 4b, and 4c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 4e.*
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684 you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A. Enter the amount from Form 4684, line 10 ............................... .
B. Enter the rental portion of line A ...................................... .
C. Enter the amount from line 2c of this worksheet ........................... .
D. Subtract line C from line B. Enter the result here and on line 6a of this worksheet .... .
Line 6e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a, 6b, and 6c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 6e.*
*Allocating the limited deduction. If you cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4d or 6d this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you wish among
the expenses included on line 4d or 6d. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
Page 28 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Page 29 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). • Order IRS products online.
The Low Income Taxpayer Clinic program • Research your tax questions online.serves individuals who have a problem with the
6. IRS and whose income is below a certain level. • Search publications online by topic or
LITCs are independent from the IRS. Most keyword.
LITCs can provide representation before the • Use the online Internal Revenue Code,IRS or in court on audits, tax collection disputes, regulations, or other official guidance.How To Get Tax and other issues for free or a small fee. If an
individual's native language is not English, some • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
clinics can provide multilingual information published in the last few years.Help about taxpayer rights and responsibilities. For • Figure your withholding allowances usingmore information, see Publication 4134, Low the withholding calculator online at www.Income Taxpayer Clinic List. This publication isYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, irs.gov/individuals.available at IRS.gov, by callingorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or at your • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed bytions, and get information from the IRS in sev-
local IRS office. using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)eral ways. By selecting the method that is best
Assistant.for you, you will have quick and easy access to Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS
tax help. • Sign up to receive local and national taxGuide to Free Tax Services, is your guide to IRS
news by email.services and resources. Learn about free tax
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The information from the IRS, including publications, • Get information on starting and operatingTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- services, and education and assistance pro- a small business.pendent organization within the IRS. We help grams. The publication also has an index of over
taxpayers who are experiencing economic 100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information)
harm, such as not being able to provide necessi- you can listen to on the telephone. The majority Phone. Many services are available byties like housing, transportation, or food; taxpay- of the information and services listed in this phone. ers who are seeking help in resolving tax publication are available to you free of charge. If
problems with the IRS; and those who believe there is a fee associated with a resource or
that an IRS system or procedure is not working service, it is listed in the publication. • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
as it should. Here are seven things every tax- Accessible versions of IRS published prod- tions. Call 1-800-TAX-FORM
payer should know about TAS: ucts are available on request in a variety of (1-800-829-3676) to order current-year
alternative formats for people with disabilities. forms, instructions, and publications, and• The Taxpayer Advocate Service is your
prior-year forms and instructions. Youvoice at the IRS. Free help with your return. Free help in pre- should receive your order within 10 days.paring your return is available nationwide from• Our service is free, confidential, and tai-
IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withlored to meet your needs. Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.
• You may be eligible for our help if you help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun- • Solving problems. You can gethave tried to resolve your tax problem seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed face-to-face help solving tax problemsthrough normal IRS channels and have to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-gotten nowhere, or you believe an IRS tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic sistance Centers. An employee can ex-procedure just isn't working as it should. filing and all volunteers will let you know about plain IRS letters, request adjustments tocredits and deductions you may be entitled to• We help taxpayers whose problems are your account, or help you set up a pay-claim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, callcausing financial difficulty or significant ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-1-800-829-1040.cost, including the cost of professional tance Center for an appointment. To findAs part of the TCE program, AARP offers therepresentation. This includes businesses the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near-as well as individuals. tacts or look in the phone book underest AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or United States Government, Internal Reve-• Our employees know the IRS and how to visit AARP's website at www.aarp.org/money/ nue Service.navigate it. If you qualify for our help, we'll taxaide.
assign your case to an advocate who will • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessFor more information on these programs, go
listen to your problem, help you under- to TTY/TDD equipment, callto IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the
stand what needs to be done to resolve it, 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toupper right-hand corner.
and stay with you every step of the way order forms and publications.Internet. You can access the IRS web-until your problem is resolved. • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-site at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days
• We have at least one local taxpayer advo- ten to pre-recorded messages coveringa week to:
cate in every state, the District of Colum- various tax topics.• E-file your return. Find out about commer-bia, and Puerto Rico. You can call your • Refund information. To check the status ofcial tax preparation and e-file serviceslocal advocate, whose number is in your your 2010 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 oravailable free to eligible taxpayers.phone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer Ad- 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund infor-vocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, • Check the status of your 2010 refund. Go mation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week).and on our website at www.irs.gov/advo- to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re- Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS ac-cate. You can also call our toll-free line at fund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS knowledges receipt of your e-filed return,1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD acknowledges receipt of your e-filed re- or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper re-1-800-829-4059. turn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper turn. If you filed Form 8379 with your re-return. If you filed Form 8379 with your• You can learn about your rights and re- turn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filedreturn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if yousponsibilities as a taxpayer by visiting our electronically). Have your 2010 tax returnfiled electronically). Have your 2010 taxonline tax toolkit at www.taxtoolkit.irs.gov. available so you can provide your socialreturn available so you can provide yourYou can get updates on hot tax topics by security number, your filing status, and thesocial security number, your filing status,visiting our YouTube channel at www.you- exact whole dollar amount of your refund.and the exact whole dollar amount of yourtube.com/tasnta and our Facebook page If you check the status of your refund andrefund.at www.facebook.com/YourVoiceAtIRS, or are not given the date it will be issued,
by following our tweets at www.twitter. • Download forms, including talking tax please wait until the next week before
com/YourVoiceAtIRS. forms, instructions, and publications. checking back.
Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help Page 29

Page 30 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Other refund information. To check the or help you set up a payment plan. If you DVD for tax products. You can order
status of a prior-year refund or amended Publication 1796, IRS Tax Productsneed to resolve a tax problem, have ques-
return refund, call 1-800-829-1040. DVD, and obtain:tions about how the tax law applies to your
individual tax return, or you are more com- • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-Evaluating the quality of our telephone fortable talking with someone in person, lications.services. To ensure IRS representatives give visit your local Taxpayer Assistance
accurate, courteous, and professional answers, • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-Center where you can spread out your
we use several methods to evaluate the quality tions.records and talk with an IRS representa-
of our telephone services. One method is for a tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andsecond IRS representative to listen in on or essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you finding aid.record random telephone calls. Another is to ask can call your local Center and leave a
• Tax law frequently asked questions.some callers to complete a short survey at the message requesting an appointment to re-
end of the call. solve a tax account issue. A representa- • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-tive will call you back within 2 business sponse system.Walk-in. Many products and services days to schedule an in-person appoint-are available on a walk-in basis. • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of thement at your convenience. If you have an
U.S. Code.ongoing, complex tax account problem or
a special need, such as a disability, an• Products. You can walk in to many post • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax
appointment can be requested. All otheroffices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up forms.
issues will be handled without an appoint-certain forms, instructions, and publica-
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery ment. To find the number of your local
stores, copy centers, city and county gov- office, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or • Toll-free and email technical support.
ernment offices, credit unions, and office look in the phone book under United
• Two releases during the year.supply stores have a collection of products States Government, Internal Revenue
± The first release will ship the beginningavailable to print from a CD or photocopy Service.
of January 2011.from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
± The final release will ship the beginningoffices and libraries have the Internal Rev- Mail. You can send your order for of March 2011.enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue forms, instructions, and publications to
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail- the address below. You should receive
 Purchase the DVD from National Technicalable for research purposes. a response within 10 days after your request is Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/received.• Services. You can walk in to your local cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or call
Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30
Internal Revenue Serviceness day for personal, face-to-face tax (plus a $6 handling fee).
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayhelp. An employee can explain IRS letters,
request adjustments to your tax account, Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Advance rent ................ . 3 Attorneys' fees ............ . 7, 8 Local benefit taxes ......... . 4A
Mortgages, payments toSecurity deposits ........... . 3 Automobiles:Accelerated Cost Recovery
obtain ................... . 4MACRS recovery periods ... . 9System (ACRS)  (See also Advertising .................. . 3
Modified Accelerated Cost Cars:Allocation of expenses:
Recovery System MACRS recovery periods ... . 9Change of property to rental B(MACRS)) ................. . 8 Cash method taxpayers ..... . 3use ..................... . 16 Basis:Effective date .............. . 7 Casualty losses ............ . 14How to divide expenses .... . 22 Adjusted basis ............. . 8Accounting methods: Part of property rented ..... . 17 Change of accountingAssessments for localAccrual method ............ . 3 method .................. . 12Personal use of rental improvements ............ . 8Cash method .............. . 3 property .............. . 3, 21 Charitable contributions:Basis other than cost ....... . 8Change of method ......... . 12 Use of property ............ . 21Alternative Depreciation System Cost basis ................. . 7(ADS):Constructive receipt of Cleaning andDecreases to ............... . 8
income .................. . 3 Election of ................. . 9 maintenance .............. . 3Deductions:
Accrual method taxpayers .. . 3 MACRS ................ . 8, 11 Closing costs ............... . 7Capitalization of costs
ACRS (Accelerated Cost Alternative minimum tax (AMT): Comments on publication ... . 2vs. .................... . 8
Recovery System): Not greater than basis .... . 7Accelerated depreciation Commissions ............... . 3
Fair market value .......... . 16Effective date .............. . 7 methods ................. . 6 Computers:
Increases to ................ . 8Active participation ........ . 13 Amended returns ........... . 12 MACRS recovery periods ... . 9
MACRS depreciableActivities not for profit ..... . 17 Apartments: Condominiums ......... . 16, 21basis .................... . 7Additions to property  (See also Basement apartments ..... . 22 Constructive receipt ofProperty changed to rentalImprovements) ............ . 10 Dwelling units ............. . 21 income .................... . 3use ..................... . 16Basis ...................... . 8 Appraisal fees ............... . 7 Cooperative housing .... . 6, 16,
MACRS recovery period ... . 10 21Assessments for
Adjusted basis: maintenance .............. . 8 Cost basis ................... . 7C
MACRS depreciation ....... . 8 Assessments, local  (See Local Credit reports ............... . 7Capital expenditures:
assessments)Adjusted gross income (AGI): Credits:Deductions vs. effect on
Assistance  (See Tax help) basis .................... . 8Modified (See Modified adjusted Residential energy credit before
Improvements .............. . 5gross income (MAGI)) Assumption of mortgage .... . 7 1986 .................... . 8
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help

Page 31 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rental income and Equipment leasing .......... . 4 Income .................... . 3D
expenses ............... . 12 Limits: Passive activity:Days of personal use ....... . 21
Schedule E ............... . 12 Passive activity losses and Maximum specialDays used for repairs and
Form 1098: credits .................. . 13 allowance ............... . 14maintenance ............. . 21
Mortgage interest .......... . 4 Rental expense Personal property:Deductions:
deductions .............. . 22Form 1099-MISC: Rental income from ......... . 3Capitalizing costs vs. effect on
Rental losses ............. . 13Miscellaneous Income .... . 1, 5 Personal use of rental property basis .................... . 8
Loans:Form 4684: (See also Property changed toDepreciation (See Depreciation)
Assumption fees ........... . 7Casualties and thefts ...... . 14 rental use) ............ . 16, 21Limitations on ......... . 12, 22
Charges connected with gettingForm 4797: Placed-in-service date ....... . 6Passive activity losses (See
or refinancing, costSales of businessPassive activity) Points ..................... . 4, 7basis .................... . 7property ................ . 14Depreciation ............. . 6-12 Pre-rental expenses ......... . 4Low or no interest .......... . 7Form 8582:Alternative Depreciation System Principal residence  (See Home)Origination fees ............ . 4Passive activity losses .... . 13,(ADS) (See Modified Profit, property not rentedLocal assessments .......... . 814Accelerated Cost Recovery for ....................... . 17Losses  (See Gains and losses)System (MACRS)) Free tax services ........... . 29 Property changed to rentalBasis (See Basis) use ....................... . 16Change of accounting Basis ..................... . 16MGmethod ................. . 12 Publications  (See Tax help)Minimal rental useGains and losses:Change of property to rental exception ................ . 22At-risk rules ............... . 13use ..................... . 16 Missing children, photographsCasualty and theftClaiming correct amount Rof ......................... . 2losses .................. . 14of ...................... . 11 Real estateLimits on rental losses ..... . 12 Modified Accelerated CostDeclining balance method .. . 7 professionals ............ . 13Passive activity losses ..... . 13 Recovery SystemDisaster assistance ......... . 2 Real estate taxes ............ . 7Rental real estate (MACRS) ............... . 8-11Duration of property expected to activities ................ . 13 Real property trades orAdditions or improvements tolast more than one year .. . 6 Sale of rental property ... . 2, 14 businesses ............... . 13property ................ . 10Eligible property ............ . 6 Adjusted basis ............. . 8General depreciation system Recordkeeping requirements:First-year expensing ........ . 6 Alternative Depreciation System(GDS)  (See Modified Travel and transportationGO Zone .................. . 2 (ADS) ................ . 8, 11Accelerated Cost Recovery expenses ................ . 4MACRS (See Modified Basis other than cost ....... . 8System (MACRS)) Recovery periods ........... . 9Accelerated Cost Recovery Conventions .............. . 10 Rent ......................... . 7System (MACRS)) Cost basis ................. . 7 Advance rent ............... . 3Methods ................ . 7, 10 H Depreciable basis .......... . 7 Fair price ................. . 21Ownership of property ...... . 6 Help  (See Tax help) Effective date .............. . 7 Rental expenses ............ . 3Rental expense ............ . 4 Home: Excluded property .......... . 9 Advertising ................. . 3Rented property ............ . 6 Main home ................ . 21 General Depreciation System Allocation between rental andSection 179 deduction ...... . 6 Use as rental property (See Use (GDS) ............. . 8, 9, 10 personal uses ........... . 22Special depreciation of home) Nonresidential rental Change of property to rentalallowances ......... . 1, 2, 8 property ................. . 9 use ..................... . 16Straight line method ........ . 7 Property used in rental activitiesI Cleaning andUseful life .................. . 6 (Table 2-1) ............... . 9 maintenance ............. . 3Improvements  (See alsoVacant rental property ...... . 4 Recovery periods ........ . 9, 10 Commissions .............. . 3Repairs) ................... . 5Discount, bonds and notes Residential rental Depreciation ............... . 4Assessments for localissued at  (See Original issue property .............. . 9, 10 Dwelling unit used asimprovements ............ . 8discount (OID)) Special depreciation home ................... . 21Basis ...................... . 8Dividing of expenses  (See allowances .............. . 8 Equipment rental ........... . 4Depreciation of rentedAllocation of expenses) Modified adjusted gross income Home, property also usedproperty ................. . 6Dwelling units: (MAGI) ................... . 14 as ....................... . 3MACRS recovery period ... . 10Definition ................. . 21 More information  (See Tax help) Improvements .............. . 5Indian reservationFair rental price ........... . 21 Mortgages ................... . 4 Insurance ................ . 3, 4property ................... . 9Personal use of ........... . 21 Assumption of, cost basis ... . 7 Interest payments ........ . 3, 4Insurance ................... . 3 Change of property to rental Local transportationCasualty or theft loss use ..................... . 16 expenses ................ . 4payments ................ . 8E End of, OID ................ . 5 Part of property rented ..... . 17Change of property to rentalEasements .................. . 8 Interest ............. . 4, 16, 17 Points ..................... . 4use ..................... . 16Equipment rental expense ... . 4 Mortgage insurance Pre-rental expenses ........ . 4Fire insurance premiums, cost premiums ................ . 7 Rental payments ........... . 4basis .................... . 7 Part of property rented ..... . 17 Repairs .................. . 4, 5Part of property rented ..... . 17F Reporting expenses ...... . 1, 5Premiums paid inFair market value (FMV) .... . 16 Sale of property ............ . 4advance ................. . 4 NFair rental price ........ . 21, 22 Tax return preparationTitle insurance, cost basis .. . 7 Nonresidential realFees: fees ..................... . 4Interest payments  (See also property ................... . 9Loan origination fees ..... . 4, 7 Taxes ..................... . 4Mortgages) ................ . 4 Not-for-profit activities ..... . 17Points (See Points) Tenant, paid by ............ . 3Loan origination fees ....... . 4Settlement fees and other Travel expenses ........... . 4Rental expenses ........... . 3costs .................... . 7 Utilities .................... . 4OTax return preparation Vacant rental property ...... . 4Original issue discountfees ..................... . 4 L Rental income:(OID) .................... . 4-5First-year expensing ........ . 6 Land: Advance rent ............... . 3
Cost basis ................. . 7Form 1040: Cancellation of lease
Depreciation ............... . 6 PNot rented for profit payments ................ . 3
income ................. . 17 Dwelling unit used asLeases: Part interest:
home ................... . 21Part of property rented ..... . 17 Cancellation payments ..... . 3 Expenses .................. . 3
Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help Page 31

Page 32 of 32 of Publication 527 16:11 - 10-FEB-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rental income: (Cont.) Gain or loss ............. . 2, 14 Tax credits: Use of home:
Lease with option to buy .... . 3 Main home ................. . 2 Residential energy credit Before or after renting ..... . 22
Minimal rental use allowed before 1986, effect Change to rental use ...... . 16Section 179 deductions ..... . 6
exception ............... . 22 on basis ................. . 8 Days of personal use ...... . 21Security deposits ........... . 3
Not rented for profit ........ . 17 Fair rental price ........... . 21Tax help .................... . 29Settlement fees ............. . 7Part interest ................ . 3 Minimal rental useTax return preparationShared equity financingProperty received from exception ............... . 22fees ....................... . 4agreements .............. . 21tenant ................... . 3 Passive activity rulesTaxes:Special depreciationReporting ............... . 3, 12 exception ............... . 13Deduction of ............... . 4allowances ................ . 8Security deposit ............ . 3 Personal use as dwellingLocal benefit taxes ......... . 4Spouse:Services received from unit ..................... . 21Real estate taxes ........... . 7Material participation ...... . 13tenant ................... . 3 Utilities .................... . 4, 8Transfer taxes ............. . 7Standard mileage rates ...... . 4Uncollected rent ............ . 4 Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 29Suggestions forUsed as home ............. . 3 Theft losses ................ . 14 Vpublication ................ . 2Rental losses  (See also Gains Title insurance .............. . 7 Vacant rental property ....... . 4Surveys ..................... . 7and losses; Passive Transfer taxes ............... . 7 Vacation homes:activity) ................... . 13 Dividing of expenses ...... . 22Travel and transportationRepairs  (See also T Dwelling unit .............. . 21expenses:Improvements) ........... . 4, 5 Tables and figures: Fair rental price ........... . 21Local transportationAssessments for Improvements, examples of Minimal rental useexpenses ................ . 4maintenance ............. . 8 (Table 1-1) ............... . 5 exception ............... . 22Recordkeeping ............. . 4Personal use of rental property MACRS optional tables (Table Personal use of ........... . 21Rental expenses ........... . 4exception for days used for 2-2d) ................... . 11 Standard mileage rate ...... . 4 Valuation:repairs and MACRS optional tables (Tables Fair market value .......... . 16TTY/TDD information ....... . 29maintenance ............ . 21 2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c) .... . 10
■MACRS recovery periods for
Uproperty used in rentalS
activities (Table 2-1) ...... . 9 Uncollected rent:Sale of property:
Income .................... . 4Expenses .................. . 4
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help