Userid: RGBLAC00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\bsyfb\documents\2008 forms & pubs\Pub 501\P501 2008.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 ContentsCat. No. 15000U
What's New for 2008 .............. . 1Department
of the What's New for 2009 .............. . 2Treasury Exemptions,
Reminders ..................... . 2Internal
Revenue Introduction .................... . 2StandardService
Who Must File .................. . 3
Who Should File ................ . 5Deduction,
Filing Status ................... . 5
Exemptions .................... . 10and Filing
Exemptions for Dependents ........ . 11
Phaseout of Exemptions ........... . 21Information
Standard Deduction .............. . 22
2008 Standard Deduction
Worksheet ............... . 24For use in preparing
How To Get Tax Help ............. . 25
Index ......................... . 272008 Returns
What's New for 2008
Who must file. Generally, the amount of in-
come you can receive before you must file a tax
return has increased. Table 1 shows the filing
requirements for most taxpayers.
Exemption amount. The amount you can de-
duct for each exemption has increased from
$3,400 in 2007 to $3,500 in 2008.
Exemption phaseout. You lose part of the
benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted gross
income is above a certain amount. For 2008, the
phaseout begins at $119,975 for married per-
sons filing separately; $159,950 for single indi-
viduals; $199,950 for heads of household; and
$239,950 for married persons filing jointly or
qualifying widow(ers). However, in 2008, you
can lose no more than 1/3 of the amount of your
exemptions. In other words, each exemption
cannot be reduced to less than $2,333.
Exemption for individual displaced by Mid-
western disaster. You may be able to claim a
$500 exemption if you provided housing to a
person displaced by a Midwestern disaster. For
more information, see Exemption for Individual
Displaced by a Midwestern Disaster.
Standard deduction increased. The stan-
dard deduction for most taxpayers who do not
itemize their deductions on Schedule A of Form
1040 is higher in 2008 than it was in 2007. The
amount depends on your filing status. In addition
to the annual increase due to inflation adjust-
ments, your 2008 standard deduction is in-
creased by:
• Any state or local real estate taxes you
Get forms and other information paid that would be deductible on Schedule
A if you were itemizing deductions, up tofaster and easier by:
$500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly), and
Internet www.irs.gov • Any net disaster loss from a federally de-
clared disaster.
Dec 11, 2008

Page 2 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can use the 2008 Standard Deduction or she does not have and is not eligible to get an Exemptions, which reduce your taxable in-
Worksheet near the end of this publication to SSN. See Form W-7, Application for IRS Individ- come, are discussed in Exemptions.
figure your standard deduction. ual Taxpayer Identification Number. Also, see Exemptions for Dependents explains the dif-
Social Security Numbers for Dependents, later. ference between a qualifying child and a qualify-
Itemized deductions. Some of your itemized ing relative. Other topics include the social
deductions may be limited if your adjusted gross Photographs of missing children. The Inter- security number requirement for dependents,
income is more than $159,950 ($79,975 if you nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the the rules for multiple support agreements, and
are married filing separately). See Who Should National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- the rules for divorced or separated parents.
Itemize, later. dren. Photographs of missing children selected Standard Deduction gives the rules and dol-
by the Center may appear in this publication on lar amounts for the standard deduction Ð a
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can benefit for taxpayers who do not itemize their
help bring these children home by looking at the deductions. This section also discusses the
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOSTWhat's New for 2009 standard deduction for taxpayers who are blind
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. or age 65 or older, and special rules for depen-
dents. In addition, this section should help youDivorced or separated parents. Beginning
decide whether you would be better off takingwith 2009 tax returns, a noncustodial parent
the standard deduction or itemizing your deduc-claiming an exemption for a child can no longer
Introduction tions.attach certain pages from a divorce decree or
How To Get Tax Help explains how to get taxseparation agreement instead of Form 8332 if This publication discusses some tax rules that help from the IRS.the decree or agreement was made after 2008. affect every person who may have to file a fed- This publication is for U.S. citizens and resi-This noncustodial parent will have to attach eral income tax return. It answers some basic dent aliens only. If you are a resident alien forForm 8332 or a similar statement signed by the questions: who must file; who should file; what the entire year, you must follow the same taxcustodial parent and whose only purpose is to filing status to use; how many exemptions to rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules torelease a claim to exemption. See Children of claim; and the amount of the standard deduc- determine if you are a resident or nonresidentdivorced or separated parents  under Exemp- tion. alien are discussed in chapter 1 of Publicationtions for Dependents. Who Must File  explains who must file an 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.income tax return. If you have little or no gross
income, reading this section will help you decide Nonresident aliens. If you were a nonresi-
if you have to file a return. dent alien at any time during the year, the rulesReminders Who Should File will help you decide if you and tax forms that apply to you may be different
should file a return, even if you are not required from those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Publi-
to do so.Taxpayer identification number for aliens. cation 519.
If you are a nonresident or resident alien and Filing Status helps you determine which filing
Comments and suggestions. We welcomeyou do not have and are not eligible to get a status to use. Filing status is important in deter-
your comments about this publication and yoursocial security number (SSN), you must apply mining whether you must file a return, your stan-
suggestions for future editions.for an individual taxpayer identification number dard deduction, and your tax rate. It also helps
You can write to us at the following address:(ITIN). Your spouse also may need an ITIN if he determine what credits you may be entitled to.
Table 1. 2008 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers Internal Revenue Service
Individual Forms and Publications Branch
THEN file a return SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
if your gross 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
AND at the end of 2008 you income was at Washington, DC 20224
IF your filing status is... were...* least...**
We respond to many letters by telephone.under 65  $ 8,950single
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
65 or older $10,300 clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.under 65 $11,500head of household You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
asterisk must be included in the address.)65 or older $12,850 Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-under 65 (both spouses) $17,900married, filing jointly***
ally to each email, we do appreciate your
65 or older (one spouse) $18,950 feedback and will consider your comments as
we revise our tax products.65 or older (both spouses) $20,000
Ordering forms and publications. Visitmarried, filing separately any age  $ 3,500 www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theunder 65 $14,400qualifying widow(er) with
address below and receive a response within 10dependent child 65 or older $15,450 days after your request is received.
*  If you were born before January 2, 1944, you are considered to be 65 or older at the end of 2008. Internal Revenue Service**  Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway services that is not exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613 States (even if you can exclude part or all of it). Do not include any social security benefits unless
 (a) you are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during
 2008, or (b) one-half of your social security benefits plus your other gross income is more than $25,000 
Tax questions. If you have a tax question,($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) applies, see the Form 1040 instructions to figure the taxable part
 of social security benefits you must include in gross income. check the information available on www.irs.gov
*** If you did not live with your spouse at the end of 2008 (or on the date your spouse died) and or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxyour gross income was at least $3,500, you must file a return regardless of your age. questions sent to either of the above addresses.
Page 2 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 3 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Useful Items Table 2. 2008 Filing Requirements for Dependents 
You may want to see: See Exemptions for Dependents to find out if you are a dependent.
Publication If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see
❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, and if you must file a return.
Administrators In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, and
capital gain distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation, taxable❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and
social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned incomeDependents
from a trust. Earned income includes wages, tips, professional fees, and taxable❏ 4492-B Information for Affected scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income is the total of your unearned andTaxpayers in the Midwestern earned income.Disaster Areas Caution. If your gross income was $3,500 or more, you usually cannot be claimed
as a dependent unless you are a qualifying child. For details, see Exemptions forForm (and Instructions)
Dependents.
❏ 1040X Amended U.S. Individual Income
Tax Return
Single dependentsÐ Were you either age 65 or older or blind?❏ 2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.of Representative
1. Your unearned income was more than $900.❏ 8332 Release/Revocation of Release of 2. Your earned income was more than $5,450.Claim to Exemption for Child by
3. Your gross income was more than the larger of ÐCustodial Parent
a. $900, or❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's
b. Your earned income (up to $5,150) plus $300.Interest and Dividends
❏ 8914 Exemption Amount for Taxpayers M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.Housing Midwestern Displaced
Individuals 1. Your unearned income was more than $2,250 ($3,600 if 65 or older and
blind).
2. Your earned income was more than $6,800 ($8,150 if 65 or older and
blind).
Who Must File 3. Your gross income was more than the larger of±
a. $2,250 ($3,600 if 65 or older and blind), orIf you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien,
b. Your earned income (up to $5,150) plus $1,650 ($3,000 if 65 or olderwhether you must file a federal income tax return
and blind).depends on your gross income, your filing sta-
tus, your age, and whether you are a dependent.
For details, see Table 1 and Table 2. You also
must file if one of the situations described in Married dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind?
Table 3 applies. The filing requirements apply M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.even if you owe no tax.
1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate You may have to pay a penalty if you are
return and itemizes deductions.required to file a return but fail to do so. If you
2. Your unearned income was more than $900.willfully fail to file a return, you may be subject to
criminal prosecution. 3. Your earned income was more than $5,450.
For information on what form to use Ð Form 4. Your gross income was more than the larger of Ð
1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040 Ð see the a. $900, orinstructions in your tax package.
b.  Your earned income (up to $5,150) plus $300.
Gross income. Gross income is all income
you receive in the form of money, goods, prop- M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
erty, and services that is not exempt from tax. If 1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separateyou are married and live with your spouse in a return and itemizes deductions.community property state, half of any income
2. Your unearned income was more than $1,950 ($3,000 if 65 or older anddefined by state law as community income may
blind).be considered yours. For a list of community
property states, see Community property states 3. Your earned income was more than $6,500 ($7,550 if 65 or older and
under Married Filing Separately, later. blind).
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of±Self-employed persons. If you are
self-employed in a business that provides serv- a. $1,950 ($3,000 if 65 or older and blind), or
ices (where products are not a factor), your b. Your earned income (up to $5,150) plus $1,350 ($2,400 if 65 or oldergross income from that business is the gross and blind).receipts. If you are self-employed in a business
involving manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
ing, your gross income from that business is the
total sales minus the cost of goods sold. To this
Filing status. Your filing status generally de- Age. Age is a factor in determining if you mustfigure, you add any income from investments
pends on whether you are single or married. In file a return only if you are 65 or older at the endand from incidental or outside operations or
some cases, it depends on other factors as well. of your tax year. For 2008, you are 65 or older ifsources.
Whether you are single or married is determined you were born before January 2, 1944.
You must file Form 1040 if you owe any as of the last day of your tax year, which is
self-employment tax. December 31 for most taxpayers. Filing status is
TIP
discussed in detail later in this publication.
Publication 501 (2008) Page 3

Page 4 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Individuals With Income From U.S.Table 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2008 Return
Possessions
If any of the four conditions listed below applied to you for 2008, you must file a
If you had income from Guam, the Common-return. wealth of Northern Mariana Islands, American
Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special rules1. You owe any special taxes, including any of the following. may apply when determining whether you must
file a U.S. federal income tax return. In addition,
a. Alternative minimum tax. (See the Form 1040 instructions for line 45.) you may have to file a return with the individual
possession government. See Publication 570
b. Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement for more information.
arrangement (IRA), or other tax-favored account. (See Publication 590,
Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), and Publication 969, Health Dependents
Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.) But if you are filing a
A person who is a dependent may still have toreturn only because you owe this tax, you can file Form 5329 by itself.
file a return. This depends on the amount of the
dependent's earned income, unearned income,c. Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer (see
and gross income. For details, see Table 2. APublication 531, Reporting Tip Income) or on wages you received from an dependent may also have to file if one of theemployer who did not withhold these taxes (see Form 8919). situations described in Table 3 applies.
d. Write-in taxes, including uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad Responsibility of parent. If a dependent
retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer or on group-term life child who must file an income tax return cannot
insurance and additional tax on health savings accounts. (See Publication 531, file it for any reason, such as age, a parent,
Publication 969, and the Form 1040 instructions for line 61.) guardian, or other legally responsible person
must file it for the child. If the child cannot sign
the return, the parent or guardian must sign thee. Household employment taxes. But if you are filing a return only because you
child's name followed by the words ªBy (yourowe these taxes, you can file Schedule H by itself.
signature), parent for minor child.º
f. Recapture taxes. (See the Form 1040 instructions for lines 44 and 61.) Earned income. This is salaries, wages, pro-
fessional fees, and other amounts received as
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your pay for work you actually perform. Earned in-
employer. These payments should be shown in box 9 of your Form W-2. (See come (only for purposes of filing requirements
Publication 596, Earned Income Credit (EIC).) and the standard deduction) also includes any
part of a scholarship that you must include in
your gross income. See chapter 1 of Publication3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Schedule SE
970, Tax Benefits for Education, for more infor-(Form 1040) and its instructions.)
mation on taxable and nontaxable scholarships.
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled Child's earnings. Amounts a child earns by
organization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes. performing services are his or her gross income.
(See Schedule SE (Form 1040) and its instructions.) This is true even if under local law the child's
parents have the right to the earnings and may
actually have received them. If the child does not
pay the tax due on this income, the parent isabroad, including any income you can excludeFiling Requirements liable for the tax.under the foreign earned income exclusion. Forfor Most Taxpayers more information on special tax rules that may Unearned income. This is income such asapply to you, see Publication 54, Tax Guide forYou must file a return if your gross income for interest, dividends, and capital gains. Trust dis-U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad.the year was at least the amount shown on the tributions of interest, dividends, capital gains,appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents should and survivor annuities are considered unearnedseeTable 2  instead. income also.Residents of Puerto Rico
Election to report child's unearned incomeGenerally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a bonaDeceased Persons on parent's return.  You may be able to in-fide resident of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. clude your child's interest and dividend incomeYou must file an income tax return for a dece- income tax return if you meet the income re- on your tax return. If you choose to do this, yourdent (a person who died) if both of the following quirements. This is in addition to any legal re- child will not have to file a return. However, all ofare true. quirement you may have to file an income tax the following conditions must be met.
return with Puerto Rico.1. You are the surviving spouse, executor, • Your child was under age 19 (or under
If you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Ricoadministrator, or legal representative. age 24 if a full-time student). (A child born
for the whole year, your U.S. gross income does on January 1, 1990, is considered to be2. The decedent met the filing requirements not include income from sources within Puerto age 19 at the end of 2008; you cannotdescribed in this publication at the time of make the election for this child unless theRico. However, include in your U.S. gross in-his or her death. child was a full-time student. Similarly, acome any income you received for your services
For more information, see Final Return for child born on January 1, 1985, is consid-as an employee of the United States or any U.S.
Decedent in Publication 559. ered to be age 24 at the end of 2008; youagency. If you receive income from Puerto Ri-
cannot make the election for this child.)can sources that is not subject to U.S. tax, you
must reduce your standard deduction, which • Your child had gross income only from in-
U.S. Citizens or Resident Aliens reduces the amount of income you can have terest and dividends (including capital gain
Living Abroad distributions and Alaska Permanent Fundbefore you must file a U.S. income tax return.
dividends).For more information, see Publication 570,For purposes of determining whether you must
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income Fromfile a return, you must include in your gross • The interest and dividend income was less
income all of the income you earned or received U.S. Possessions. than $9,000.
Page 4 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 5 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your child is required to file a return for file a joint return, or you can file separate re-
2008 unless you make this election. turns.Filing Status
• Your child does not file a joint return for Considered married. You are considered
You must determine your filing status before you2008. married for the whole year if on the last day of
can determine your filing requirements, stan- your tax year you and your spouse meet any one• No estimated tax payment was made for dard deduction (discussed later), and correct of the following tests.2008 and no 2007 overpayment was ap- tax. You figure your correct tax by using the
plied to 2008 under your child's name and 1. You are married and living together assection of the Tax Computation Worksheet or
social security number. husband and wife.the column in the Tax Table that applies to your
filing status.• No federal income tax was withheld from 2. You are living together in a common lawYou also use your filing status in determiningyour child's income under the backup with- marriage that is recognized in the statewhether you are eligible to claim certain otherholding rules. where you now live or in the state wheredeductions and credits. the common law marriage began.• You are the parent whose return must be There are five filing statuses:
used when making the election to report 3. You are married and living apart, but not• Single,your child's unearned income. legally separated under a decree of di-
vorce or separate maintenance.• Married Filing Jointly,
For more information, see Form 8814 and
4. You are separated under an interlocutory• Married Filing Separately,Parent's Election To Report Child's Interest and
(not final) decree of divorce. For purposesDividends in Publication 929. • Head of Household, and of filing a joint return, you are not consid-
ered divorced.• Qualifying Widow(er) With DependentOther Situations Child.
Spouse died during the year. If yourYou may have to file a tax return even if your If more than one filing status applies to you, spouse died during the year, you are consideredgross income is less than the amount shown in choose the one that will give you the lowest tax. married for the whole year for filing status pur-Table 1  or Table 2  for your filing status. See poses.Table 3 for those other situations when you must Marital Status If you did not remarry before the end of thefile. tax year, you can file a joint return for yourselfIn general, your filing status depends on and your deceased spouse. For the next 2whether you are considered unmarried or mar- years, you may be entitled to the special benefitsried. For federal tax purposes, a marriage described later under Qualifying Widow(er) WithWho Should File means only a legal union between a man and a Dependent Child.woman as husband and wife. If you remarried before the end of the taxEven if you do not have to file, you should file a year, you can file a joint return with your newtax return if you can get money back. For exam- Unmarried persons. You are considered un- spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status isple, you should file if one of the following applies. married for the whole year if, on the last day of married filing separately for that year.your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-
1. You had income tax withheld from your Married persons living apart. If you liverated from your spouse under a divorce or sepa-
pay. apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,rate maintenance decree.
you may be considered unmarried. If this appliesState law governs whether you are married2. You made estimated tax payments for the
to you, you can file as head of household evenor legally separated under a divorce or separateyear or had any of your overpayment for
though you are not divorced or legally sepa-maintenance decree.last year applied to this year's estimated
rated. If you qualify to file as head of householdtax. Divorced persons.  If you are divorced instead of as married filing separately, yourunder a final decree by the last day of the year,3. You qualify for the earned income credit. standard deduction will be higher. Also, your taxyou are considered unmarried for the wholeSee Publication 596, Earned Income may be lower, and you may be able to claim theyear.Credit (EIC), for more information. earned income credit. See Head of Household,
later.Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a4. You qualify for the additional child tax
divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filingcredit. See the instructions in your tax
tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at theforms package for more information on this Single
time of divorce you intended to and did remarrycredit.
each other in the next tax year, you and your Your filing status is single if, on the last day of5. You qualify for the health coverage tax spouse must file as married individuals. the year, you are unmarried or legally separatedcredit. For information about this credit, from your spouse under a divorce or separateAnnulled marriages. If you obtain a courtsee Form 8885, Health Coverage Tax maintenance decree, and you do not qualify fordecree of annulment, which holds that no validCredit. another filing status. To determine your maritalmarriage ever existed, you are considered un- status on the last day of the year, see Marital6. You qualify for the refundable credit for married even if you filed joint returns for earlier Status, earlier.prior year minimum tax. See Form 8801, years. You must file amended returns (FormCredit for Prior Year Minimum Tax Ð Indi- 1040X) claiming single or head of household Widow(er). Your filing status may be single ifviduals, Estates, and Trusts. status for all tax years affected by the annulment you were widowed before January 1, 2008, andthat are not closed by the statute of limitations7. You qualify for the recovery rebate credit. did not remarry before the end of 2008. How-for filing a tax return. The statute of limitationsSee the instructions in your tax forms ever, you might be able to use another filinggenerally does not expire until 3 years after yourpackage for information about this credit. status that will give you a lower tax. See Head oforiginal return was filed. Household and Qualifying Widow(er) With De-8. You qualify for the first-time homebuyer
Head of household or qualifying widow(er) pendent Child, later, to see if you qualify.credit. See Form 5405, First-Time
with dependent child. If you are consideredHomebuyer Credit.
How to file. You can file Form 1040EZ (if youunmarried, you may be able to file as a head of
have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,household or as a qualifying widow(er) with a
and meet other requirements), Form 1040A, ordependent child. See Head of Household  and
Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or FormQualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child  to
1040, show your filing status as single by check-see if you qualify.
ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of
Married persons. If you are considered mar- the Tax Table, or Section A of the Tax Computa-
ried for the whole year, you and your spouse can tion Worksheet, to figure your tax.
Publication 501 (2008) Page 5

Page 6 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Innocent spouse relief. nonresident alien or dual-status alien who wasMarried Filing Jointly
married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the2. Separation of liability, which applies to joint end of the year, the spouses can choose to file aYou can choose married filing jointly as your filers who are divorced, widowed, legally joint return. If you do file a joint return, you andfiling status if you are married and both you and separated, or who have not lived together your spouse are both treated as U.S. residentsyour spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint for the 12 months ending on the date elec- for the entire tax year. See chapter 1 of Publica-return, you report your combined income and tion of this relief is filed. tion 519. deduct your combined allowable expenses. You
3. Equitable relief.can file a joint return even if one of you had no
income or deductions. Married Filing Separately You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-If you and your spouse decide to file a joint cent Spouse Relief, to request any of thesereturn, your tax may be lower than your com- You can choose married filing separately askinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spousebined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your your filing status if you are married. This filingRelief, explains these kinds of relief and whostandard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc- status may benefit you if you want to be respon-may qualify for them.tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax sible only for your own tax or if it results in less
benefits that do not apply to other filing statuses. tax than filing a joint return.Signing a joint return. For a return to be
considered a joint return, both husband and wife If you and your spouse do not agree to file aIf you and your spouse each have in-
generally must sign the return. joint return, you have to use this filing statuscome, you may want to figure your tax
unless you qualify for head of household status,both on a joint return and on separate Spouse died before signing. If your
TIP discussed next.returns (using the filing status of married filing spouse died before signing the return, the exec- You may be able to choose head of house-separately). You can choose the method that utor or administrator must sign the return for hold filing status if you live apart from yourgives the two of you the lower combined tax. your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has spouse, meet certain tests, and are consideredyet been appointed as executor or administrator,How to file. If you file as married filing jointly, unmarried (explained later, under Head ofyou can sign the return for your spouse andyou can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you Household). This can apply to you even if youenter ªFiling as surviving spouseº in the areahave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind, are not divorced or legally separated. If youwhere you sign the return.and meet other requirements, you can file Form qualify to file as head of household, instead of as
Spouse away from home. If your spouse is1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A, married filing separately, your tax may be lower,
away from home, you should prepare the return,show this filing status by checking the box on you may be able to claim the earned income
sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so thatline 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of the credit and certain other credits, and your stan-
it can be filed on time.Tax Table, or Section B of the Tax Computation dard deduction will be higher. The head of
Worksheet, to figure your tax. household filing status allows you to choose theInjury or disease prevents signing. If your
standard deduction even if your spouse choosesspouse cannot sign because of injury or diseaseSpouse died during the year. If your spouse
to itemize deductions. See Head of Household,and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse'sdied during the year, you are considered mar-
later, for more information.name in the proper space on the return followedried for the whole year and can choose married
by the words ªBy (your name), Husband (orfiling jointly as your filing status. See Spouse Unless you are required to file sepa-
Wife).º Be sure to also sign in the space pro-died during the year , under Married persons , rately, you should figure your tax both
vided for your signature. Attach a dated state-earlier. ways (on a joint return and on separate
TIP
ment, signed by you, to the return. The returns). This way you can make sure you areDivorced persons. If you are divorced under statement should include the form number of the using the filing status that results in the lowesta final decree by the last day of the year, you are return you are filing, the tax year, the reason combined tax. However, you will generally payconsidered unmarried for the whole year and your spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse more combined tax on separate returns thanyou cannot choose married filing jointly as your has agreed to your signing for him or her. you would on a joint return for the reasons listedfiling status.
under Special Rules, later.Signing as guardian of spouse. If you are
the guardian of your spouse who is mentally
How to file. If you file a separate return, youincompetent, you can sign the return for yourFiling a Joint Return
generally report only your own income, exemp-spouse as guardian.
Both you and your spouse must include all of tions, credits, and deductions on your individualSpouse in combat zone. If your spouse isyour income, exemptions, and deductions on return. You can claim an exemption for yourunable to sign the return because he or she isyour joint return. spouse if your spouse had no gross income andserving in a combat zone (such as the Persian was not the dependent of another person. How-Accounting period. Both of you must use the Gulf area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or a ever, if your spouse had any gross income orsame accounting period, but you can use differ- qualified hazardous duty area (Bosnia and Her- was the dependent of someone else, you cannotent accounting methods. zegovina, Croatia, or Macedonia), and you do claim an exemption for him or her on your sepa-not have a power of attorney or other statement,Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held rate return.you can sign for your spouse. Attach a signedresponsible, jointly and individually, for the tax If you file as married filing separately, youstatement to your return that explains that yourand any interest or penalty due on your joint can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select thisspouse is serving in a combat zone. For morereturn. One spouse may be held responsible for filing status by checking the box on line 3 ofinformation on special tax rules for persons whoall the tax due even if all the income was earned either form. You also must enter your spouse'sare serving in a combat zone, or who are inby the other spouse. full name in the space provided and must entermissing status as a result of serving in a combat your spouse's SSN or ITIN in the space providedDivorced taxpayer. You may be held jointly zone, see Publication 3, Armed Forces' Tax unless your spouse does not have and is notand individually responsible for any tax, interest, Guide. required to have an SSN or ITIN. Use the Mar-and penalties due on a joint return filed before
Other reasons spouse cannot sign. If ried filing separately column of the Tax Table oryour divorce. This responsibility may apply even
your spouse cannot sign the joint return for any Section C of the Tax Computation Worksheet toif your divorce decree states that your former
other reason, you can sign for your spouse only figure your tax.spouse will be responsible for any amounts due
if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legalon previously filed joint returns.
document giving you permission to act for your
Relief from joint responsibility. In some spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copy Special Rules
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint liabil- of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848.
If you choose married filing separately as yourity for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return
filing status, the following special rules apply.for items of the other spouse which were incor- Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. A
Because of these special rules, you will usuallyrectly reported on the joint return. You can ask joint return generally cannot be filed if either
pay more tax on a separate return than if youfor relief no matter how small the liability. spouse is a nonresident alien at any time during
used another filing status that you qualify for.There are three types of relief available. the tax year. However, if one spouse was a
Page 6 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 7 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Your tax rate generally will be higher than Rental activity losses. If you actively partici- If you qualify to file as head of house-
it would be on a joint return. hold, your tax rate usually will be lowerpated in a passive rental real estate activity that
than the rates for single or married fil-produced a loss, you generally can deduct the
TIP2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al- ing separately. You will also receive a higherloss from your nonpassive income up toternative minimum tax will be half that al- standard deduction than if you file as single or$25,000. This is called a special allowance.lowed to a joint return filer. married filing separately.However, married persons filing separate re-
3. You cannot take the credit for child and turns who lived together at any time during thedependent care expenses in most cases, year cannot claim this special allowance. Mar- How to file. If you file as head of household,and the amount that you can exclude from ried persons filing separate returns who lived you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040.income under an employer's dependent apart at all times during the year are each al- Indicate your choice of this filing status bycare assistance program is limited to lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance checking the box on line 4 of either form. Use the$2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a joint for losses from passive real estate activities. Head of a household column of the Tax Table orreturn). See Rental Activities in Publication 925, Passive Section D of the Tax Computation Worksheet to
4. You cannot take the earned income credit. Activity and At-Risk Rules. figure your tax.
5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit for
adoption expenses in most cases. Community property states. If you live in Ari- Considered Unmarriedzona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,6. You cannot take the education credits (the
New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin To qualify for head of household status, youHope credit and the lifetime learning
and file separately, your income may be consid- must be either unmarried or considered unmar-credit), the deduction for student loan inter-
ered separate income or community income forest, or the tuition and fees deduction. ried on the last day of the year. You are consid-
income tax purposes. See Publication 555, ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if7. You cannot exclude any interest income Community Property. you meet all the following tests. from qualified U.S. savings bonds that you
used for higher education expenses. 1. You file a separate return (defined earlier
under Joint Return After Separate Re-8. If you lived with your spouse at any time Joint Return After
turns).during the tax year: Separate Returns
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-a. You cannot claim the credit for the eld- You can change your filing status by filing an ing up your home for the tax year.erly or the disabled. amended return using Form 1040X.
3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur-b. You will have to include in income more If you or your spouse (or both of you) file a
ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your(up to 85%) of any social security or separate return, you generally can change to a
spouse is considered to live in your homeequivalent railroad retirement benefits joint return any time within 3 years from the due
even if he or she is temporarily absent dueyou received, and date of the separate return or returns. This does
to special circumstances. See Temporarynot include any extensions. A separate returnc. You cannot roll over amounts from a absences, later.includes a return filed by you or your spousetraditional IRA into a Roth IRA.
claiming married filing separately, single, or 4. Your home was the main home of your
head of household filing status. child, stepchild, or foster child for more9. The following credits and deductions are
reduced at income levels that are half of than half the year. (See Home of qualifying
those for a joint return: person, later, for rules applying to a child's
Separate Returns birth, death, or temporary absence duringa. The child tax credit, After Joint Return the year.)
b. The retirement savings contributions 5. You must be able to claim an exemptionOnce you file a joint return, you cannot choosecredit, for the child. However, you meet this test ifto file separate returns for that year after the due
c. Itemized deductions, and you cannot claim the exemption only be-date of the return.
cause the noncustodial parent can claimd. The deduction for personal exemptions. the child using the rules described later inException. A personal representative for a Children of divorced or separated parents10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 decedent can change from a joint return elected under Qualifying Child or in Support Test(instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re- by the surviving spouse to a separate return for for Children of Divorced or Separated Par-turn). the decedent. The personal representative has ents under Qualifying Relative. The gen-1 year from the due date (including extensions)11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you eral rules for claiming an exemption for aof the return to make the change. See Publica-cannot claim the standard deduction. If you dependent are explained later under Ex-tion 559 for more information on filing income taxcan claim the standard deduction, your ba- emptions for Dependents.returns for a decedent.sic standard deduction is half the amount
allowed on a joint return. If you were considered married for part
Head of Household of the year and lived in a community12. Your first-time homebuyer credit is limited
property state (listed earlier under Mar-to $3,750 (instead of $7,500 if you filed a
CAUTION
! You may be able to file as head of household if ried Filing Separately), special rules may applyjoint return). you meet all the following requirements. in determining your income and expenses. See
Publication 555 for more information.1. You are unmarried or ªconsidered unmar-Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
riedº on the last day of the year.You may not be able to deduct all or part of your Nonresident alien spouse. You are consid-contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your 2. You paid more than half the cost of keep- ered unmarried for head of household purposesspouse was covered by an employee retirement ing up a home for the year. if your spouse was a nonresident alien at anyplan at work during the year. Your deduction is
3. A ªqualifying personº lived with you in the time during the year and you do not choose toreduced or eliminated if your income is more
home for more than half the year (except treat your nonresident spouse as a residentthan a certain amount. This amount is much
for temporary absences, such as school). alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifyinglower for married individuals who file separately
However, if the ªqualifying personº is your person for head of household purposes. Youand lived together at any time during the year.
dependent parent, he or she does not must have another qualifying person and meetFor more information, see How Much Can You
have to live with you. See Special rule for the other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofDeduct? in chapter 1 of Publication 590, Individ-
parent, later, under Qualifying Person. household.ual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs).
Publication 501 (2008) Page 7

Page 8 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Earned income credit. Even if you are con- Choice to treat spouse as resident. You up a home for the year. You can determine
sidered unmarried for head of household pur- whether you paid more than half of the cost ofare considered married if you choose to treat
poses because you are married to a nonresident keeping up a home by using the following work-your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1
alien, you are still considered married for pur- sheet.of Publication 519.
poses of the earned income credit (unless you
meet the five tests listed earlier under Consid-
ered Unmarried  ).You are not entitled to the Keeping Up a Home
credit unless you file a joint return with your
To qualify for head of household status, youspouse and meet other qualifications.
 See Publication 596 for more information. must pay more than half of the cost of keeping
Table 4. Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not youqualifying child (such as a son,
can claim an exemption for the person.daughter, or grandchild who lived
with you more than half the year he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.and meets certain other tests)2
exemption for him or her
he or she is married and you cannot claim an not a qualifying person.3
exemption for him or her
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6qualifying relative4 who is your
father or mother you cannot claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
he or she lived with you more than half the year, a qualifying person.qualifying relative4 other than your
and he or she is related to you in one of thefather or mother (such as a
ways listed under Relatives who do not have tograndparent, brother, or sister who
live with you on page 15, and you can claim anmeets certain tests).
exemption for him or her5
he or she did not live with you more than half the not a qualifying person.
year
he or she is not related to you in one of the ways not a qualifying person
listed under Relatives who do not have to live
with you on page 15 and is your qualifying
relative only because he or she lived with you all
year as a member of your household
you cannot claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term ªqualifying childº is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later. Note: If you are a noncustodial parent, the term ªqualifying childº for
head of household filing status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described
under Children of divorced or separated parents under Qualifying Child, later. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child
generally is your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child is not a qualifying child for whom you can claim an
exemption.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you cannot claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone
else's return.
4The term ªqualifying relativeº is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later.
5If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple
Support Agreement.
6See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
Page 8 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 9 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the year and his gross income was $5,000. Be- continue to keep up the home during the ab-Cost of Keeping Up a Home
Keep for Your Records
 cause he does not meet the age test (explained sence.
later under Qualifying Child ), your son is not Kidnapped child. You may be eligible to fileyour qualifying child. Because he does not meet as head of household even if the child who isAmount the gross income test (explained later under your qualifying person has been kidnapped. YouYou Total Qualifying Relative) , he is not your qualifying can claim head of household filing status if allPaid Cost relative. As a result, he is not your qualifying the following statements are true.person for head of household purposes.Property taxes $ $
1. The child must be presumed by law en-Mortgage interest expense Example 3 Ð girlfriend. Your girlfriend forcement authorities to have been kid-Rent lived with you all year. Even though she may be napped by someone who is not a memberUtility charges your qualifying relative if the gross income and of your family or the child's family.Upkeep and repairs support tests (explained later) are met, she isProperty insurance 2. In the year of the kidnapping, the childnot your qualifying person for head of householdFood consumed lived with you for more than half the part ofpurposes because she is not related to you inon the premises the year before the kidnapping.one of the ways listed under Relatives who doOther household expenses not have to live with you. See Table 4. 3. You would have qualified for head ofTotals $ $
household filing status if the child had notExample 4 Ðgirlfriend's child. The facts been kidnapped.Minus total amount you ( ) are the same as in Example 3 except your girl-paid This treatment applies for all years until thefriend's 10-year-old son also lived with you all
child is returned. However, the last year thisyear. He is not your qualifying child and, be-
Amount others paid $ treatment can apply is the earlier of:cause he is your girlfriend's qualifying child, he is
not your qualifying relative (see Not a Qualifying 1. The year there is a determination that theChild Test , later). As a result, he is not your child is dead, orIf the total amount you paid is more than the amount qualifying person for head of household pur-others paid, you meet the requirement of paying more poses. 2. The year the child would have reachedthan half the cost of keeping up the home.
age 18.Home of qualifying person. Generally, the
qualifying person must live with you for moreCosts you include. Include in the cost of up- than half of the year. Qualifying Widow(er)keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest,
real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re- Special rule for parent. If your qualifying With Dependent Child
pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home. person is your father or mother, you may be
If you used payments you received under If your spouse died in 2008, you can use marriedeligible to file as head of household even if your
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families filing jointly as your filing status for 2008 if youfather or mother does not live with you. How-
(TANF) or other public assistance programs to otherwise qualify to use that status. The year ofever, you must be able to claim an exemption for
pay part of the cost of keeping up your home, death is the last year for which you can file jointlyyour father or mother. Also, you must pay more
you cannot count them as money you paid. with your deceased spouse. See Married Filingthan half the cost of keeping up a home that was
However, you must include them in the total cost Jointly, earlier.the main home for the entire year for your father
of keeping up your home to figure if you paid You may be eligible to use qualifyingor mother. You are keeping up a main home for
over half the cost. widow(er) with dependent child as your filingyour father or mother if you pay more than half
status for 2 years following the year your spousethe cost of keeping your parent in a rest home orCosts you do not include. Do not include in died. For example, if your spouse died in 2007home for the elderly.the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing, and you have not remarried, you may be able toeducation, medical treatment, vacations, life in- Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as use this filing status for 2008 and 2009. Thesurance, or transportation. Also, do not include head of household if the individual who qualifies rules for using this filing status are explained inthe rental value of a home you own or the value you for this filing status is born or dies during the detail here.of your services or those of a member of your year. You must have provided more than half of This filing status entitles you to use jointhousehold. the cost of keeping up a home that was the return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-Also do not include any government or chari- individual's main home for more than half of the tion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).table assistance you received because of your year, or, if less, the period during which the This status does not entitle you to file a jointtemporary relocation due to the storms, torna- individual lived. return.does, or flooding in a Midwestern disaster area.
Example. You are unmarried. Your mother, How to file. If you file as a qualifying widow(er)
for whom you can claim an exemption, lived in with dependent child, you can use either FormQualifying Person an apartment by herself. She died on Septem- 1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing status
ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartment by checking the box on line 5 of either form. UseSee Table 4, earlier, to see who is a qualifying for the year until her death was $6,000. You paid the Married filing jointly column of the Tax Tableperson. $4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your or Section B of the Tax Computation WorksheetAny person not described in Table 4 is not a brother made no other payments towards your to figure your tax.qualifying person. mother's support. Your mother had no income.
Because you paid more than half of the cost of Eligibility rules. You are eligible to file yourExample 1 Ðchild. Your unmarried son keeping up your mother's apartment from Janu- 2008 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-lived with you all year and was 18 years old at ary 1 until her death, and you can claim an pendent child if you meet all the following tests.the end of the year. He did not provide more exemption for her, you can file as a head of • You were entitled to file a joint return withthan half of his own support and does not meet household. your spouse for the year your spousethe tests to be a qualifying child of anyone else.
Temporary absences. You and your quali- died. It does not matter whether you actu-As a result, he is your qualifying child (see Quali-
fying person are considered to live together ally filed a joint return.fying Child, later) and, because he is single, is a
even if one or both of you are temporarily absentqualifying person for you to claim head of house- • Your spouse died in 2006 or 2007 and youfrom your home due to special circumstanceshold filing status. did not remarry before the end of 2008.such as illness, education, business, vacation,
Example 2 Ðchild who is not qualifying or military service. It must be reasonable to • You have a child or stepchild for whom
person. The facts are the same as in Example assume that the absent person will return to the you can claim an exemption. This does
1 except your son was 25 years old at the end of home after the temporary absence. You must not include a foster child.
Publication 501 (2008) Page 9

Page 10 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• This child lived in your home all year, ex- Who cannot claim a personal exemption. If Your Spouse's Exemption
cept for temporary absences. See Tempo- you are entitled to claim an exemption for a
Your spouse is never considered your depen-rary absences, earlier, under Head of dependent (such as your child), that dependent
dent.Household. There are also exceptions, de- cannot claim a personal exemption on his or her
scribed later, for a child who was born or own tax return. Joint return. On a joint return, you can claimdied during the year and for a kidnapped
one exemption for yourself and one for yourchild. Exemption for individual displaced by a Mid- spouse.western disaster. You may be able to claim a• You paid more than half the cost of keep-
$500 exemption if you provided housing to aing up a home for the year. See Keeping Separate return. If you file a separate return,
person displaced by the storms, tornadoes, orUp a Home, earlier, under Head of House- you can claim the exemption for your spouse
flooding in a Midwestern disaster area. See Ex-hold. only if your spouse had no gross income, is not
emption for Individual Displaced by a Midwest- filing a return, and was not the dependent of
ern Disaster, later. another taxpayer. This is true even if the otherExample. John Reed's wife died in 2006.
taxpayer does not actually claim your spouse asJohn has not remarried. He has continued dur- How to claim exemptions. How you claim an a dependent. This is also true if your spouse is aing 2007 and 2008 to keep up a home for himself
exemption on your tax return depends on which nonresident alien.and his child, who lives with him and for whom
form you file.he can claim an exemption. For 2006 he was Head of household. If you qualify for head
entitled to file a joint return for himself and his of household filing status because you are con-Form 1040EZ filers. If you file Form
deceased wife. For 2007 and 2008, he can file sidered unmarried, you can claim an exemption1040EZ, the exemption amount is combined
as a qualifying widower with a dependent child. for your spouse if the conditions described in thewith the standard deduction and entered on line
After 2008, he can file as head of household if he preceding paragraph are satisfied.5.qualifies. To claim the exemption for your spouse,Form 1040A filers. If you file Form 1040A, check the box on line 6b of Form 1040 or FormDeath or birth. You may be eligible to file as a complete lines 6a through 6d. The total number 1040A and enter the name of your spouse in thequalifying widow(er) with dependent child if the of exemptions you can claim is the total in the space to the right of the box. Enter the SSN orchild who qualifies you for this filing status is box on line 6d. Also complete line 26. ITIN of your spouse in the space provided at theborn or dies during the year. You must have top of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.Form 1040 filers. If you file Form 1040,provided more than half of the cost of keeping up
complete lines 6a through 6d.The total numbera home that was the child's main home during Death of spouse. If your spouse died duringof exemptions you can claim is the total in thethe entire part of the year he or she was alive. the year, you generally can claim your spouse'sbox on line 6d. Also complete line 42. exemption under the rules just explained in JointKidnapped child. You may be eligible to file
return. If you file a separate return for the year,as a qualifying widow(er) with dependent child, U.S. citizen or resident alien.  If you are a you may be able to claim your spouse's exemp-even if the child who qualifies you for this filing U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national tion under the rules just described in Separatestatus has been kidnapped. You can claim quali- (defined later) or a resident of Canada or Mex- return.fying widow(er) with dependent child filing status ico, you may qualify for any of the exemptions If you remarried during the year, you cannotif all the following statements are true. discussed here. take an exemption for your deceased spouse.
1. The child must be presumed by law en- If you are a surviving spouse without gross
Nonresident aliens.  Generally, if you are aforcement authorities to have been kid- income and you remarry in the year your spouse
nonresident alien (other than a resident of Can-napped by someone who is not a member died, you can be claimed as an exemption on
ada or Mexico, or certain residents of India orof your family or the child's family. both the final separate return of your deceased
Korea), you can qualify for only one personal spouse and the separate return of your new2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child exemption for yourself. You cannot claim ex- spouse for that year. If you file a joint return withlived with you for more than half the part of emptions for a spouse or dependents. your new spouse, you can be claimed as anthe year before the kidnapping.
exemption only on that return.These restrictions do not apply if you are a
3. You would have qualified for qualifying nonresident alien married to a U. S. citizen or
widow(er) with dependent child filing status Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-resident alien and have chosen to be treated as
if the child had not been kidnapped. tained a final decree of divorce or separatea resident of the United States.
maintenance by the end of the year, you cannot
More information. For more information onAs mentioned earlier, this filing status take your former spouse's exemption. This rule
exemptions if you are a nonresident alien, seeis available for only 2 years following applies even if you provided all of your former
chapter 5 in Publication 519.the year your spouse died. spouse's support.
CAUTION
!
Dual-status taxpayers. If you have been both Exemption for Individual
a nonresident alien and a resident alien in the Displaced by a Midwesternsame tax year, you should see Publication 519Exemptions Disasterfor information on determining your exemptions.
Exemptions reduce your taxable income. Gen- You may be able to take an additional exemption
Personal Exemptionserally, you can deduct $3,500 for each exemp- amount of $500 for providing housing to a per-
tion you claim in 2008. If you are entitled to two son displaced by the storms, tornadoes, orYou are generally allowed one exemption forexemptions for 2008, you would deduct $7,000 flooding in a Midwestern disaster area. You can-yourself and, if you are married, one exemption($3,500 ×  2). But you may lose part of the dollar not claim this amount for housing your spouse orfor your spouse. These are called personal ex-amount of your exemptions if your adjusted any of your dependents.emptions.gross income is above a certain amount. See You can take this exemption for up to four
Phaseout of Exemptions, later. individuals. Since the exemption is $500 per
You usually can claim exemptions for your- person, the maximum you can claim is $2,000.Your Own Exemptionself, your spouse, and each person you can You may be able to take this exemption if all of
claim as a dependent. the following are true.You can take one exemption for yourself unless
you can be claimed as a dependent by anotherTypes of exemptions. There are two types of • You provided housing in your main home
taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claimexemptions: personal exemptions and exemp- for a period of at least 60 consecutive
you as a dependent, you cannot take an exemp-tions for dependents. While each is worth the days to a person displaced by the storms,
tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer doessame amount ($3,500 for 2008), different rules, tornadoes, or flooding in a Midwestern dis-
not actually claim you as a dependent.discussed later, apply to each type. aster area.
Page 10 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 11 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 5. Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this publication.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund
and there would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns. 
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a
resident of Canada or Mexico, for some part of the year.1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the
child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, qualifying child of any other taxpayer.
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year, ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with
(b) under age 24 at the end of the year and a full-time you, or (b) must live with you all year as a member of your
student, or (c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. household2 (and your relationship must not violate local
law).
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of 3. The person's gross income for the year must be less than
the year.2 $3,500.3
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or 4. You must provide more than half of the person's total
her own support for the year. support for the year.4
5. If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more
than one person, you must be the person entitled to claim
the child as a qualifying child.
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents, and
 kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents, and kidnapped children.
• The person lived in a Midwestern disaster You can claim an exemption for a qualifying information, see the instructions in your tax
area when the disaster occurred. child or qualifying relative only if these three forms package.
tests are met.• You did not receive rent or any other
amount for providing the housing. 1. Dependent taxpayer test.
2. Joint return test.To claim the additional exemption amount, file Dependent Taxpayer Test
Form 8914, Exemption Amount for Taxpayers 3. Citizen or resident test. If you could be claimed as a dependent by an-Housing Midwestern Displaced Individuals. For
These three tests are explained in detail later. other person, you cannot claim anyone else as amore information, see Publication 4492-B, Infor-
All the requirements for claiming an exemp- dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child ormation for Affected Taxpayers in the Midwestern
tion for a dependent are summarized in Table 5. qualifying relative, you cannot claim that personDisaster Areas.
as a dependent.
Dependent not allowed a personal If you are filing a joint return and your spouseexemption. If you can claim an ex- could be claimed as a dependent by someoneemption for your dependent, the de-
CAUTION
! else, you and your spouse cannot claim anyExemptions for pendent cannot claim his or her own exemption dependents on your joint return.on his or her own tax return. This is true even ifDependents you do not claim the dependent's exemption on
your return or if the exemption will be reduced Joint Return TestYou are allowed one exemption for each person under the phaseout rule described underyou can claim as a dependent. You can claim an Phaseout of Exemptions, later. You generally cannot claim a married person asexemption for a dependent even if your depen-
a dependent if he or she files a joint return.dent files a return.
Housekeepers, maids, or servants. If theseThe term ªdependentº means: Example. You supported your 18-year-oldpeople work for you, you cannot claim exemp-
daughter, and she lived with you all year while• A qualifying child, or tions for them.
her husband was in the Armed Forces. The• A qualifying relative. Child tax credit. You may be entitled to a child couple files a joint return. Even though your
The terms ªqualifying childº and ªqualifying rela- tax credit for each qualifying child who was daughter is your qualifying child, you cannot
tiveº are defined later. under age 17 at the end of the year. For more take an exemption for her.
Publication 501 (2008) Page 11

Page 12 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception. The joint return test does not apply classroom and practical training are consideredRelationship Test
if a joint return is filed by the dependent and his full-time students.
To meet this test, a child must be:or her spouse merely as a claim for refund and
Permanently and totally disabled. Yourno tax liability would exist for either spouse on • Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, child is permanently and totally disabled if bothseparate returns. or a descendant (for example, your of the following apply.grandchild) of any of them, orExample. Your son and his wife each had • He or she cannot engage in any substan-• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-less than $3,000 of wages and no unearned tial gainful activity because of a physical orter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descen-income. Neither is required to file a tax return. mental condition.dant (for example, your niece or nephew)Taxes were taken out of their pay, so they filed a
of any of them. • A doctor determines the condition hasjoint return to get a refund. The exception to the
joint return test applies, so you are not disquali- lasted or can be expected to last continu-
fied from claiming their exemptions just because ously for at least a year or can lead toAdopted child. An adopted child is always
they filed a joint return. You can claim their death.treated as your own child. The term ªadopted
exemptions if you meet all the other require- childº includes a child who was lawfully placed
ments to do so. with you for legal adoption. Residency Test
To meet this test, your child must have lived withFoster child. A foster child is an individualCitizen or Resident Test you for more than half of the year. There arewho is placed with you by an authorized place-
exceptions for temporary absences, childrenment agency or by judgment, decree, or otherYou cannot claim a person as a dependent un- who were born or died during the year, kid-order of any court of competent jurisdiction.less that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident napped children, and children of divorced oralien, U.S. national, or a resident of Canada or separated parents.Mexico, for some part of the year. However, Age Testthere is an exception for certain adopted chil- Temporary absences. Your child is consid-dren, as explained next. To meet this test, a child must be: ered to have lived with you during periods of
Adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen or time when one of you, or both, are temporarily• Under age 19 at the end of the year,U.S. national who has legally adopted a child absent due to special circumstances such as:
• A full-time student under age 24 at the endwho is not a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, or • Illness,of the year, orU.S. national, this test is met if the child lived
with you as a member of your household all • Education,• Permanently and totally disabled at anyyear. This also applies if the child was lawfully time during the year, regardless of age. • Business,placed with you for legal adoption.
• Vacation, orChild's place of residence. Children usually Example. Your son turned 19 on December
are citizens or residents of the country of their • Military service.10. Unless he was permanently and totally dis-
parents. abled or a full-time student, he does not meet
If you were a U.S. citizen when your child the age test because, at the end of the year, he Death or birth of child. A child who was bornwas born, the child may be a U.S. citizen even if was not under age 19. or died during the year is treated as having livedthe other parent was a nonresident alien and the with you all year if your home was the child'schild was born in a foreign country. If so, this test Full-time student. A full-time student is a stu- home the entire time he or she was alive duringis met. dent who is enrolled for the number of hours or the year. The same is true if the child lived with
courses the school considers to be full-time at- you all year except for any required hospital stayForeign students' place of residence. For-
tendance. following birth.eign students brought to this country under a
qualified international education exchange pro- Student defined. To qualify as a student, Child born alive. You may be able to claimgram and placed in American homes for a tem- your child must be, during some part of each of an exemption for a child who was born aliveporary period generally are not U.S. residents any 5 calendar months of the year: during the year, even if the child lived only for aand do not meet this test. You cannot claim an moment. State or local law must treat the childexemption for them. However, if you provided a 1.  A full-time student at a school that has a as having been born alive. There must be proofhome for a foreign student, you may be able to regular teaching staff, course of study, and of a live birth shown by an official document,take a charitable contribution deduction. See a regularly enrolled student body at the such as a birth certificate. The child must beExpenses Paid for Student Living With You in school, or your qualifying child or qualifying relative, and allPublication 526, Charitable Contributions. the other tests to claim an exemption for a de-2.  A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
U.S. national. A U.S. national is an individual pendent must be met.ing course given by a school described in
who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or her (1), or by a state, county, or local govern- Stillborn child. You cannot claim an ex-allegiance to the United States. U.S. nationals ment agency. emption for a stillborn child.include American Samoans and Northern Mari- The 5 calendar months do not have to be con-ana Islanders who chose to become U.S. na- Kidnapped child. You can treat your child assecutive.tionals instead of U.S. citizens. meeting the residency test even if the child hasSpecial rules may apply for people who been kidnapped, but both of the following state-had to relocate because of the Mid-Qualifying Child ments must be true.western storms, tornadoes, or flooding.
TIP
For details, see Publication 4492-B.There are five tests that must be met for a child 1. The child is presumed by law enforcement
to be your qualifying child. The five tests are: authorities to have been kidnapped bySchool defined. A school can be an ele- someone who is not a member of yourmentary school, junior and senior high school,1. Relationship, family or the child's family.college, university, or technical, trade, or2. Age, 2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, themechanical school. However, an on-the-job
child lived with you for more than half oftraining course, correspondence school, or3. Residency,
the part of the year before the date of theschool offering courses only through the Internet4. Support, and kidnapping.does not count as a school.
5. Special test for qualifying child of more This treatment applies for all years until theVocational high school students. Stu-than one person. child is returned. However, the last year thisdents who work on ªco-opº jobs in private indus-
treatment can apply is the earlier of:These tests are explained next. try as a part of a school's regular course of
Page 12 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 13 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. The year there is a determination that the The exemption can be released for 1 year, Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-
child is dead, or for a number of specified years (for example, port provided by your new spouse is treated as
alternate years), or for all future years, as speci- provided by you.2. The year the child would have reached fied in the declaration. If the exemption is re-age 18. Parents who never married. This specialleased for more than 1 year, the original release rule for divorced or separated parents also ap-must be attached to the return of the noncus- plies to parents who never married.Children of divorced or separated parents. todial parent for the first year, and a copy must
In most cases, because of the residency test, a be attached for each later year.
child of divorced or separated parents is the Support Test (To Be a QualifyingDivorce decree or separation agreementqualifying child of the custodial parent. However, Child)made after 1984. If the divorce decree or sep-the child will be treated as the qualifying child of aration agreement went into effect after 1984,the noncustodial parent if all four of the following To meet this test, the child cannot have providedthe noncustodial parent can attach certainstatements are true. more than half of his or her own support for thepages from the decree or agreement instead of year.1. The parents: Form 8332. The decree or agreement must
This test is different from the support test tostate all three of the following.a. Are divorced or legally separated under be a qualifying relative, which is described later.
a decree of divorce or separate mainte- 1. The noncustodial parent can claim the However, to see what is or is not support, see
nance, child as a dependent without regard to any Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) ,
condition, such as payment of support. later. If you are not sure whether a child providedb. Are separated under a written separa-
more than half of his or her own support, yoution agreement, or 2. The custodial parent will not claim the child may find Worksheet 1 helpful.as a dependent for the year.c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6
months of the year. 3. The years for which the noncustodial par- Scholarships. A scholarship received by a
ent, rather than the custodial parent, can child who is a full-time student is not taken into2. The child received over half of his or her claim the child as a dependent. account in determining whether the child pro-support for the year from the parents. vided more than half of his or her own support.The noncustodial parent must attach all of3. The child is in the custody of one or both the following pages of the decree or agreementparents for more than half of the year. to his or her tax return. Special Test for Qualifying Child of4. Either of the following statements is true. • The cover page (write the other parent's More Than One Person
social security number on this page).a. The custodial parent signs a written
declaration, discussed later, that he or If your qualifying child is not a qualify-• The pages that include all of the informa-
she will not claim the child as a depen- ing child for anyone else, this test doestion identified in items (1) through (3)
dent for the year, and the noncustodial not apply to you and you do not need toabove.
TIP
parent attaches this written declaration read about it. This is also true if your qualifying• The signature page with the other parent'sto his or her return. (If the decree or child is not a qualifying child for anyone elsesignature and the date of the agreement.agreement went into effect after 1984, except your spouse with whom you file a joint
see Divorce decree or separation return.
agreement made after 1984, later.) The noncustodial parent must attach
If a child is treated as the qualifyingthe required information even if it wasb. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa- child of the noncustodial parent underfiled with a return in an earlier year.rate maintenance or written separation
CAUTION
! the rules for children of divorced or
CAUTION
!agreement that applies to 2008 states separated parents described earlier, see Apply-Beginning with 2009 tax returns, thethat the noncustodial parent can claim ing this special test to divorced or separatednoncustodial parent will no longer bethe child as a dependent, the decree or parents, later.able to attach pages from the decree oragreement was not changed after 1984
CAUTION
!
agreement instead of Form 8332 if the decree or Sometimes, a child meets the relationship,to say the noncustodial parent cannot
agreement was made after 2008. The noncus- age, residency, and support tests to be a qualify-claim the child as a dependent, and the
todial parent will have to attach Form 8332 or a ing child of more than one person. Although thenoncustodial parent provides at least
child is a qualifying child of each of these per-similar statement signed by the custodial parent$600 for the child's support during the
sons, only one person can actually treat the childand whose only purpose is to release a claim toyear.
as a qualifying child. To meet this special test,exemption.
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent. Table 6. When More Than One Person Files a Return Claiming the SameThe custodial parent is the parent with whom the
Qualifying Child (Tie-Breaker Rule)child lived for the greater part of the year. The
other parent is the noncustodial parent. Caution. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent
under the rules for children of divorced or separated parents, see Applying thisIf the parents divorced or separated during
special test to divorced or separated parents.the year and the child lived with both parents
before the separation, the custodial parent is the
IF more than one person files a return claiming THEN the child will be treated asone with whom the child lived for the greater part
the same qualifying child and . . . the qualifying child of the. . .of the rest of the year.
only one of the persons is the child's parent, parent.Example. Your child lived with you for 10
months of the year. The child lived with your parent with whom the child lived
former spouse for the other 2 months. You are two of the persons are parents of the child and they for the longer period of time
considered the custodial parent. do not file a joint return together, during the year.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent two of the persons are parents of the child, they do
may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement not file a joint return together, and the child lived parent with the higher adjusted
(containing the same information required by the with each parent the same amount of time during gross income (AGI).
form) to make the written declaration to release the year,
the exemption to the noncustodial parent. The
none of the persons are the child's parent, person with the highest AGI.noncustodial parent must attach the form or
statement to his or her tax return.
Publication 501 (2008) Page 13

Page 14 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you must be the person who can treat the child provide more than half of your own support for child and dependent care expenses, exclusion
for dependent care benefits, and the earnedas a qualifying child. the year. This means you are your mother's
income credit, if you qualify for each of those taxqualifying child and she could claim you as aIf you and another person have the same
benefits (and if your son's father does not claimdependent. Because of the Dependent Tax-qualifying child, you and the other person(s) can
your son as a dependent or as a qualifying childpayer Test  explained earlier, you cannot treatdecide which of you will treat the child as a
for any of those tax benefits).your daughter as a qualifying child and cannotqualifying child. That person can take all of the
claim her as a dependent. Only your mother canfollowing tax benefits (provided the person is
Example 8 Ð unmarried parents claimtreat your daughter as a qualifying child.eligible for each benefit) based on the qualifying
same child. The facts are the same as inchild.
Example 7 except that you and your son's fatherExample 5 Ð separated parents. You,• The exemption for the child. both claim your son as a qualifying child. In thisyour husband, and your 10-year-old son lived
case, only your son's father will be allowed totogether until August 1, 2008, when your hus-• The child tax credit.
treat your son as a qualifying child. This is be-band moved out of the household. In August and• Head of household filing status. cause his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI,September, your son lived with you. For the rest
$12,000. If you claimed an exemption, the childof the year, your son lived with your husband,• The credit for child and dependent care
tax credit, head of household filing status, creditthe boy's father. Your son is a qualifying child ofexpenses.
for child and dependent care expenses, exclu-both you and your husband because your son• The exclusion from income for dependent sion for dependent care benefits, or the earnedlived with each of you for more than half the yearcare benefits. income credit for your son, the IRS will disallowand because he met the relationship, age, and
your claim to all these tax benefits.support tests for both of you. At the end of the• The earned income credit.
year, you and your husband still were not di-The other person cannot take any of these bene- Example 9 Ðchild did not live with a par-vorced, legally separated, or separated under afits based on this qualifying child. In other words, ent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your sis-written separation agreement, so the specialyou and the other person cannot agree to divide ter's child, lived with your mother all year. Yourule for divorced or separated parents does notthese tax benefits between you. are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Yourapply.
mother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece is a qualify-If you and the other person(s) cannot agree on You and your husband will file separate re- ing child of both you and your mother becausewho will claim the child and more than one turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your she meets the relationship, age, residency, andperson files a return claiming the same child, the son as a qualifying child. This means, if your support tests for both you and your mother.husband does not claim your son as a qualifyingIRS will disallow all but one of the claims using However, only one of you can treat her as achild, you can claim your son as a dependentthe tie-breaker rule in Table 6. qualifying child. Your mother agrees to let youand treat him as a qualifying child for the child treat the child as a qualifying child.tax credit and exclusion for dependent care ben-Example 1 Ðchild lived with parent and
efits, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits.grandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh- Example 10Ðchild did not live with a par-However, you cannot claim head of householdter Jane lived with your mother all year. You are ent. The facts are the same as in Example 9filing status because you and your husband did25 years old and earned $9,000 for the year. except that you and your mother both claim yournot live apart the last 6 months of the year. As aYour mother is not your dependent. Jane is a niece as a qualifying child. In this case, only yourresult, your filing status is married filing sepa-qualifying child of both you and your mother mother will be allowed to treat your niece as arately, so you cannot claim the earned incomebecause she meets the relationship, age, resi- qualifying child. This is because your mother'scredit or the credit for child and dependent caredency, and support tests for both you and your AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300. Ifexpenses.mother. However, only one of you can claim her. you claimed an exemption, the child tax credit,You agree to let your mother claim Jane. This head of household filing status, credit for childExample 6 Ð separated parents claimmeans your mother can claim Jane as a depen- and dependent care expenses, exclusion forsame child. The facts are the same as indent and can claim her as a qualifying child for dependent care benefits, or the earned incomeExample 5 except that you and your husbandthe child tax credit, head of household filing credit for your niece, the IRS will disallow yourboth claim your son as a qualifying child. In thisstatus, credit for child and dependent care ex- claim to all these tax benefits.case, only your husband will be allowed to treatpenses, exclusion for dependent care benefits,
your son as a qualifying child. This is because, Applying this special test to divorced or sep-and the earned income credit, if she qualifies for
during 2008, the boy lived with him longer than arated parents. If a child is treated as theeach of those tax benefits (and if you do not
with you. If you claimed an exemption, the child qualifying child of the noncustodial parent underclaim Jane as a dependent or as a qualifying
tax credit, head of household filing status, credit the rules for children of divorced or separatedchild for any of those tax benefits).
for child and dependent care expenses, exclu- parents described earlier, only the noncustodial
sion for dependent care benefits, or the earned parent can claim an exemption and the child taxExample 2 Ð two persons claim same
income credit for your son, the IRS will disallow credit for the child. However, the noncustodialchild. The facts are the same as in Example 1
your claim to all these tax benefits. In addition, parent cannot claim the child as a qualifyingexcept that you and your mother both claim Jane
because you and your husband did not live apart child for head of household filing status, theas a dependent and as a qualifying child. In this
the last 6 months of the year, your husband credit for child and dependent care expenses,case, you as the child's parent will be the only
cannot claim head of household filing status. As the exclusion for dependent care benefits, andone allowed to claim Jane as a dependent and
a result, his filing status is married filing sepa- the earned income credit. Only the custodialas a qualifying child. The IRS will disallow your
rately, so he cannot claim the earned income parent or another eligible taxpayer can claim themother's claim to these tax benefits unless she
credit or the credit for child and dependent care child as a qualifying child for these four taxhas another qualifying child.
expenses. benefits. If the custodial parent and another eli-
gible taxpayer both claim the child as a qualify-Example 3 Ðqualifying children split be-
Example 7 Ð unmarried parents. You, ing child for any of these four tax benefits, thetween two persons. The facts are the same
your 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived IRS will disallow all but one of the claims usingas in Example 1 except that you also have two
together all year. You and your son's father are the tie-breaker rule in Table 6.other young children who are qualifying children
not married. Your son is a qualifying child of bothof both you and your mother. Only one of you
you and his father because he meets the rela- Example 1. You and your 5-year-old soncan claim each child as a dependent. However,
tionship, age, residency, and support tests for lived all year with your mother, who paid theyou and your mother can split the three qualify-
both you and his father. Your adjusted gross entire cost of keeping up the home. Under theing children between you. For example, you can
income (AGI) is $12,000 and your son's father's rules for children of divorced or separated par-claim one child as a dependent and your mother
AGI is $14,000. Your son's father agrees to let ents, your son is treated as the qualifying child ofcan claim the other two.
you treat the child as a qualifying child. This his father, who can claim an exemption and the
Example 4 Ðtaxpayer who is a qualifying means you can claim him as a dependent and child tax credit for the child if he meets all the
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 treat him as a qualifying child for the child tax requirements to do so. Because of this, you
except that you are only 18 years old and did not credit, head of household filing status, credit for cannot claim an exemption or the child tax credit
Page 14 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 15 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for your son. However, your son's father cannot as a dependent. If the child does not live withNot a Qualifying Child Test
you, the child does not meet the residency testclaim your son as a qualifying child for head of
A child is not your qualifying relative if the child is to be your qualifying child. If the persons thehousehold filing status, the credit for child and
your qualifying child or the qualifying child of any child does live with are not U.S. citizens anddependent care expenses, the exclusion for de-
other taxpayer. have no U.S. gross income, those persons arependent care benefits, or the earned income
not ªtaxpayers,º so the child is not the qualifyingcredit. You and your mother did not have any Example 1. Your 22-year-old daughter, who child of any other taxpayer. If the child is not yourchild care expenses or dependent care benefits, is a full-time student, lives with you and meets all qualifying child or the qualifying child of anybut the boy is a qualifying child of both you and the tests to be your qualifying child. She is not other taxpayer, the child is your qualifying rela-your mother for head of household filing status your qualifying relative. tive if the gross income test and the support testand the earned income credit because he meets
are met.the relationship, age, residency, and support Example 2. Your 2-year-old son lives withtests for both you and your mother. (Note: The You cannot claim as a dependent a child whoyour parents and meets all the tests to be theirsupport test does not apply for the earned in- lives in a foreign country other than Canada orqualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela-
come credit.) However, you agree to let your Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S.tive.
mother claim your son. This means she can resident alien, or U.S. national for some part of
claim him for head of household filing status and the year. There is an exception for certainExample 3. Your son lives with you but is
the earned income credit if she qualifies for each adopted children who lived with you all year. Seenot your qualifying child because he is 30 years
and if you do not claim him as a qualifying child Citizen or Resident Test, earlier.old and does not meet the age test. He may be
for the earned income credit. (You cannot claim your qualifying relative if the gross income test
Example. You provide all the support ofhead of household filing status because your and the support test are met.
your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live inmother paid the entire cost of keeping up the
Mexico with your mother and have no income.home.) Example 4. Your 13-year-old grandson
You are single and live in the United States.lived with his mother for 3 months, with his uncle
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Your mother is not a U.S. citizen and has nofor 4 months, and with you for 5 months during
Example 1 except that you and your mother both U.S. income, so she is not a ªtaxpayer.º Yourthe year. He is not your qualifying child because
claim your son as a qualifying child for the children are not your qualifying children becausehe does not meet the residency test. He may be
earned income credit. Your mother also claims they do not meet the residency test. Also, theyyour qualifying relative if the gross income test
him as a qualifying child for head of household and the support test are met. are not the qualifying children of any other tax-
filing status. You as the child's parent will be the payer, so they are your qualifying relatives andChild of person not required to file a return.only one allowed to claim your son as a qualify- you can claim them as dependents if all the testsA child is not the qualifying child of any othering child for the earned income credit. The IRS are met. You may also be able to claim yourtaxpayer and so may qualify as your qualifyingwill disallow your mother's claim to the earned mother as a dependent if all the tests are met,relative if the child's parent (or other person forincome credit and head of household filing sta- including the gross income test and the supportwhom the child is defined as a qualifying child) istus unless she has another qualifying child. test.not required to file an income tax return and
either:
Qualifying Relative • Does not file an income tax return, or Member of Household or
Relationship TestThere are four tests that must be met for a • Files a return only to get a refund of in-person to be your qualifying relative. The four come tax withheld. To meet this test, a person must either:tests are:
1. Live with you all year as a member of your1. Not a qualifying child test, Example 1 Ðreturn not required. You household, orsupport an unrelated friend and her 3-year-old2. Member of household or relationship test, child, who lived with you all year in your home. 2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed
3. Gross income test, and Your friend has no gross income, is not required under Relatives who do not have to live
to file a 2008 tax return, and does not file a 2008 with you.4. Support test. tax return. Both your friend and her child are
If at any time during the year the person wasyour qualifying relatives if the member of house-
your spouse, that person cannot be your qualify-hold or relationship test, gross income test, andAge. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rel-
ing relative. However, see Personal Exemp-support test are met.ative can be any age. There is no age test for a
tions, earlier.qualifying relative.
Example 2 Ðreturn filed to claim refund.
Relatives who do not have to live with you.The facts are the same as in Example 1 exceptKidnapped child. You can treat a child as A person related to you in any of the followingyour friend had wages of $1,500 during the yearyour qualifying relative even if the child has been ways does not have to live with you all year as aand had income tax withheld from her wages.kidnapped, but both of the following statements member of your household to meet this test.She files a return only to get a refund of themust be true. income tax withheld and does not claim the • Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de-earned income credit or any other tax credits or1. The child is presumed by law enforcement scendant of any of them (for example,deductions. Both your friend and her child areauthorities to have been kidnapped by your grandchild). (A legally adopted childyour qualifying relatives if the member of house-someone who is not a member of your is considered your child.)hold or relationship test, gross income test, andfamily or the child's family.
• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-support test are met.2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the ter, stepbrother, or stepsister.child met the tests to be your qualifying Example 3 Ð earned income credit • Your father, mother, grandparent, or otherrelative for the part of the year before the claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam- direct ancestor, but not foster parent.date of the kidnapping. ple 2 except your friend had wages of $8,000
during the year and claimed the earned income • Your stepfather or stepmother.This treatment applies for all years until the
credit on her return. Your friend's child is thechild is returned. However, the last year this • A son or daughter of your brother or sister.qualifying child of another taxpayer (your friend),treatment can apply is the earlier of: so you cannot claim your friend's child as your • A brother or sister of your father or
qualifying relative.1. The year there is a determination that the mother.
child is dead, or • Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-Child in Canada or Mexico. A child who lives
2. The year the child would have reached ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law,in Canada or Mexico may be your qualifying
age 18. or sister-in-law.relative, and you may be able to claim the child
Publication 501 (2008) Page 15

Page 16 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Any of these relationships that were established to someone else. Therefore, she does not meet Support Test (To Be a Qualifying
by marriage are not ended by death or divorce. this test and you cannot claim her as a depen- Relative)
dent.
To meet this test, you generally must provideExample. You and your wife began sup-
more than half of a person's total support duringporting your wife's father, a widower, in 2002. Adopted child. An adopted child is always the calendar year.Your wife died in 2007. In spite of your wife's treated as your own child. The term ªadopted However, if two or more persons providedeath, your father-in-law continues to meet this
childº includes a child who was lawfully placed support, but no one person provides more thantest, even if he does not live with you. You can
with you for legal adoption. half of a person's total support, see Multipleclaim him as a dependent if all other tests are
Support Agreement, later.met, including the gross income test and support
test. Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if he How to determine if support test is met.or she lives with you all year as a member ofFoster child. A foster child is an individual You figure whether you have provided moreyour household. A cousin is a descendant of awho is placed with you by an authorized place- than half of a person's total support by compar-
brother or sister of your father or mother.ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other ing the amount you contributed to that person's
order of any court of competent jurisdiction. support with the entire amount of support that
person received from all sources. This includesJoint return. If you file a joint return, the per- Gross Income Test support the person provided from his or her ownson can be related to either you or your spouse. funds.Also, the person does not need to be related to To meet this test, a person's gross income for You may find Worksheet 1 helpful in figuringthe spouse who provides support. the year must be less than $3,500. whether you provided more than half of a per-For example, your spouse's uncle who re- Gross income defined. Gross income is all son's support.ceives more than half of his support from you income in the form of money, property, andmay be your qualifying relative, even though he Person's own funds not used for support.services that is not exempt from tax.does not live with you. However, if you and your A person's own funds are not support unlessIn a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-spouse file separate returns, your spouse's un- they are actually spent for support.ing business, gross income is the total net salescle can be your qualifying relative only if he lives
minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-with you all year as a member of your house- Example. Your mother received $2,400 in
hold. neous income from the business. social security benefits and $300 in interest. She
paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.Gross receipts from rental property are grossTemporary absences. A person is consid-
She put $300 in a savings account.income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., toered to live with you as a member of your house-
Even though your mother received a total ofdetermine the gross income from rental prop-hold during periods of time when one of you, or
$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400erty.both, are temporarily absent due to special cir-
($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If youcumstances such as: Gross income includes a partner's share of spent more than $2,400 for her support and nothe gross (not a share of the net) partnership• Illness, other support was received, you have providedincome. more than half of her support.• Education, Gross income also includes all unemploy-
• Business, Child's wages used for own support. Youment compensation and certain scholarship and
cannot include in your contribution to yourfellowship grants. Scholarships received by de-• Vacation, or child's support any support that is paid for by thegree candidates that are used for tuition, fees,
• Military service. child with the child's own wages, even if you paidsupplies, books, and equipment required for
the wages.particular courses may not be included in gross
If the person is placed in a nursing home for income. For more information about scholar- Year support is provided. The year you pro-an indefinite period of time to receive constant ships, see chapter 1 of Publication 970, Tax vide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifmedical care, the absence may be considered Benefits for Education. you do so with borrowed money that you repaytemporary. Tax-exempt income, such as certain social in a later year.
Death or birth. A person who died during the security benefits, is not included in gross in- If you use a fiscal year to report your income,
year, but lived with you as a member of your come. you must provide more than half of the depen-
household until death, will meet this test. The dent's support for the calendar year in whichDisabled dependent working at shelteredsame is true for a child who was born during the your fiscal year begins.workshop. For purposes of this test (the grossyear and lived with you as a member of your income test), the gross income of an individualhousehold for the rest of the year. The test is Armed Forces dependency allotments. Thewho is permanently and totally disabled at anyalso met if a child lived with you as a member of part of the allotment contributed by the govern-time during the year does not include income foryour household except for any required hospital ment and the part taken out of your military pay
services the individual performs at a shelteredstay following birth. are both considered provided by you in figuring
workshop. The availability of medical care at theIf your dependent died during the year and whether you provide more than half of the sup-
workshop must be the main reason for the indi-you otherwise qualified to claim an exemption port. If your allotment is used to support persons
vidual's presence there. Also, the income mustfor the dependent, you can still claim the exemp- other than those you name, you can take the
come solely from activities at the workshop thattion. exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify.
are incident to this medical care.
Example. Your dependent mother died on Example. You are in the Armed Forces.A ªsheltered workshopº is a school that:
January 15. She met the tests to be your qualify- You authorize an allotment for your widowed
• Provides special instruction or training de-ing relative. The other tests to claim an exemp- mother that she uses to support herself and her
signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-tion for a dependent were also met. You can sister. If the allotment provides more than half of
vidual, andclaim an exemption for her on your return. each person's support, you can take an exemp-
tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify,• Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-Local law violated. A person does not meet even though you authorize the allotment only forzations or by a state, a U.S. possession, athis test if at any time during the year the rela- your mother.political subdivision of a state or posses-tionship between you and that person violates
sion, the United States, or the District of Tax-exempt military quarters allowances.local law.
Columbia. These allowances are treated the same way as
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a dependency allotments in figuring support. The
ªPermanently and totally disabledº has themember of your household all year. However, allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-
same meaning here as under Qualifying Child,your relationship with her violated the laws of the ance for quarters are both considered as pro-
state where you live, because she was married earlier. vided by you for support.
Page 16 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 17 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's Smiths' unreimbursed expenses are not deduct- Support provided Father Mothertotal support, include tax-exempt income, sav- ible as charitable contributions but are consid-
Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000ings, and borrowed amounts used to support ered support they provided for Lauren.
that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer- Pension spent for their
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sum support ............ . 2,100 2,100
nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed advance payment to a home for the aged to take Share of food (1/6 ofForces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, care of your relative for life and the payment is $6,000) ............ . 1,000 1,000and tax-exempt interest. based on that person's life expectancy, the
Medical expenses foramount of support you provide each year is the
mother ............. . 600Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward lump-sum payment divided by the relative's life
your mother's support during the year. She has expectancy. The amount of support you provide Parents' total support .. . $4,100 $4,700
earned income of $600, nontaxable social se- also includes any other amounts you provided You must apply the support test separatelycurity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter- during the year. to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000est of $200. She uses all these for her support. lodging, $1,000 food) of your father's total sup-You cannot claim an exemption for your mother port of $4,100 Ð less than half. You providebecause the $4,000 you provide is not more Total Support $2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000than half of her total support of $9,600. food, $600 medical) Ð more than half of herTo figure if you provided more than half of a
total support of $4,700. You meet the supportperson's support, you must first determine theExample 2. Your brother's daughter takes test for your mother, but not your father. Heattotal support provided for that person. Total sup-out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay and utility costs are included in the fair rentalport includes amounts spent to provide food,her college tuition. She is personally responsible value of the lodging, so these are not consideredlodging, clothing, education, medical and dentalfor the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total separately.care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-support. You cannot claim an exemption for her
cessities.because you provide less than half of her sup- Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging,
Generally, the amount of an item of supportport. you are considered to provide support equal to
is the amount of the expense incurred in provid- the fair rental value of the room, apartment,Social security benefits. If a husband and ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support house, or other shelter in which the person lives.wife each receive benefits that are paid by one is the fair rental value of the lodging. Fair rental value includes a reasonable allow-check made out to both of them, half of the total ance for the use of furniture and appliances, andExpenses that are not directly related to anypaid is considered to be for the support of each for heat and other utilities that are provided.one member of a household, such as the cost ofspouse, unless they can show otherwise. food for the household, must be divided among Fair rental value defined. This is theIf a child receives social security benefits and the members of the household. amount you could reasonably expect to receiveuses them toward his or her own support, the
from a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It isbenefits are considered as provided by the child. Example 1. Grace Brown, mother of Mary used instead of actual expenses such as taxes,
Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and theirSupport provided by the state (welfare, interest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utilities,
two children. Grace gets social security benefitsfood stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits pro- cost of furniture and appliances, etc. In some
of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-vided by the state to a needy person generally cases, fair rental value may be equal to the rent
portation, and recreation. Grace has no otherare considered support provided by the state. paid.
income. Frank and Mary's total food expense forHowever, payments based on the needs of the If you provide the total lodging, the amount of
the household is $5,200. They pay Grace'srecipient will not be considered as used entirely support you provide is the fair rental value of the
medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fairfor that person's support if it is shown that part of room the person uses, or a share of the fair
rental value of the lodging provided for Grace isthe payments were not used for that purpose. rental value of the entire dwelling if the person
$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar has use of your entire home. If you do not pro-
rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support vide the total lodging, the total fair rental valueFoster care payments and expenses. Pay-
as follows: must be divided depending on how much of thements you receive for the support of a foster
total lodging you provide. If you provide only achild from a child placement agency are consid-
part and the person supplies the rest, the fairered support provided by the agency. Similarly, Fair rental value of lodging ..... . $ 1,800
rental value must be divided between both ofpayments you receive for the support of a foster Clothing, transportation, and you according to the amount each provides.child from a state or county are considered sup- recreation ................. . 2,400port provided by the state or county.
Example. Your parents live rent free in aMedical expenses ........... . 1,200If you are not in the trade or business of house you own. It has a fair rental value ofproviding foster care and your unreimbursed Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) .... . 1,040 $5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fairout-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster Total support .............. . $6,440 rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800child were mainly to benefit an organization for the furniture. This does not include heat andqualified to receive deductible charitable contri- utilities. The house is completely furnished withThe support Frank and Mary provide ($1,800butions, the expenses are deductible as charita- furniture belonging to your parents. You paylodging + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040ble contributions but are not considered support $600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usuallyfood = $4,040) is more than half of Grace'syou provided. For more information about the included in rent for houses in the area where$6,440 total support.deduction for charitable contributions, see Publi- your parents live. Therefore, you consider thecation 526. If your unreimbursed expenses are Example 2. Your parents live with you, your total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000not deductible as charitable contributions, they spouse, and your two children in a house you ($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnishedare considered support you provided. own. The fair rental value of your parents' share house, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro-
If you are in the trade or business of provid- of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each), vided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities)
ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa- of which you are considered to provide $4,200
are not considered support provided by you. ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200, ($3,600 + $600).
which he spends equally between your mother Person living in his or her own home. TheExample.  Lauren, a foster child, lived with and himself for items of support such as cloth- total fair rental value of a person's home that heMr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of the ing, transportation, and recreation. Your total or she owns is considered support contributedyear. The Smiths cared for Lauren because they food expense for the household is $6,000. Your by that person.wanted to adopt her (although she had not been heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Your
placed with them for adoption). They did not mother has hospital and medical expenses of Living with someone rent free. If you live
care for her as a trade or business or to benefit $600, which you pay during the year. Figure with a person rent free in his or her home, you
the agency that placed her in their home. The your parents' total support as follows: must reduce the amount you provide for support
Publication 501 (2008) Page 17

Page 18 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of that person by the fair rental value of lodging $2,000). You have not provided more than half for your mother. The one who claims the exemp-
he or she provides you. of his support. tion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara-
tion, to his or her return and must keep the
Child care expenses. If you pay someone to statement signed by the other for his or herProperty. Property provided as support is
provide child or dependent care, you can include records. Because neither brother provides moremeasured by its fair market value. Fair market
these payments in the amount you provided for than 10% of the support, neither can take thevalue is the price that property would sell for on
the support of your child or disabled dependent, exemption and neither has to sign a statement.the open market. It is the price that would be
even if you claim a credit for the payments. Foragreed upon between a willing buyer and a
Example 2. You and your brother each pro-information on the credit, see Publication 503,willing seller, with neither being required to act,
vide 20% of your mother's support for the year.Child and Dependent Care Expenses.and both having reasonable knowledge of the
The remaining 60% of her support is providedrelevant facts.
equally by two persons who are not related toOther support items. Other items may beCapital expenses. Capital items, such as her. She does not live with them. Because moreconsidered as support depending on the facts infurniture, appliances, and cars, that are bought than half of her support is provided by personseach case.for a person during the year can be included in who cannot claim an exemption for her, no onetotal support under certain circumstances. can take the exemption.The following examples show when a capital Do Not Include in Total Support
item is or is not support. Example 3. Your father lives with you and
The following items are not included in total receives 25% of his support from social security,Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawn support. 40% from you, 24% from his brother (your un-mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is cle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or your1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paidgiven the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. uncle can take the exemption for your father ifby persons from their own income. Because the lawn mower benefits all members the other signs a statement agreeing not to. Theof the household, you cannot include the cost of one who takes the exemption must attach Form2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid bythe lawn mower in the support of your child. 2120, or a similar declaration, to his return andpersons from their own income. 
must keep for his records the signed statement3. Life insurance premiums. Example 2. You buy a $150 television set from the one agreeing not to take the exemption.as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child. 4. Funeral expenses. The television set is placed in your child's bed-
5. Scholarships received by your child if yourroom. You can include the cost of the television Support Test for Children ofchild is a full-time student. set in the support of your child. Divorced or Separated Parents
6. Survivors' and Dependents' EducationalExample 3. You pay $5,000 for a car and In most cases, a child of divorced or separatedAssistance payments used for the supportregister it in your name. You and your parents will be a qualifying child of one of theof the child who receives them.17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be- parents. See Children of divorced or separated
Government or charitable assistance you re-cause you own the car and do not give it to your parents under Qualifying Child,  earlier. How-
ceived because of your temporary relocationdaughter but merely let her use it, you cannot ever, if the child does not meet the requirements
due to the storms, tornadoes, or flooding in ainclude the cost of the car in your daughter's to be a qualifying child of either parent, the child
Midwestern disaster area is not included in totaltotal support. However, you can include in your may be a qualifying relative of one of the par-
support. Disregard these amounts in determin-daughter's support your out-of-pocket expenses ents. In that case, the following rules must be
ing who provided a person's support.of operating the car for her benefit. used in applying the support test.
A child will be treated as being the qualifyingExample 4. Your 17-year-old son, using relative of his or her noncustodial parent if allMultiple Support Agreementpersonal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro- four of the following statements are true.vide all the rest of your son's support Ð $4,000.
Sometimes no one provides more than half ofSince the car is bought and owned by your son,
the support of a person. Instead, two or more 1. The parents:the car's fair market value ($4,500) must be
persons, each of whom would be able to takeincluded in his support. Your son has provided a. Are divorced or legally separated underthe exemption but for the support test, togethermore than half of his own total support of $8,500 a decree of divorce or separate mainte-provide more than half of the person's support.($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your qualifying nance,When this happens, you can agree that anychild. You did not provide more than half of his
one of you who individually provides more than b. Are separated under a written separa-total support, so he is not your qualifying rela-
10% of the person's support, but only one, can tion agreement, ortive. You cannot claim an exemption for your
claim an exemption for that person as a qualify-son. c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6ing relative. Each of the others must sign a
months of the year.statement agreeing not to claim the exemptionMedical insurance premiums. Medical insur- for that year. The person who claims the exemp-ance premiums you pay, including premiums for 2. The child received over half of his or hertion must keep these signed statements for hissupplementary Medicare coverage, are in- support for the year from the parents.or her records. A multiple support declarationcluded in the support you provide. identifying each of the others who agreed not to 3. The child is in the custody of one or both
Medical insurance benefits. Medical in- claim the exemption must be attached to the parents for more than half of the year.
surance benefits, including basic and supple- return of the person claiming the exemption.
4. Either of the following statements is true.mentary Medicare benefits, are not part of Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can
support. be used for this purpose. a. The custodial parent signs a writtenYou can claim an exemption under a multiple declaration, discussed later, that he orTuition payments and allowances under the support agreement for someone related to you she will not claim the child as a depen-GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the or for someone who lived with you all year as a dent for the year, and the noncustodialGI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while member of your household. parent attaches this written declarationthey attend school are included in total support. to his or her return. (If the decree orExample 1. You, your sister, and your two agreement went into effect after 1984,Example. During the year, your son re- brothers provide the entire support of your see Divorce decree or separationceives $2,200 from the government under the GI mother for the year. You provide 45%, your agreement made after 1984, later.)Bill. He uses this amount for his education. You sister 35%, and your two brothers each provide
provide the rest of his support Ð $2,000. Be- 10%. Either you or your sister can claim an b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
cause GI benefits are included in total support, exemption for your mother. The other must sign rate maintenance or written separation
your son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 + a statement agreeing not to take an exemption agreement that applies to 2008 states
Page 18 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 19 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Divorce decree or separation agreementthat the noncustodial parent can claim agreement was made after 2008. The noncus-
the child as a dependent, the decree or made after 1984. If the divorce decree or sep- todial parent will have to attach Form 8332 or a
agreement was not changed after 1984 similar statement signed by the custodial parentaration agreement went into effect after 1984,
to say the noncustodial parent cannot and whose only purpose is to release a claim tothe noncustodial parent can attach certain
claim the child as a dependent, and the exemption.pages from the decree or agreement instead of
noncustodial parent provides at least Form 8332. The decree or agreement must Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-$600 for the child's support during the state all three of the following. port provided by your new spouse is treated asyear.
provided by you.1. The noncustodial parent can claim the
child as a dependent without regard to anyCustodial parent and noncustodial parent. Child support under pre-1985 agreement.condition, such as payment of support.The custodial parent is the parent with whom the All child support payments actually receivedchild lived for the greater part of the year. The 2. The custodial parent will not claim the child from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985other parent is the noncustodial parent. as a dependent for the year. agreement are considered used for the supportIf the parents divorced or separated during of the child.3. The years for which the noncustodial par-the year and the child lived with both parents
ent, rather than the custodial parent, canbefore the separation, the custodial parent is the Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, theclaim the child as a dependent.one with whom the child lived for the greater part noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for theof the rest of the year. The noncustodial parent must attach all of child's support. This amount is considered sup-
the following pages of the decree or agreement port provided by the noncustodial parent even ifExample. Your child lived with you for 10 to his or her tax return. the $1,200 was actually spent on things othermonths of the year. The child lived with your than support.• The cover page (write the other parent'sformer spouse for the other 2 months. You are
social security number on this page).considered the custodial parent. Alimony. Payments to a spouse that are
includible in the spouse's gross income as either• The pages that include all of the informa-Written declaration.  The custodial parent alimony, separate maintenance payments, ortion identified in items (1) through (3)may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement similar payments from an estate or trust, are notabove.(containing the same information required by the treated as a payment for the support of a depen-form) to make the written declaration to release • The signature page with the other parent's dent.the exemption to the noncustodial parent. The signature and the date of the agreement.noncustodial parent must attach the form or
Parents who never married. This special rulestatement to his or her tax return.
for divorced or separated parents also applies toThe exemption can be released for 1 year, The noncustodial parent must attach
parents who never married.for a number of specified years (for example, the required information even if it was
alternate years), or for all future years, as speci- filed with a return in an earlier year.
CAUTION
!
Multiple support agreement. If the support offied in the declaration. If the exemption is re-
the child is determined under a multiple supportleased for more than 1 year, the original release Beginning with 2009 tax returns, the
agreement, this special support test for divorcedmust be attached to the return of the noncus- noncustodial parent will no longer be
or separated parents does not apply.todial parent for the first year, and a copy must able to attach pages from the decree or
CAUTION
!
be attached for each later year. agreement instead of Form 8332 if the decree or
Publication 501 (2008) Page 19

Page 20 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 1. Worksheet for Determining Support Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year ........................................... . 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support ...................... . 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes .......................... . 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ...... . 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ............................. . 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
 6a. Enter the total rent paid ................................................. . 6a.
 6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21. ........................................... . 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses ................................................ . 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) ......... . 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ......................... . 9.
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance. ................................ . 10.
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ...................... . 11.
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ............................ . 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............. . 13.
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses ....................................... . 14.
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ...................................... . 15.
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance .. . 16.
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses .............................. . 17.
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses ..................................... . 18.
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ........... . 19.
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50) ................................................. . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support ............... . 21.
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
 No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23±26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. .. . 23.
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ....................................................... . 24.
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ........ . 25.
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
 Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for this
person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or separated
parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children of Divorced or
Separated Parents, or Kidnapped child under Qualifying Relative..
Page 20 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 21 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Worksheet for Determining the Deduction for Exemptions Keep for Your Records
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22, more than the amount on line 4 below for your
filing status?
M No. Stop. Multiply $3,500 by the total number of exemptions claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 or Form
1040A and enter the result on Form 1040, line 42, or Form 1040A, line 26.
M Yes. Continue.
2. Multiply $3,500 by the total number of exemptions claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. ....... . 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22 ........ . 3.
4. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status:
• Married filing separatelyÐ$119,975
• SingleÐ$159,950
}
.......... . 4.• Head of householdÐ$199,950
• Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)Ð$239,950
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. . .................................. . 5.
6. Is line 5 more than $122,500 ($61,250 if married filing
separately)?
M Yes. Multiply $2,333 by the total number of exemptions
claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 42, or
Form 1040A, line 26. Do not complete the rest of
this worksheet.
M No. Divide line 5 by $2,500 ($1,250 if married filing
separately). If the result is not a whole number,
increase it to the next whole number (for example,
increase 0.0004 to 1). ........... . 6.
7. Multiply line 6 by 2% (.02) and enter the result as a decimal . ................................. . 7.
8. Multiply line 2 by line 7 ........................................................... . 8.
9. Divide line 8 by 3.0 ............................................................. . 9.
10. Deduction for exemptions. Subtract line 9 from line 2. Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 42, or
Form 1040A, line 26 ............................................................ . 10.
child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-Social Security
pital records instead. The document must showNumbers for DependentsPhaseout of the child was born alive. If you do this, enter
ªDIEDº in column (2) of line 6c of your FormYou must list the social security number (SSN)Exemptions 1040 or Form 1040A.of any dependent for whom you claim an exemp-
tion in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or Alien or adoptee with no SSN. If your depen-The amount you can claim as a deduction for
Form 1040A. dent does not have and cannot get an SSN, youexemptions is reduced once your adjusted gross
must list the individual taxpayer identificationincome (AGI) goes above a certain level for your If you do not list the dependent's SSN number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica-filing status. These levels are as follows: when required or if you list an incorrect tion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.SSN, the exemption may be disal-
CAUTION
!
AGI Level lowed. Taxpayer identification numbers forThat Reduces aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non-Filing Status Exemption Amount No SSN. If a person for whom you expect to resident alien who does not have and is notMarried filing separately . . $119,975 claim an exemption on your return does not eligible to get an SSN, your dependent mustSingle ............. . 159,950 have an SSN, either you or that person should apply for an individual taxpayer identificationHead of household ..... . 199,950 apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filing number (ITIN). For details on how to apply, seeMarried filing jointly .... . 239,950 Form SS-5, Application for a Social Security Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Tax-Qualifying widow(er) .... . 239,950 Card, with the Social Security Administration payer Identification Number.(SSA). You can get Form SS-5 online at www.
Taxpayer identification numbers forsocialsecurity.gov or at your local SSA office.You must reduce the dollar amount of your adoptees. If you have a child who was placedIt usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN.exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part of with you by an authorized placement agency,If you do not have a required SSN by the filing$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa- you may be able to claim an exemption for thedue date, you can file Form 4868, Application forrately), that your AGI exceeds the amount child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or anAutomatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Indi-shown above for your filing status. However, you ITIN for the child, you must get an adoptionvidual Income Tax Return, for an extension ofcan lose no more than 1/3 of the dollar amount of taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for thetime to file.your exemptions. In other words, each exemp- child from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Applicationtion cannot be reduced to less than $2,333. Born and died in 2008. If your child was for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending
born and died in 2008, and you do not have anIf your AGI exceeds the level for your filing U.S. Adoptions, for details.
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of thestatus, use Worksheet 2 to figure the amount of
your deduction for exemptions. However, if you
are claiming a $500 exemption for housing a
Midwestern displaced individual, use Form 8914
instead.
Publication 501 (2008) Page 21

Page 22 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Higher Standard Deduction for Age Higher Standard Deduction for Net
(65 or Older) Disaster LossStandard Deduction
If you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled Your standard deduction is increased by any netMost taxpayers have a choice of either taking a to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65 disaster loss from a federally declared disasterstandard deduction or itemizing their deduc- or older at the end of the year. You are consid- that occurred in 2008. This amount is on Formtions. If you have a choice, you can use the ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday. 4684, line 18a.method that gives you the lower tax. Therefore, you can take a higher standard If you are increasing your standard deduc-The standard deduction is a dollar amount deduction for 2008 if you were born before Janu- tion by the amount of your net disaster loss, bethat reduces the amount of income on which you ary 2, 1944.are taxed. It is a benefit that eliminates the need sure to check the box on line 39c of Form 1040.
for many taxpayers to itemize actual deductions, See the instructions for Form 4684, Casual-
such as medical expenses, charitable contribu- Higher Standard Deduction for ties and Thefts, and Publication 4492-B, Infor-tions, and taxes, on Schedule A of Form 1040. Blindness mation for Affected Taxpayers in the MidwesternThe standard deduction is higher for taxpayers Disaster Areas, for more information.who: If you are blind on the last day of the year and
you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled• Are 65 or older, to a higher standard deduction. You qualify for Examples• Are blind, this benefit if you are totally or partly blind.
The following examples illustrate how to deter-• Pay state or local real estate taxes, or Partly blind. If you are partly blind, you must mine your standard deduction using Worksheet
• Have a net disaster loss from a federally get a certified statement from an eye doctor or 3.declared disaster. registered optometrist that:
Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are1. You cannot see better than 20/200 in the filing a joint return for 2008. Neither is blind, andYou benefit from the standard deduc- better eye with glasses or contact lenses,
neither can be claimed as a dependent. They didtion if your standard deduction is more or
than the total of your allowable item- not pay real estate taxes or have a net disaster
TIP
2. Your field of vision is not more than 20ized deductions. loss. They decide not to itemize their deduc-degrees. tions. Because they are married filing jointly,
If your eye condition will never improve be-Persons not eligible for the standard deduc- they enter $10,900 on line 1 of Worksheet 3.
yond these limits, the statement should includetion. Your standard deduction is zero and you They check the ªNoº box on line 2, so they also
this fact. You must keep the statement in yourshould itemize any deductions you have if: enter $10,900 on lines 4 and 10. Their standard
records. deduction is $10,900.1. You are married, filing a separate return, If your vision can be corrected beyond theseand your spouse itemizes deductions, limits only by contact lenses that you can wear Example 2. The facts are the same as in
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,2. You are filing a tax return for a short tax Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the end
you can take the higher standard deduction foryear because of a change in your annual of 2008, so he and Donna enter $1,050 on line 5
blindness if you otherwise qualify.accounting period, or of Worksheet 3. They then enter $11,950
($10,900 + $1,050) on line 10, so their standard3. You are a nonresident or dual-status alien
deduction is $11,950.during the year. You are considered a Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-
Example 3. Bill and Lisa are filing a jointdent and resident alien during the year. You can take the higher standard deduction if
return for 2008. Both are over age 65. Neither isyour spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:If you are a nonresident alien who is mar-
blind, and neither can be claimed as a depen-ried to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the 1. You file a joint return, or dent. They did not pay real estate taxes or haveend of the year, you can choose to be
a net disaster loss. They do not itemize deduc-treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publication 2. You file a separate return and can claim an
tions, so they use Worksheet 3. Because they519.) If you make this choice, you can take exemption for your spouse because your
the standard deduction. spouse had no gross income and an ex- are married filing jointly, they enter $10,900 on
emption for your spouse could not be line 1. They check the ªNoº box on line 2, so they
If an exemption for you can be claimed by another taxpayer. also enter $10,900 on line 4. Because they are
claimed on another person's return both over age 65, they enter $2,100 ($1,050 ×  2)
(such as your parents' return), your You cannot claim the higher standard
CAUTION
! on line 5. They enter $13,000 ($10,900 +standard deduction may be limited. See Stan- deduction for an individual other than $2,100) on line 10, so their standard deduction isdard Deduction for Dependents, later. yourself and your spouse.
CAUTION
! $13,000.
Standard Deduction Amount Example 4. The facts are the same as in
Higher Standard Deduction for Example 3 except that Bill and Lisa paid $3,000The standard deduction amount depends on Real Estate Taxes in local real estate taxes on their home in 2008,your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or so they enter $3,000 on line 7 of the worksheet.blind, whether an exemption can be claimed for Your standard deduction is increased by any They then enter $1,000 on lines 8 and 9 andyou by another taxpayer, whether you pay state state and local real estate taxes you paid in $14,000 ($10,900 + $2,100 + $1,000) on line 10.or local real estate taxes, and whether you have 2008, up to $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly). Their standard deduction is $14,000.a net disaster loss from a federally declared The taxes must be state or local real estate
disaster. Generally, the standard deduction taxes that would be deductible on Form 1040 Example 5. The facts are the same as inamounts are adjusted each year for inflation. (Schedule A) if you were itemizing your deduc- Example 4 except that Bill and Lisa had a netUse Worksheet 3 to figure your standard deduc- tions. Taxes deductible in arriving at adjusted
disaster loss from a federally declared disastertion amount. gross income, such as taxes on business real
of $8,000. That is the amount on line 18a of theirestate, and taxes on foreign real estate cannotThe amount of the standard deduction for a
Form 4684. They enter $8,000 on line 6 of theirbe used to increase your standard deduction.decedent's final tax return is the same as it
standard deduction worksheet. On line 10 of thewould have been had the decedent continued to If you are increasing your standard deduc-
worksheet, they enter $22,000 ($10,900 +live. However, if the decedent was not 65 or tion by the amount of real estate taxes you paid,
$2,100 + $8,000 + $1,000), which is their stan-older at the time of death, the higher standard be sure to check the box on line 39c of Form
deduction for age cannot be claimed. dard deduction.1040 or line 23c of Form 1040A.
Page 22 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 23 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$5,450 on line 1. He checks the ªYesº box on 3. Paid interest and taxes on your home,Standard Deduction for
line 2, enters $4,100 ($3,800 + $300) on line 3, 4. Had large unreimbursed employee busi-Dependents and also enters $4,100 (the smaller of line 1 and ness expenses or other miscellaneous de-line 3) on line 4. He leaves lines 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9The standard deduction for an individual for ductions,blank and enters $4,100 on line 10. His standardwhom an exemption can be claimed on another
5. Had large uninsured casualty or theftdeduction is $4,100.person's tax return is generally limited to the
losses,greater of:
Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimed 6. Made large contributions to qualified chari-1. $900, or on her parents' 2008 return. She is 18 years old ties, orand blind. She has interest income of $1,3002. The individual's earned income for the 7. Have total itemized deductions that areand wages of $2,900. She did not pay real es-year plus $300 (but not more than the reg- more than the standard deduction to whichtate taxes or have a net disaster loss. She hasular standard deduction amount, generally
you otherwise are entitled.no itemized deductions. Amy finds her standard$5,450).
deduction by using Worksheet 3. Because she If you decide to itemize your deductions,However, if the individual is 65 or older or blind, is single, she enters $5,450 on line 1. She complete Schedule A and attach it to your Formpaid state or local real estate taxes, or had a net checks the ªYesº box on line 2, enters $3,200 1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, linedisaster loss from a federally declared disaster, ($2,900 + $300) on line 3, and also enters 29, on Form 1040, line 40.the standard deduction may be higher. $3,200 (the smaller of line 1 and line 3) on line 4.If an exemption for you (or your spouse if you
Because she is blind, she enters $1,350 on lineare married filing jointly) can be claimed on Electing to itemize for state tax or other pur-5. Because she did not pay real estate taxes orsomeone else's return, use Worksheet 3 to de- poses. Even if your itemized deductions arehave a net disaster loss, she does not fill outtermine your standard deduction. less than the amount of your standard deduc-lines 6, 7, 8, and 9. She enters $4,550 ($3,200 + tion, you can elect to itemize deductions on yourEarned income defined. Earned income is $1,350) on line 10. Her standard deduction issalaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and federal return rather than take the standard de-$4,550.other amounts received as pay for work you duction. You may want to do this, for example, if
actually perform. the tax benefit of being able to itemize yourWho Should ItemizeFor purposes of the standard deduction, deductions on your state tax return is greater
earned income also includes any part of a schol- than the tax benefit you lose on your federalYou should itemize deductions if your total de-arship or fellowship grant that you must include return by not taking the standard deduction. Toductions are more than the standard deductionin your gross income. See chapter 1 of Publica- make this election, you must check the box onamount. Also, you should itemize if you do nottion 970 for more information on what qualifies line 30 of Schedule A.qualify for the standard deduction, as discussedas a scholarship or fellowship grant.
earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-
dard deduction. Changing your mind. If you do not itemizeExample 1. Michael is single. His parents
your deductions and later find that you shouldclaim an exemption for him on their 2008 tax You should first figure your itemized deduc-
have itemized Ð or if you itemize your deduc-return. He has interest income of $780 and tions and compare that amount to your standard
wages of $150. He did not pay real estate taxes tions and later find you should not have Ð youdeduction to make sure you are using the
or have a net disaster loss. He has no itemized can change your return by filing Form 1040X.method that gives you the greater benefit.
deductions. Michael uses Worksheet 3 to find Married persons who filed separate re-You may be subject to a limit on somehis standard deduction. Because he is single, he turns. You can change methods of taking de-of your itemized deductions if your ad-enters $5,450 on line 1. He checks the ªYesº box ductions only if you and your spouse both makejusted gross income (AGI) is more than
CAUTION
!on line 2, enters $900 on line 3, and also enters $159,950 ($79,975 if you are married filing sep- the same changes. Both of you must file a con-$900 (the smaller of line 1 and line 3) on line 4.
arately). See the instructions for Schedule A sent to assessment for any additional tax eitherHe leaves lines 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 blank and enters
(Form 1040), line 29, for more information on one may owe as a result of the change.$900 on line 10. His standard deduction is $900.
figuring the correct amount of your itemized de- You and your spouse can use the method
ductions.Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col- that gives you the lower total tax, even though
lege student, is claimed on his parents' 2008 tax one of you may pay more tax than you wouldWhen to itemize. You may benefit fromreturn. Joe is married and files a separate return. have paid by using the other method. You bothitemizing your deductions on Schedule A (FormHis wife does not itemize deductions on her must use the same method of claiming deduc-1040) if you:separate return. Joe has $1,500 in interest in- tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other
come and wages of $3,800. He did not pay real should itemize because he or she will not qualify1. Do not qualify for the standard deduction,estate taxes or have a net disaster loss. He has for the standard deduction. See Persons notor the amount you can claim is limited,no itemized deductions. Joe finds his standard eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.2. Had large uninsured medical and dentaldeduction by using Worksheet 3. Because he is
married filing a separate return, he enters expenses during the year,
Publication 501 (2008) Page 23

Page 24 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3. 2008 Standard Deduction Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Caution. If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, do not complete this
worksheet. You cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before January 2, 1944, are blind, pay real estate taxes, or have a net
disaster loss.
If you are filing Form 1040EZ, do not use this worksheet. Instead, see line 5 of Form 1040EZ.
1. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status.
• Single or married filing separately Ð $5,450
...................... . 1.• Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er) Ð
$10,900 }
• Head of household Ð $8,000
2. Can you (or your spouse if filing jointly) be claimed as a dependent?
 No. Skip line 3; enter the amount from line 1 on line 4. 
 Yes. Go to line 3.
3. Is your earned income* more than $600?
 Yes. Add $300 to your earned income. Enter the total } ...................... . 3.
 No. Enter $900
4. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 3 .................................................... . 4.
5. If born before January 2, 1944, or blind, multiply the number on Form 1040, line 39a (or Form 1040A, line
23a**) by $1,050 ($1,350 if single or head of household). Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... . 5.
6. Enter any net disaster loss from Form 4684, line 18a. If more than zero, check the box on Form 1040, line
39c** ......................................................................... . 6.
7. Enter the state and local real estate taxes you paid that would be deductible on Schedule A
(Form 1040), line 6, if you were itemizing your deductions. See the instructions for Schedule
A (Form 1040), line 6. Do not include foreign real estate taxes .................... . 7.
8. Enter $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly) ................................... . 8.
9. Enter the smaller of line 7 or line 8. If more than zero, check the box on Form 1040, line 39c (or Form
1040A, line 23c**) ................................................................ . 9.
10.  Add lines 4, 5, 6, and 9. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 40 (or Form 1040A, line 24**). This is
your standard deduction for 2008. .................................................. . 10.
*Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also
includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must include in your income. Generally, your earned income is the total of the amount(s)
you reported on Form 1040, lines 7, 12, and 18, minus the amount, if any, on line 27 (or Form 1040A, line 7). 
**If the amount on line 6 of this worksheet is more than zero, you cannot file Form 1040A; you must file Form 1040.
Page 24 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 25 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet. You can access the IRS web- • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-
site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 ten to pre-recorded messages coveringHow To Get Tax Help
days a week to: various tax topics.
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, • E-file your return. Find out about commer- • Refund information. To check the status of
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- your 2008 refund, call 1-800-829-1954cial tax preparation and e-file services
tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- during business hours or 1-800-829-4477available free to eligible taxpayers.eral ways. By selecting the method that is best (automated refund information 24 hours a• Check the status of your 2008 refund. Gofor you, you will have quick and easy access to day, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72to www.irs.gov and click on Where's Mytax help. hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt
Refund. Wait at least 72 hours after the of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks afterContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filed mailing a paper return. If you filed FormTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a 8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11pendent organization within the IRS whose em- paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with weeks if you filed electronically). Haveployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if your 2008 tax return available so you caneconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- you filed electronically). Have your 2008 provide your social security number, youring tax problems that have not been resolved filing status, and the exact whole dollartax return available so you can providethrough normal channels, or who believe that an amount of your refund. Refunds are sentyour social security number, your filingIRS system or procedure is not working as it out weekly on Fridays. If you check thestatus, and the exact whole dollar amountshould. status of your refund and are not given theof your refund.You can contact the TAS by calling the TAS date it will be issued, please wait until thetoll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or • Download forms, instructions, and publica- next week before checking back.TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi- tions.
ble for assistance. You can also call or write your • Other refund information. To check the
• Order IRS products online.local taxpayer advocate, whose phone number status of a prior year refund or amended
and address are listed in your local telephone return refund, call 1-800-829-1954.• Research your tax questions online.
directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer Ad-
• Search publications online by topic orvocate Service ÐYour Voice at the IRS. You Evaluating the quality of our telephone
keyword.can file Form 911, Request for Taxpayer Advo- services. To ensure IRS representatives give
cate Service Assistance (And Application for accurate, courteous, and professional answers,• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)Taxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an IRS em- we use several methods to evaluate the qualitypublished in the last few years.ployee to complete it on your behalf. For more of our telephone services. One method is for a
• Figure your withholding allowances usinginformation, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. second IRS representative to listen in on or
the withholding calculator online at record random telephone calls. Another is to askLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). www.irs.gov/individuals. some callers to complete a short survey at theLITCs are independent organizations that pro- end of the call.vide low income taxpayers with representation • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by
in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Walk-in. Many products and servicesor for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide Assistant. are available on a walk-in basis.tax education and outreach for taxpayers who
 • Sign up to receive local and national taxspeak English as a second language. Publica-
news by email. • Products. You can walk in to many posttion 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List,
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upprovides information on clinics in your area. It is • Get information on starting and operating certain forms, instructions, and publica-available at www.irs.gov or your local IRS office. a small business. tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
Free tax services. To find out what services stores, copy centers, city and county gov-
are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to ernment offices, credit unions, and officePhone. Many services are available byFree Tax Services. It contains lists of free tax supply stores have a collection of productsphone. information sources, including publications, available to print from a CD or photocopy
services, and free tax education and assistance
 from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
programs. It also has an index of over 100 offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuetions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur-can listen to on your telephone. Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-rent-year forms, instructions, andAccessible versions of IRS published prod- able for research purposes.publications, and prior-year forms and in-ucts are available on request in a variety of structions. You should receive your order • Services. You can walk in to your localalternative formats for people with disabilities. within 10 days. Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
Free help with your return. Free help in pre- ness day for personal, face-to-face tax• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withparing your return is available nationwide from help. An employee can explain IRS letters,your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income request adjustments to your tax account,
• Solving problems. You can getTax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to or help you set up a payment plan. If you
face-to-face help solving tax problemshelp low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun- need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-
seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- tions about how the tax law applies to your
to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their individual tax return, or you are more com-sistance Centers. An employee can ex-
tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic fortable talking with someone in person,plain IRS letters, request adjustments to
filing and all volunteers will let you know about visit your local Taxpayer Assistanceyour account, or help you set up a pay-
credits and deductions you may be entitled to Center where you can spread out yourment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-
claim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, call records and talk with an IRS representa-tance Center for an appointment. To find
1-800-829-1040. tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-the number, go to 
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, youwww.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the
Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near- can call your local Center and leave aphone book under United States Govern-est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or message requesting an appointment to re-ment, Internal Revenue Service.visit AARP's website at solve a tax account issue. A representa-
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesswww.aarp.org/money/taxaide. tive will call you back within 2 business
to TTY/TDD equipment, callFor more information on these programs, go days to schedule an in-person appoint-
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toto www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the ment at your convenience. If you have an
upper right-hand corner. order forms and publications. ongoing, complex tax account problem or
Publication 501 (2008) Page 25

Page 26 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a special need, such as a disability, an • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re- • Helpful information, such as how to pre-
appointment can be requested. All other sponse system. pare a business plan, find financing for
issues will be handled without an appoint- your business, and much more.• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of thement. To find the number of your local U.S. Code. • All the business tax forms, instructions,office, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or and publications needed to successfully• Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxlook in the phone book under United manage a business.forms.States Government, Internal Revenue
• Tax law changes for 2009.Service. • Internal Revenue Bulletins.
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and• Toll-free and email technical support.Mail. You can send your order for finding aid.
forms, instructions, and publications to • Two releases during the year. • Web links to various government agen-the address below. You should receive ± The first release will ship the beginning
 cies, business associations, and IRS orga-a response within 10 days after your request is of January 2009. nizations.received. ± The final release will ship the beginning
of March 2009. • ªRate the Productº surveyÐyour opportu-
Internal Revenue Service nity to suggest changes for future editions.
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway Purchase the DVD from National Technical • A site map of the guide to help you navi-Bloomington, IL 61705-6613 Information Service (NTIS) at gate the pages with ease.www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no handling fee)DVD for tax products. You can order or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD • An interactive ªTeens in Bizº module thatPublication 1796, IRS Tax Products for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee). The price is gives practical tips for teens about startingDVD, and obtain:
 discounted to $25 for orders placed prior to their own business, creating a business
December 1, 2008. plan, and filing taxes.• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-
lications.
Small Business Resource Guide The information is updated during the year.• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica- 2009. This online guide is a must for Visit www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªSBRGº intions. every small business owner or any tax-
 the upper right-hand corner for more informa-
payer about to start a business. This year's tion.• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
guide includes:finding aid.
• Tax law frequently asked questions.
Page 26 Publication 501 (2008)

Page 27 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Child support under pre-1985 Disaster loss, standard Foreign employment, filingA
agreement ............... . 19 deduction increased requirements .............. . 4Abroad, citizens living, filing
by ........................ . 22Child tax credit ............. . 11 Foreign students ........... . 12requirements .............. . 4
Divorced parents ........... . 13Child, qualifying ............ . 12 Form 1040:Absence, temporary ..... . 9, 12,
Divorced taxpayers: Personal exemption ....... . 1016 Children:
Child custody ............. . 13 Schedule A, itemized deductionAdopted child (See Adoption)Accounting periods, joint
Filing status .............. . 5, 6 limit .................... . 23returns .................... . 6 Adoption (See Adopted child)
Joint returns, responsibility Social security numbers ... . 21Birth of child ............ . 9, 10Additional exemption amount:
for ....................... . 6 Use of ................... . 5, 6Claiming parent, when child isMidwestern disaster ....... . 10 Personal exemption ....... . 10 Form 1040A:head of household ....... . 9Adopted child .......... . 12, 16 Domestic help, no exemption Personal exemption ....... . 10Custody of ................ . 13Taxpayer identification for ....................... . 11 Social security numbers ... . 21Death of child ........... . 9, 10number ................. . 21 Use of ................... . 5, 6Dual-status taxpayers:Dividends of ............... . 4Advance earned income credit, Exemptions ............... . 10 Form 1040EZ:Filing requirements aseffect on filing requirements Joint returns not available ... . 6 Personal exemption ....... . 10dependents (Table 2) ..... . 3(Table 3) .................. . 4 Use of ................... . 5, 6Investment income of childAge: Form 1040X:under age 18 .......... . 3, 4Filing status E Change of filing status ...... . 7Kidnapped ............ . 12, 15determination ............ . 3 Earned income: Itemized deductions, change toSocial security number .... . 21Gross income and filing Defined for purposes of standard deduction ...... . 23Stillborn .................. . 12requirements (Table 1) ... . 2 standard deduction ...... . 23 Standard deduction, change toChurch employees, filingStandard deduction for age 65 Dependent filing requirements itemized deductions ..... . 23requirements (Table 3) .... . 4or older ................. . 22 (Table 2) ................ . 3 Form 8814, parents' election toCitizen or resident test ..... . 12Test ...................... . 12 Earned income credit ........ . 4 report child's interest andCitizens outside U.S., filingAliens: Nonresident alien spouse ... . 8 dividends ................. . 4requirements .............. . 4Dual-status (See Dual-status Two persons with same Form 8857, innocent spouseComments on publication ... . 2taxpayers) qualifying child .......... . 14 relief ...................... . 6Nonresident (See Nonresident Common law marriage ...... . 5 Elderly persons: Form SS-5, social securityaliens) Community property Home for the aged ........ . 17 number request .......... . 21Alimony .................... . 19 states ..................... . 7 Standard deduction for age 65 Form W-7, individual taxpayeror older ................. . 22Alternative minimum tax (AMT), Cousin ..................... . 16 identification numbereffect on filing requirements Equitable relief, InnocentCustody of child ............ . 13 request .................. . 21(Table 3) .................. . 4 spouse .................... . 6 Form W-7A, adoption taxpayerAmended returns  (See also Exemptions ............. . 10-21 identification numberDForm 1040X) ............ . 7, 23 Amount .................... . 1 request .................. . 21Death:Change from itemized to Deduction for exemptions, Foster care payments andstandard deduction (or vice determination of (WorksheetOf child ................... . 12 expenses ................ . 17versa) .................. . 23 2) ...................... . 21Of dependent ........... . 9, 16 Foster child ......... . 12, 16, 17Dependents ............... . 11Of spouse ........... . 5, 6, 10American citizens abroad ... . 4 Free tax services ........... . 25Midwestern displacedDecedents  (See also Death ofAnnulled marriages, filing Funeral expenses .......... . 18individual ............... . 10spouse) .................... . 5status ..................... . 5
Personal (See PersonalFiling requirements ......... . 4Armed forces:
exemption)Deductions:Combat zone, signing return for GPhaseout ............... . 1, 21spouse .................. . 6 Personal exemption ....... . 10 GI Bill benefits ............. . 18Standard deduction ........ . 22Dependency allotments .... . 16 Gross income:GI Bill benefits ............ . 18 Dependent taxpayer test ... . 11 F Defined .................... . 3Military quarters Dependents: Fair rental value ............ . 17 Filing requirements (Tableallotments .............. . 16 Birth of ................... . 16 1) ..................... . 2Figures  (See Tables and figures)
Assistance  (See Tax help) Born and died within Dependent filing requirementsFiling requirements ....... . 3-5year .................... . 21ATINs (Adoption taxpayer (Table 2) ................ . 3Filing status .............. . 5-10identification Child's earnings ............ . 4 Test ...................... . 16Annulled marriages ......... . 5numbers) ................ . 21 Death of .................. . 16 Group-term life insurance ... . 4Change to:Earned income ............. . 4 Joint return after separateExemption for ............. . 11 returns ................ . 7B HFiling requirements ....... . 3, 4 Separate returns after jointBirth of child ................ . 9 Head of household ........ . 7-9Married, filing joint return ............... . 7, 9Blind persons, standard Exemption for spouse ..... . 10return .................. . 11 Determination of ......... . 3, 5deduction ................ . 22 Filing requirements (TableNot allowed to claim Head of household ....... . 5, 7 1) ....................... . 2dependents ............. . 11 Marital status, determination
Health insuranceQualifying child ............ . 12 of ....................... . 5C premiums ................ . 18Qualifying relative ......... . 15 Married filing jointly (See JointCanada, resident of .... . 10, 12, Social security number .... . 21 Help  (See Tax help)returns)15 Standard deduction for .... . 23 Married filing separately (See Home:
Capital expenses ........... . 18 Unearned income .......... . 4 Married filing separately) Aged, home for ............ . 17
Child born alive ............ . 12 Unmarried persons (See Single Cost of keeping up ......... . 8Disabled:
Child care expenses ........ . 18 taxpayers)Child ..................... . 12 Household workers, no
Child custody .............. . 13 Dependent ................ . 16 Food stamps ............... . 17 exemption for ............ . 11
Publication 501 (2008) Page 27

Page 28 of 28 of Publication 501 10:10 - 11-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Married taxpayers  (See also Surviving spouse:I R
Joint returns) ............... . 6 Death of spouse (See Death ofIncome: Real estate taxes, standard
Age 65 or older spouse, spouse)Gross .................... . 16 deduction increased
standard deduction ...... . 22 Gross income filingTax exempt ............... . 17 by ........................ . 22
Blind spouse, standard requirements (Table 1) ... . 2Individual retirement Recapture taxes ............. . 4
deduction ............... . 22 Single filing status .......... . 5arrangements (IRAs): Relationship test ....... . 12, 15Dual-status alien spouse .... . 6 Widow(er) with dependentFiling requirements (Table Relative, qualifying ......... . 15Filing status ................ . 5 child .................. . 9, 103) ....................... . 4 Remarriage after divorce .... . 5Medical insuranceMarried filing separately .... . 7 Rental losses ................ . 7premiums ................ . 18Individual taxpayer TResidency test ............. . 12Medical savings accountsidentification numbers Tables and figures  (See also(MSAs, effect on filing(ITINs) .................. . 2, 21 Worksheets) .............. . 20requirements (Table 3) .... . 4 SInnocent spouse relief ....... . 6 Filing requirements:
Medicare taxes, not Scholarships ..... . 4, 13, 16, 18, Dependents (Table 2) .... . 3Insurance premiums:
support .................. . 18 23 Gross income levels (TableLife ....................... . 18
Member of household or Self-employed persons: 1) ..................... . 2Medical ................... . 18
relationship test .......... . 15 Filing requirements (Table Other situations requiringIRAs  (See Individual retirement
3) ....................... . 4Mexico, resident of ..... . 10, 12, filing (Table 3) ......... . 4arrangements (IRAs))
Gross income .............. . 315 Tax help .................... . 25Itemized deductions:
Separate returns  (See MarriedMidwestern disaster ..... . 9, 10, Tax returns:Changing from standard to
filing separately)12, 18 Amended (See Form 1040X)itemized deduction (or vice
Separated parents .......... . 13Military  (See Armed forces) Filing of (See Filingversa) .................. . 23
requirements)Separated taxpayers:Choosing to itemize ....... . 23 Missing children, photographs
Joint returns (See Joint returns)Filing status ................ . 5Limits on ................ . 2, 23 of in IRS publications ..... . 2
Who must file ....... . 1, 3, 4, 5Living apart but not legallyMarried filing separately ... . 23 More information  (See Tax help)
separated ................ . 5When to itemize ........... . 23 Taxes, not support ......... . 18Multiple support
Personal exemption ....... . 10ITINs (Individual taxpayer Tax-exempt income ........ . 17agreement ............... . 18
Signatures, joint returns ..... . 6identification Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 25
numbers) ................ . 21 Single taxpayers: Temporary absences ... . 12, 16N Filing status ................ . 5 Tips, reporting of (TableNational of the United Gross income filing 3) ......................... . 4J States .................... . 12 requirements (Table 1) ... . 2 Total support ............... . 17Joint return test ............ . 11 Nonresident aliens .......... . 2 How to file and forms ....... . 5 TTY/TDD information ....... . 25Joint returns ................ . 6 Dependents ............... . 21 Personal exemption ....... . 10Dependents on ............ . 16 Tuition, benefits under GIEarned income credit ....... . 8 Social security and MedicarePersonal exemption ....... . 10 Bill ....................... . 18Exemptions ............... . 10 taxes:Joint return ................ . 6 Reporting of (Table 3) ...... . 4Spouse .................... . 7K USupport, not included in .... . 18Taxpayer identificationKidnapped children: U.S. citizen or resident ..... . 12Social security benefits .... . 17number ................. . 21Qualifying child ............ . 12 U.S. citizens filing abroad, filingSocial security numbers (SSNs)
Qualifying relative ......... . 15 requirements:for dependents ........... . 21
Widow(er) with dependent O Filing requirements ......... . 4Spouse  (See also Joint
child .................... . 10 Overseas taxpayers ......... . 4 U.S. national ............... . 12returns) .................... . 6
Deceased ............... . 6, 10 U.S. possessions, income
Dual-status alien spouse .... . 6 from ...................... . 4L P
Exemption for ............. . 10 Unmarried persons  (See SingleLife insurance premiums ... . 18 Parent, claiming head of Innocent spouse relief ...... . 6 taxpayers)Limit on itemized household for ............. . 9 Nonresident alien .......... . 7deductions ............... . 23 Parents who never Signing joint returns ........ . 6Local income taxes, itemized married .................. . 13 WSurviving (See Survivingdeductions ............... . 23 Parents, divorced or Welfare benefits ............ . 17spouse)Local law violated .......... . 16 separated ................ . 13 What's New for 2008:SSNs  (See Social securityLodging .................... . 17 Penalty, failure to file ........ . 3 Exemption amount ......... . 1numbers (SSNs) forLosses, rental real estate .... . 7 Exemption phaseout ........ . 1Personal exemption ........ . 10 dependents)
Limit on itemizedPhaseout ............... . 1, 21 Standard deduction ..... . 22-23 deduction ................ . 2Phaseout of exemptions ..... . 1 Married filing jointly ......... . 6M Who must file .............. . 1Photographs of missing State or local incomeMarital status, determination Widow/widower  (See Survivingchildren in IRS taxes ..................... . 23of ......................... . 5 spouse)publications ............... . 2 Stillborn child .............. . 12Married dependents, filing joint Worksheets:Publications  (See Tax help)return .................... . 11 Students: Deduction for exemptions,Puerto Rico, residents of .... . 4 Defined ................... . 12Married filing jointly  (See Joint determination of ......... . 21Foreign ................... . 12returns) Head of household status andSuggestions forMarried filing separately ..... . 6 Q cost of keeping uppublication ................ . 2Changing method from or to Qualifying:  (See also Surviving home .................... . 9itemized deductions ..... . 23 Support test:spouse) Support test ............... . 20Exemption for spouse ..... . 10 Qualifying child ............ . 13Child ..................... . 12
■Itemized deductions ....... . 23 Qualifying relative ......... . 16Relative .................. . 15
Surviving spouse ........... . 9
Widow/widower ............ . 9
Page 28 Publication 501 (2008)