Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -50% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P502.cvt (27-Oct-2003) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\RBSwan00\documents\Epicfiles\03P502.sgm
Page 1 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ContentsDepartment of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service Important Changes......................... 1
Important Reminders....................... 2
Publication 502 Introduction.............................. 2
Cat. No. 15002Q
What Are Medical Expenses? ................ 2
What Expenses Can You Include This
Year? ................................. 2Medical and
How Much of the Expense Can You
Deduct? .............................. 3Dental
Whose Medical Expenses Can You
Include? .............................. 3
Expenses What Medical Expenses Are Includible?........ 4
What Expenses Are Not Includible?........... 13(Including the Health
How Do You Treat Reimbursements? .......... 15Coverage Tax Credit)
How Do You Figure and Report the
Deduction on Your Tax Return?........... 18
For use in preparing Sale of Medical Equipment or Property......... 19
Damages for Personal Injuries................ 212003 Returns
Impairment-Related Work Expenses........... 21
Health Insurance Costs for Self-Employed
Persons ............................... 21
Health Coverage Tax Credit.................. 22
How To Get Tax Help....................... 25
Index .................................... 27
Important Changes
Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate al-
lowed for out-of-pocket expenses for a car when you use
it for medical reasons is 12 cents a mile for 2003. See
Transportation under What Medical Expenses Are Includ-
ible.
Self-employed health insurance deduction rate
increase.If you are self-employed, you may be able to
deduct, as an adjustment to income, up to 100% of the
amount you paid for medical and qualified long-term care
insurance in 2003 for yourself, your spouse, and your
dependents. This is an increase from the 70% of such
expenses you were allowed to deduct in 2002. For more
information, see Health Insurance Costs for Self-Em-
ployed Persons.
Health coverage tax credit.There is a new credit for
health insurance premiums paid by certain workers whoGet forms and other information are displaced by foreign trade or who are receiving a
faster and easier by: pension from the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
This credit is available to eligible individuals for qualifyingInternet • www.irs.gov or FTP • ftp.irs.gov payments made for each month in 2003. For more infor-
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine) mation, see Health Coverage Tax Credit near the end of
this publication.

Page 2 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 8853 Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care
Insurance ContractsImportant Reminders
❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Credit
Deduction threshold.Even if you have medical and See How To Get Tax Help near the end of this publica-dental expenses, you may not be able to claim a deduc-tion for information about getting publications and forms.tion for those expenses. This is because you can deduct
only the part of your medical and dental expenses that isComments and suggestions. We welcome your com-
more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. ments about this publication and your suggestions for
future editions.Obesity as a disease.The cost of participation in a You can e-mail us at *taxforms@irs.gov. Please putweight-loss program as a treatment for the disease of“Publications Comment” on the subject line.obesity is an amount paid for medical care. However, theYou can write to us at the following address:cost of purchasing reduced-calorie diet foods is not a
medical expense if these foods substitute for food youInternal Revenue Service
would normally consume to satisfy your nutritional re-Individual Forms and Publications Branch
quirements. For more information, see Weight-Loss Pro- SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
gram under What Medical Expenses are Includible and 1111 Constitution Ave. NW
under What Expenses Are Not Includible. Washington, DC 20224
Photographs of missing children.The Internal Reve- We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, itnue Service is a proud partner with the National Center forwould be helpful if you would include your daytime phoneMissing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missingnumber, including the area code, in your correspondence.children selected by the Center may appear in this publi-
cation on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
help bring these children home by looking at the photo-
What Are Medical Expenses?graphs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST
(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child. Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, cure, mitiga-
tion, treatment, or prevention of disease, and the costs for
treatments affecting any part or function of the body. The
Introduction medical care expenses must be primarily to alleviate or
prevent a physical or mental defect or illness. MedicalThis publication explains the itemized deduction for medi-expenses include dental expenses. Medical expenses docal and dental expenses that you claim on Schedule Anot include expenses that are merely beneficial to general(Form 1040). It discusses what expenses, and whosehealth, such as vitamins or a vacation.expenses, you can and cannot include in figuring theMedical expenses include the premiums you pay fordeduction. It explains how to treat reimbursements andinsurance that covers the expenses of medical care, andhow to figure the deduction. It also tells you how to reportthe amounts you pay for transportation to get medicalthe deduction and what to do if you sell medical propertycare. Medical expenses also include amounts paid foror receive damages for a personal injury. qualified long-term care services and limited amountsMedical expenses include dental expenses, and in thispaid for any qualified long-term care insurance contract.publication, the term “medical expenses” is often used to
refer to medical and dental expenses.
You can deduct only the part of your medical andWhat Expenses Can Youdental expenses that is more than 7.5% of your adjusted
gross income. If your medical and dental expenses areInclude This Year?
not more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, you
cannot claim a deduction. You can include only the medical and dental expenses
After discussing the medical and dental expenses de-you paid this year, regardless of when the services were
provided. (But see Decedent under Whose Medical Ex-duction, this publication explains how to treat
penses Can You Include, later, for an exception.) If youimpairment-related work expenses, health insurance pre-
pay medical expenses by check, the day you mail ormiums if you are self-employed, and the health coverage
deliver the check generally is the date of payment. If youtax credit that is available to certain individuals.
use a “pay-by-phone” or “on-line” account to pay your
medical expenses, the date reported on the statement of
Useful Items the financial institution showing when payment was madeYou may want to see: is the date of payment. You can include medical expenses
you charge to your credit card in the year the charge isPublication made. It does not matter when you actually pay the
❏ 969 Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs) amount charged.
If you did not claim a medical or dental expense that
Form (and Instructions) would have been deductible in an earlier year, you can file
Form 1040X , Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return turn, for the year in which you overlooked the expense. Do
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductions not claim the expense on this year’s return. Generally, an
Page 2

Page 3 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amended return must be filed within 3 years from the dateExample 1. Mary received medical treatment before
she married Bill. Bill paid for the treatment after theythe original return was filed or within 2 years from the time
married. Bill can include these expenses in figuring histhe tax was paid, whichever is later.
medical expense deduction even if Bill and Mary fileYou cannot include medical expenses that were paid
separate returns.by an insurance company or other sources. This is true
If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could not includewhether the payments were made directly to you, to the
Mary’s expenses in his separate return. Mary would in-patient, or to the provider of the medical services.
clude the amounts she paid during the year in her sepa-
rate return. If they filed a joint return, the medicalSeparate returns.If you and your spouse live in a non-expenses both paid during the year would be used tocommunity property state and file separate returns, eachfigure their medical expense deduction.of you can include only the medical expenses each actu-
ally paid. Any medical expenses paid out of a joint check-Example 2.This year, John paid medical expenses foring account in which you and your spouse have the samehis wife Louise, who died last year. John married Belleinterest are considered to have been paid equally by eachthis year and they file a joint return. Because John wasof you, unless you can show otherwise. married to Louise when she received the medical serv-
Community property states.If you and your spouse ices, he can include those expenses in figuring his medi-
live in a community property state and file separate re-cal deduction for this year.
turns, any medical expenses paid out of community fundsDependent. You can include medical expenses you paidare divided equally. Each of you should include half thefor your dependent. For you to include these expenses,expenses. If medical expenses are paid out of the sepa-the person must have been your dependent either at therate funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paid thetime the medical services were provided or at the time youmedical expenses can include them. If you live in a com-paid the expenses. A person generally qualifies as yourmunity property state, are married, and file a separatedependent for purposes of the medical expense deduc-return, see Publication 555, Community Property. tion if all three of the following requirements are met.
1) That person lived with you for the entire year as a
member of your household or is:How Much of the Expense Can
a) Your child, grandchild, great grandchild, etc. (aYou Deduct? legally adopted child is considered your child).
You can deduct only the amount of your medical and b) Your stepchild.
dental expenses that is more than 7.5% of your adjusted c) Your brother, sister, half brother, half sister, step-gross income (line 35, Form 1040). brother, or stepsister.In this publication, the term “7.5% limit”  is used to refer
to 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. The phrase “sub-d) Your parent, grandparent, or other direct ances-
ject to the 7.5% limit” is also used. This phrase means thattor, but not foster parent.
you must subtract 7.5% (.075) of your adjusted gross e) Your stepfather or stepmother.income from your medical expenses to figure your medi-
f) A brother or sister of your father or mother.cal expense deduction.
g) A son or daughter of your brother or sister.Example. Your adjusted gross income is $20,000,
h) Your father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,7.5% of which is $1,500. You paid medical expenses of
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law.$800. You cannot deduct any of your medical expenses
because they are not more than 7.5% of your adjusted
2) That person was a U.S. citizen or resident, or agross income.
resident of Canada or Mexico for some part of the
calendar year in which your tax year began.
3) You provided over half of that person’s total supportWhose Medical Expenses
for the calendar year.
Can You Include? You can include the medical expenses of any person
who is your dependent even if you cannot claim an ex-You can generally include medical expenses you pay foremption for him or her on your return.yourself as well as those you pay for someone who was
your spouse or your dependent either when the servicesExample. In 2002 your son was your dependent. Inwere provided or when you paid for them. There are2003 he no longer qualified as your dependent. However,different rules for decedents and for individuals who areyou paid $800 in 2003 for medical services provided tothe subject of multiple support agreements. your son in 2002, when he was your dependent. You can
include the $800 in your medical expenses for 2003. YouSpouse. You can include medical expenses you paid forcannot include this amount in your 2002 medical ex-your spouse. To include these expenses, you must havepenses.been married either at the time your spouse received the
medical services or at the time you paid the medicalAdopted child.You can include medical expenses that
expenses. you paid for a child before adoption, if the child qualified
Page 3

Page 4 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as your dependent when the medical services were pro- one-fourth of your mother’s medical expenses. Your
vided or when the expenses were paid. brothers cannot include any part of the expenses. How-
If you pay back an adoption agency or other persons ever, if you and your brothers share the nonmedical
for medical expenses they paid under an agreement with support items and you separately pay all of your mother’s
you, you are treated as having paid those expenses medical expenses, you can include the amount you paid
provided you clearly substantiate that the payment is for her medical expenses in your medical expenses.
directly attributable to the medical care of the child.
But if you pay the agency or other person for medicalDecedent. Medical expenses paid before death by thecare that was provided and paid for before adoptiondecedent are included in figuring any deduction for medi-negotiations began, you cannot include them as medicalcal and dental expenses on the decedent’s final incomeexpenses. tax return. This includes expenses for the decedent’s
spouse and dependents as well as for the decedent.You may be able to take a credit or exclusion for
other expenses related to adoption. See Publi-The survivor or personal representative of a decedentcation 968, Tax Benefits for Adoption, for more
TIP
can choose to treat certain expenses paid by theinformation. decedent’s estate for the decedent’s medical care as paid
by the decedent at the time the medical services were
provided. The expenses must be paid within the one-year
period beginning with the day after the date of death. IfChild of divorced or separated parents.For purposes
you are the survivor or personal representative makingof the medical and dental expenses deduction, a child of
this choice, you must attach a statement to the decedent’sdivorced or separated parents can be treated as a depen-
Form 1040 (or the decedent’s amended return, Formdent of both parents. Each parent can include the medical
1040X) saying that the expenses have not been and willexpenses he or she pays for the child, even if the other
not be claimed on the estate tax return.parent claims the child’s dependency exemption, if:
Qualified medical expenses paid before death1) The child is in the custody of one or both parents forby the decedent are not deductible if paid with amore than half the year, tax-free distribution from any Archer MSA.
CAUTION
!
2) The child receives over half of his or her support
during the year from his or her parents, and
What if the decedent’s return had been filed and the3) The child’s parents:
medical expenses were not included?Form 1040X
a) Are divorced or legally separated under a decreecan be filed for the year or years the expenses are treated
of divorce or separate maintenance, as paid, unless the period for filing an amended return for
that year has passed. Generally, an amended return mustb) Are separated under a written separation agree-be filed within 3 years of the date the original return wasment, or filed, or within 2 years from the time the tax was paid,
c) Live apart at all times during the last 6 months ofwhichever date is later.
the year.
Example. John properly filed his 2002 income tax re-
This does not apply if the child’s exemption is beingturn. He died in 2003 with unpaid medical expenses of
claimed under a multiple support agreement. $1,500 from 2002 and $1,800 in 2003. His survivor or
personal representative can file an amended return for
2002 claiming a deduction based on the $1,500 medicalSupport claimed under a multiple support agreement.expenses. The $1,800 of medical expenses from 2003If you are considered to have provided more than half of acan be included on the decedent’s final return for 2003.person’s support under a multiple support agreement, you
can include medical expenses you pay for that person,What if you pay medical expenses of a deceased
even if you cannot claim an exemption for that person. Aspouse or dependent?If you paid medical expenses for
multiple support agreement is used when two or moreyour deceased spouse or dependent, include them as
people provide more than half of a person’s support, butmedical expenses on your Form 1040 in the year paid,
no one alone provides more than half. whether they are paid before or after the decedent’s
For rules regarding what expenses you can include thisdeath. The expenses can be included if the person was
year, see What Expenses Can You Include This Year, your spouse or dependent either at the time the medical
earlier. services were provided or at the time you paid the ex-
Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you inpenses.
the agreement cannot be included as medical expenses
by anyone. However, you can include the entire un-
reimbursed amount you paid for medical expenses.
What Medical Expenses Are
Example. You and your three brothers each provide
one-fourth of your mother’s total support. Under a multipleIncludible?
support agreement, you treat your mother as your depen-
dent. You paid all of her medical expenses. Your brothers Following is a list of items that you can include in figuring
repaid you for three-fourths of these expenses. In figuring your medical expense deduction. The items are listed in
your medical expense deduction, you can include only alphabetical order.
Page 4

Page 5 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
paired person that is more than the cost of regular printedAbortion editions.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for a legal abortion. Capital Expenses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forAcupuncture special equipment installed in a home, or for improve-
ments, if their main purpose is medical care for you, yourYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
spouse, or your dependent. The cost of permanent im-for acupuncture.
provements that increase the value of your property may
be partly included as a medical expense. The cost of the
Alcoholism improvement is reduced by the increase in the value of
your property. The difference is a medical expense. If theYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forvalue of your property is not increased by the improve-an inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for alcoholment, the entire cost is included as a medical expense.addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided byCertain improvements made to accommodate a homethe center during treatment. to your disabled condition, or that of your spouse or yourYou can also include in medical expenses amountsdependents who live with you, do not usually increase theyou pay for transportation to and from meetings of anvalue of the home and the cost can be included in full asAlcoholics Anonymous Club in your community if themedical expenses. These improvements include, but areattendance is pursuant to medical advice that member-not limited to, the following items.ship in the Alcoholics Anonymous Club is necessary for
• Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.the treatment of a disease involving the excessive use of
alcoholic liquors. • Widening doorways at entrances or exits to your
home.
Ambulance • Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and inte-
rior doorways.You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
ambulance service.
• Installing railings, support bars, or other modifica-
tions to bathrooms.
Artificial Limb • Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-
ment.You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for an artificial limb.
• Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures.
• Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts (but
Artificial Teeth elevators generally add value to the house).
• Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and otherYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
warning systems.for artificial teeth.
• Modifying stairways.
Autoette • Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether
or not in bathrooms).See Wheelchair, later.
• Modifying hardware on doors.
Bandages • Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit door-
ways.You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical
supplies such as bandages used to cover torn skin. • Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-
dence.
Breast Reconstruction Surgery Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to a
disabled condition are considered medical care. Addi-You can include in medical expenses the amounts you
tional costs for personal motives, such as for architecturalpay for breast reconstruction surgery following a mastec-
or aesthetic reasons, are not medical expenses.tomy for cancer.
Capital expense worksheet.Use Worksheet A to figure
Birth Control Pills the amount of your capital expense to include in your
medical expenses.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor.
Braille Books and Magazines
You can include in medical expenses the part of the cost
of Braille books and magazines for use by a visually-im-
Page 5

Page 6 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
penses, as long as the main reason for them is medicalWorksheet A. Capital Expense Worksheet
care. This rule applies even if none or only part of the
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, iforiginal cost of the capital asset qualified as a medical
any, of your medical expenses due to a home improvement.care expense.
1.Enter the amount you paid for the home Example. If, in the previous example, the elevator in-improvement..................... 1. creased the value of your home by $8,000, you would
have no medical expense for the cost of the elevator.2.Enter the value of your
home immediately after the However, the cost of electricity to operate the elevator and
improvement........... 2. any costs to maintain it are medical expenses as long as
the medical reason for the elevator exists.3.Enter the value of your
home immediately before
the improvement........ 3. Improvements to property rented by a person with a
disability.Amounts paid to buy and install special4.Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the plumbing fixtures for a person with a disability, mainly forincrease in the value of your home due
medical reasons, in a rented house are medical ex-to the improvement................. 4.
penses.
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1,
you have no medical expenses due to Example. John has arthritis and a heart condition. Hethe home improvement; stop here. cannot climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On his doctor’s
advice, he installs a bathroom with a shower stall on the• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
first floor of his two-story rented house. The landlord did5.Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are not pay any of the cost of buying and installing the specialyour medical expenses due to the home plumbing and did not lower the rent. John can include inimprovement..................... 5. medical expenses the entire amount he paid.
Example. You have a heart ailment. On your doctor’sCar
advice, you install an elevator in your home so that you
You can include in medical expenses the cost of specialwill not have to climb stairs. The elevator costs $8,000. An
hand controls and other special equipment installed in aappraisal shows that the elevator increases the value of
car for the use of a person with a disability.your home by $4,400. You figure your medical expense
as shown in the filled-in example of Worksheet A.
Special design.You can include in medical expenses
Worksheet A. Capital Expense the difference between the cost of a regular car and a car
Worksheet—Illustrated specially designed to hold a wheelchair.
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if
Cost of operation.You cannot deduct the cost of oper-any, of your medical expenses due to a home improvement.
ating a specially equipped car, except as discussed under
Transportation, later.1.Enter the amount you paid for the home
improvement..................... 1. 8,000
Chiropractor2.Enter the value of your
home immediately after the You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to aimprovement........... 2. 124,400
chiropractor for medical care.
3.Enter the value of your
home immediately before Christian Science Practitionerthe improvement........ 3. 120,000
4.Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to
increase in the value of your home due Christian Science practitioners for medical care.
to the improvement................. 4. 4,400
Contact Lenses• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1,
you have no medical expenses due to
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forthe home improvement; stop here.
contact lenses needed for medical reasons. You can also
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5. include the cost of equipment and materials required for
using contact lenses, such as saline solution and enzyme5.Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are
cleaner. See Eyeglasses and Eye Surgery, later.your medical expenses due to the home
improvement..................... 5. 3,600
Crutches
You can include in medical expenses the amount you payOperation and upkeep.Amounts you pay for operation
to buy or rent crutches.and upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical ex-
Page 6

Page 7 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior sur-Dental Treatment gery that prevented the person operated on from
having children.You can include in medical expenses the amounts you
pay for dental treatment. This includes fees paid to den-
tists for X-rays, fillings, braces, extractions, dentures, etc.
But see Teeth Whitening under What Expenses Are Not
Founder’s Fee
Includible, later.
See Lifetime Care—Advance Payments, later.
Diagnostic Devices Guide Dog or Other Animal
You can include in medical expenses the cost of devices
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a guideused in diagnosing and treating illness and disease.
dog or other animal to be used by a visually-impaired or
hearing-impaired person. You can also include the cost ofExample. You have diabetes and use a blood sugar
a dog or other animal trained to assist persons with othertest kit to monitor your blood sugar level. You can include
physical disabilities. Amounts you pay for the care ofthe cost of the blood sugar test kit in your medical ex-
these specially trained animals are also medical ex-penses.
penses.
Disabled Dependent Care Expenses Health Institute
Some disabled dependent care expenses may qualify as
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay foreither:
treatment at a health institute only if the treatment is
• Medical expenses, or prescribed by a physician and the physician issues a
statement that the treatment is necessary to alleviate a• Work-related expenses for purposes of taking aphysical or mental defect or illness of the individual receiv-credit for dependent care. ing the treatment.
You can choose to apply them either way as long as you
do not use the same expenses to claim both a credit and aHealth Maintenancemedical expense deduction. Organization (HMO)
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay toDrug Addiction entitle you, or your spouse or a dependent to receive
medical care from a health maintenance organization.You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
These amounts are treated as medical insurance premi-an inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for drug
ums. See Insurance Premiums, later.addiction. This includes meals and lodging at the center
during treatment.
Hearing Aids
Drugs You can include in medical expenses the cost of a hearing
aid and the batteries you buy to operate it.See Medicines, later.
Home CareEyeglasses
See Nursing Services, later.You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical rea-
sons. You can also include fees paid for eye examina-
Home Improvements
tions.
See Capital Expenses, earlier.
Eye Surgery Hospital Services
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forfor eye surgery to treat defective vision, such as laser eye
the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar institutionsurgery or radial keratotomy. if a principal reason for being there is to receive medical
care. This includes amounts paid for meals and lodging.Fertility Enhancement Also see Lodging, later.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of the
Insurance Premiumsfollowing procedures to overcome an inability to have
children. You can include in medical expenses insurance premi-
• Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (includingums you pay for policies that cover medical care. Policies
temporary storage of eggs or sperm). can provide payment for:
Page 7

Page 8 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
enrolled in Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare• Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc., A is not a medical expense. If you are not covered under
• Prescription drugs, social security (or were not a government employee who
paid Medicare tax), you can voluntarily enroll in Medicare• Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses,A. In this situation the premiums you paid for Medicare A
• Membership in an association that gives coopera-can be included as a medical expense on your tax return.
tive or so-called “free-choice” medical service, or
group hospitalization and clinical care, or
Medicare B• Qualified long-term care insurance contracts (sub-
ject to additional limitations). See Qualified Medicare B is a supplemental medical insurance. Premi-
Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts under ums you pay for Medicare B are a medical expense. If you
Long-Term Care, later. applied for it at age 65 or after you became disabled, you
can deduct the monthly premiums you paid. If you were
If you have a policy that provides more than one kind ofover age 65 or disabled when you first enrolled, check the
payment, you can include the premiums for the medicalinformation you received from the Social Security Admin-
care part of the policy if the charge for the medical part isistration to find out your premium.
reasonable. The cost of the medical part must be sepa-
rately stated in the insurance contract or given to you in a
Prepaid Insurance Premiumsseparate statement.
Premiums you pay before you are age 65 for insurance forNote. If advance payments of the health coverage taxmedical care for yourself, your spouse, or your depen-credit were made on your behalf to your insurance com-dents after you reach age 65 are medical care expensespany, do not include any advance payments made for youin the year paid if they are:when figuring the amount you may deduct for insurance
premiums. Also, if you are claiming the health coverage1) Payable in equal yearly installments or more often,tax credit, subtract the amount shown on line 4 of Formand8885 (reduced by any advance payments shown on line 6
of that form) from the total insurance premiums you paid.2) Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach age
65 (but not for less than 5 years).
Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan
Unused Sick Leave Used to Pay PremiumsDo not include in your medical and dental expenses on
Schedule A (Form 1040) any insurance premiums paid byYou must include in gross income cash payments youan employer-sponsored health insurance plan unless thereceive at the time of retirement for unused sick leave.premiums are included in box 1 of your Form W–2. Also,You must also include in gross income the value of un-do not include on Schedule A (Form 1040) any otherused sick leave that, at your option, your employer appliesmedical and dental expenses paid by the plan unless theto the cost of your continuing participation in youramount paid is included in box 1 of your Form W–2.employer’s health plan after you retire. You can include
this cost of continuing participation in the health plan as aExample. You are a federal employee participating in
medical expense.the Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) program.
If you participate in a health plan where your employerYour share of the FEHB premium is paid with pre-tax
automatically applies the value of unused sick leave to thedollars. Because you are an employee whose insurance
cost of your continuing participation in the health planpremiums are paid with money that is never included in
(and you do not have the option to receive cash), do notyour gross income, you cannot deduct the premiums paid
include the value of the unused sick leave in gross in-with that money.
come. You cannot include this cost of continuing partici-
Flexible spending arrangement.Contributions made pation in that health plan as a medical expense.
by your employer to provide coverage for qualified
long-term care services under a flexible spending or simi-
Insurance Premiums You Cannot Includelar arrangement must be included in your income. This
amount will be reported as wages in box 1 of your FormYou cannot include premiums you pay for:W–2.
• Life insurance policies,Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). If you
• Policies providing payment for loss of earnings,have medical expenses that are reimbursed by a health
reimbursement arrangement, you cannot include those• Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.,expenses in your medical expenses. This is because an
• Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount eachHRA is funded solely by the employer.
week for a stated number of weeks if you are hospi-
talized for sickness or injury, or
Medicare A • The part of your car insurance premiums that pro-
vides medical insurance coverage for all personsIf you are covered under social security (or if you are a
injured in or by your car because the part of thegovernment employee who paid Medicare tax), you are
Page 8

Page 9 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
premium for you, your spouse, and your depen- Payments for future medical care.Generally, you can-
not include in medical expenses current payments fordents is not stated separately from the part of the
medical care (including medical insurance) to be providedpremium for medical care for others.
substantially beyond the end of the year. This rule does
not apply in situations where the future care is purchasedHealth Insurance Costs for Self-Employed in connection with obtaining lifetime care of the type
Persons described earlier.
If you were self-employed and paid health insuranceLodgingcosts, see Health Insurance Costs for Self-Employed Per-
sons, later. You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals
and lodging at a hospital or similar institution if a principal
Laboratory Fees reason for being there is to receive medical care. See
Nursing Home, later.You can include in medical expenses the amounts you You may be able to include in medical expenses thepay for laboratory fees that are part of medical care.cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar institu-
tion. You can include the cost of such lodging while away
from home if all of the following requirements are met.
Lead-Based Paint Removal
1) The lodging is primarily for and essential to medicalYou can include in medical expenses the cost of removing
care.lead-based paints from surfaces in your home to prevent
a child who has or has had lead poisoning from eating the2) The medical care is provided by a doctor in a li-paint. These surfaces must be in poor repair (peeling orcensed hospital or in a medical care facility relatedcracking) or within the child’s reach. The cost of repaintingto, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital.the scraped area is not a medical expense.
3) The lodging is not lavish or extravagant under theIf, instead of removing the paint, you cover the areacircumstances.with wallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital
expenses. See Capital Expenses, earlier. Do not include4) There is no significant element of personal plea-
the cost of painting the wallboard as a medical expense.sure, recreation, or vacation in the travel away from
home.
Learning Disability The amount you include in medical expenses for lodg-
ing cannot be more than $50 for each night for eachSee Special Education, later. person. You can include lodging for a person traveling
with the person receiving the medical care. For example,
Legal Fees if a parent is traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per
night can be included as a medical expense for lodging.
You can include in medical expenses legal fees you paidMeals are not included.
that are necessary to authorize treatment for mental ill-Do not include the cost of lodging while away from
ness. However, you cannot include in medical expenseshome for medical treatment if that treatment is not re-
fees for the management of a guardianship estate, feesceived from a doctor in a licensed hospital or in a medical
for conducting the affairs of the person being treated, orcare facility related to, or the equivalent of, a licensed
other fees that are not necessary for medical care.hospital or if that lodging is not primarily for or essential to
the medical care received.
Lifetime Care—Advance Payments
Long-Term CareYou can include in medical expenses a part of a life-care
fee or “founder’s fee” you pay either monthly or as a lumpYou can include in medical expenses amounts paid for
sum under an agreement with a retirement home. Thequalified long-term care services and premiums paid for
part of the payment you include is the amount properlyqualified long-term care insurance contracts.
allocable to medical care. The agreement must require
that you pay a specific fee as a condition for the home’s
Qualified Long-Term Care Servicespromise to provide lifetime care that includes medical
care. You can use a statement from the retirement homeQualified long-term care services are necessary diagnos-to prove the amount properly allocable to medical care.tic, preventive, therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating,The statement must be based either on the home’s priorrehabilitative services, and maintenance and personalexperience or on information from a comparable home.care services (defined later) that are:
Dependents with disabilities.You can include in medi- 1) Required by a chronically ill individual, andcal expenses advance payments to a private institution for
2) Provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by alifetime care, treatment, and training of your physically or
licensed health care practitioner.mentally impaired child upon your death or when you
become unable to provide care. The payments must be a
condition for the institution’s future acceptance of yourChronically ill individual.An individual is chronically ill
child and must not be refundable. if, within the previous 12 months, a licensed health care
Page 9

Page 10 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
practitioner has certified that the individual meets either ofMealsthe following descriptions.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals at1) He or she is unable to perform at least two activitiesa hospital or similar institution if a principal reason forof daily living without substantial assistance frombeing there is to get medical care.another individual for at least 90 days, due to a lossYou cannot include in medical expenses the cost ofof functional capacity. Activities of daily living are
meals that are not part of inpatient care.eating, toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and
continence.
Medical Conferences2) He or she requires substantial supervision to be
protected from threats to health and safety due toYou can include in medical expenses amounts paid forsevere cognitive impairment. admission and transportation to a medical conference if
the medical conference concerns the chronic illness ofMaintenance and personal care services.Mainte- yourself, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs ofnance or personal care services is care which has as itsthe medical conference must be primarily for and neces-primary purpose the providing of a chronically ill individualsary to the medical care of you, your spouse, or yourwith needed assistance with his or her disabilities (includ-dependent. The majority of the time spent at the confer-ing protection from threats to health and safety due toence must be spent attending sessions on medical infor-severe cognitive impairment).
mation.
The cost of meals and lodging while attendingQualified Long-Term Care Insurance the conference is not deductible as a medicalContracts expense.CAUTION
!
A qualified long-term care insurance contract is an insur-
ance contract that provides only coverage of qualified
long-term care services. The contract must:
Medical Information Plan
1) Be guaranteed renewable,
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid to a2) Not provide for a cash surrender value or otherplan that keeps medical information in a computer datamoney that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or bor-bank and retrieves and furnishes the information uponrowed, request to an attending physician.
3) Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the
death of the insured or complete surrender or can-Medical Servicescellation of the contract, and dividends under the
contract must be used only to reduce future premi-You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
ums or increase future benefits, and legal medical services provided by:
4) Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurred
• Physicians,for services or items that would be reimbursed
• Surgeons,under Medicare, except where Medicare is a secon-
dary payer, or the contract makes per diem or other• Specialists, orperiodic payments without regard to expenses.
• Other medical practitioners.The amount of qualified long-term care premiums you
can include is limited. You can include the following as
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Medicines
1) Qualified long-term care premiums up to the
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay foramounts shown below.
prescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug is one
a) Age 40 or under – $250. that requires a prescription by a doctor for its use by an
individual. You can also include amounts you pay forb) Age 41 to 50 – $470.
insulin. Except for insulin, you cannot include in medicalc) Age 51 to 60 – $940. expenses amounts you pay for a drug that is not pre-
scribed.d) Age 61 to 70 – $2,510.
e) Age 71 or over – $3,130. Note. This rule applies only to the deduction for medi-
cal expenses. It does not limit reimbursements of medical2) Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term careexpenses by employer-sponsored health plans that reim-services. burse the cost of both prescription and nonprescription
medicines.Note. The limit on premiums is for each person.
Page 10

Page 11 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
responsibilities of household employers, see PublicationMentally Retarded, 926, Household Employer’s Tax Guide.Special Home for
OperationsYou can include in medical expenses the cost of keeping
a mentally retarded person in a special home, not the
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forhome of a relative, on the recommendation of a psychia-
legal operations that are not for unnecessary cosmetictrist to help the person adjust from life in a mental hospital
surgery. See Cosmetic Surgery under What Expensesto community living.
Are Not Includible, later.
Nursing Home Optometrist
You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical
See Eyeglasses, earlier.care in a nursing home, home for the aged, or similar
institution, for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents.
This includes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if
Organ Donors
a principal reason for being there is to get medical care.
See Transplants, later.Do not include the cost of meals and lodging if the
reason for being in the home is personal. You can, how-
ever, include in medical expenses the part of the cost that
Osteopath
is for medical or nursing care.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
an osteopath for medical care.Nursing Services
You can include in medical expenses wages and otherOxygen
amounts you pay for nursing services. The services need
not be performed by a nurse as long as the services are ofYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
a kind generally performed by a nurse. This includesoxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathing
services connected with caring for the patient’s condition,problems caused by a medical condition.
such as giving medication or changing dressings, as well
as bathing and grooming the patient. These services can
Prosthesisbe provided in your home or another care facility.
Generally, only the amount spent for nursing servicesSee Artificial Limb, earlier.
is a medical expense. If the attendant also provides per-
sonal and household services, amounts paid to the at-Psychiatric Caretendant must be divided between the time spent
performing household and personal services and the timeYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forspent for nursing services. However, certain maintenancepsychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting aor personal care services provided for qualified long-termmentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medicalcare can be included in medical expenses. See Mainte- center where the dependent receives medical care. Seenance and personal care services under Chronically IllPsychoanalysis, next, and Transportation, later.Individuals, earlier. Additionally, certain expenses for
household services or for the care of a qualifying individ-
Psychoanalysisual incurred to allow you to work may qualify for the child
and dependent care credit. See Publication 503, Child You can include in medical expenses payments for psy-and Dependent Care Expenses. choanalysis. However, you cannot include payments forYou can also include in medical expenses part of thepsychoanalysis that is part of required training to be aamount you pay for that attendant’s meals. Divide thepsychoanalyst.food expense among the household members to find the
cost of the attendant’s food. Then divide that cost in the
Psychologistsame manner as in the preceding paragraph. If you had to
pay additional amounts for household upkeep because ofYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay tothe attendant, you can include the extra amounts witha psychologist for medical care.your medical expenses. This includes extra rent or utilities
you pay because you moved to a larger apartment to
provide space for the attendant.
Special Education
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay on aEmployment taxes. You can include as a medical ex-doctor’s recommendation for a child’s tutoring by apense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and stateteacher who is specially trained and qualified to work withemployment taxes you pay for a nurse, attendant, or otherchildren who have learning disabilities caused by mentalperson who provides medical care. If the attendant alsoor physical impairments, including nervous system disor-provides personal and household services, you can onlyders.include as a medical expense, the amount of employment
taxes paid for medical services as explained earlier under You can include in medical expenses the cost (tuition,
Nursing Services. For information on employment tax meals, and lodging) of attending a school that furnishes
Page 11

Page 12 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
special education to help a child to overcome learning lation of the child’s arms and legs to imitate crawling and
disabilities. A doctor must recommend that the child at- other normal movements.
tend the school. Overcoming the learning disabilities must
be a principal reason for attending the school, and any
Transplantsordinary education received must be incidental to the
special education provided. Special education includes:You can include any expenses you pay for medical care
you receive because you are a donor or a possible donor
• Teaching Braille to a visually impaired person,of a kidney or other organ. This includes transportation.
• Teaching lip reading to a hearing impaired person,You can include any expenses you pay for the medical
or care of a donor in connection with the donating of an
organ to you. This includes transportation.• Giving remedial language training to correct a con-
dition caused by a birth defect.
Transportation
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid forsending a problem child to a school where the course of
transportation primarily for, and essential to, medicalstudy and the disciplinary methods have a beneficial ef-
care.fect on the child’s attitude if the availability of medical care
in the school is not a principal reason for sending theYou can include:student there.
• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares or ambulance serv-
ice,Sterilization
• Transportation expenses of a parent who must goYou can include in medical expenses the cost of a legalwith a child who needs medical care,sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a
person unable to have children). • Transportation expenses of a nurse or other person
who can give injections, medications, or other treat-
ment required by a patient who is traveling to get
Stop-Smoking Programs
medical care and is unable to travel alone, and
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for• Transportation expenses for regular visits to see aa program to stop smoking. However, you cannot includementally ill dependent, if these visits are recom-in medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that domended as a part of treatment.not require a prescription, such as nicotine gum or
patches, that are designed to help stop smoking.
Car expenses.You can include out-of-pocket expenses,
such as the cost of gas and oil, when you use a car forSurgery medical reasons. You cannot include depreciation, insur-
ance, general repair, or maintenance expenses.See Operations, earlier.
If you do not want to use your actual expenses, for
2003 you can use a standard rate of 12 cents a mile for
Telephone use of a car for medical reasons.
You can also include parking fees and tolls. You canYou can include in medical expenses the cost of special
add these fees and tolls to your medical expensestelephone equipment that lets a hearing-impaired person
whether you use actual expenses or use the standardcommunicate over a regular telephone. You can also
mileage rate.include the cost of repairing the equipment.
Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for medicalTelevision reasons during the year. He spent $200 for gas, $5 for oil,
and $50 for tolls and parking. He wants to figure theYou can include in medical expenses the cost of equip-amount he can include in medical expenses both ways toment that displays the audio part of television programssee which gives him the greater deduction.as subtitles for hearing-impaired persons. This may beHe figures the actual expenses first. He adds the $200the cost of an adapter that attaches to a regular set. It alsofor gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 for tolls and parking formay be the part of the cost of a specially equippeda total of $255.television that exceeds the cost of the same model regularHe then figures the standard mileage amount. He mul-television set. tiplies the 2,800 miles by 12 cents a mile for a total of
$336. He then adds the $50 tolls and parking for a total ofTherapy $386.
Bill includes the $386 of car expenses with his otherYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay formedical expenses for the year because the $386 is moretherapy received as medical treatment. than the $255 he figured using actual expenses.
“Patterning” exercises.You can include in medical
expenses amounts you pay to an individual for givingTransportation expenses you cannot include.You
“patterning” exercises to a mentally retarded child. These cannot include in medical expenses the cost of transpor-
exercises consist mainly of coordinated physical manipu- tation in the following situations.
Page 12

Page 13 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The amount you can include in medical expenses is• Going to and from work, even if your condition re-limited to the amount by which the cost of the special foodquires an unusual means of transportation. exceeds the cost of a normal diet. See also Weight-Loss
Program under What Expenses Are Not Includible, later.• Travel for purely personal reasons to another city
for an operation or other medical care.
Wheelchair• Travel that is merely for the general improvement of
one’s health. You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
an autoette or a wheelchair used mainly for the relief of
sickness or disability, and not just to provide transporta-
Trips tion to and from work. The cost of operating and keeping
up the autoette or wheelchair is also a medical expense.You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
transportation to another city if the trip is primarily for, and
Wigessential to, receiving medical services. You may be able
to include up to $50 per night for lodging. See Lodging, You can include in medical expenses the cost of a wigearlier. purchased upon the advice of a physician for the mental
You cannot include in medical expenses a trip or vaca-health of a patient who has lost all of his or her hair from
tion taken merely for a change in environment, improve-disease.
ment of morale, or general improvement of health, even if
the trip is made on the advice of a doctor. However, see
X-rayMedical Conferences, earlier.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
X-rays for medical reasons.Tuition
Under special circumstances, you can include charges for
tuition in medical expenses. see Special Education, ear- What Expenses Are Notlier.
You can include charges for a health plan included in aIncludible?
lump sum tuition fee if the charges are separately stated
or can easily be obtained from the school. Following is a list of some items that you cannot include in
figuring your medical expense deduction. The items are
listed in alphabetical order.
Vasectomy
You can include in medical expenses the amount you payBaby Sitting, Childcare, and Nursing
for a vasectomy. Services for a Normal, Healthy Baby
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts youVision Correction Surgery
pay for the care of children, even if the expenses enable
See Eye Surgery, earlier. you, your spouse, or your dependent to get medical or
dental treatment. Also, any expense allowed as a child-
care credit cannot be treated as an expense paid for
Weight-Loss Program
medical care.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
lose weight if it is a treatment for a specific diseaseControlled Substancesdiagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hypertension,
or heart disease). This includes fees you pay for member-You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
ship in a weight reduction group and attendance at peri-pay for controlled substances (such as marijuana, laetrile,
odic meetings. You cannot include membership dues in aetc.), in violation of federal law.
gym, health club, or spa as medical expenses, but you
can include separate fees charged there for weight loss
Cosmetic Surgeryactivities.
Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses theYou cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages in
amount you pay for unnecessary cosmetic surgery. Thismedical expenses because the diet food and beverages
includes any procedure that is directed at improving thesubstitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
patient’s appearance and does not meaningfully promotetional needs. You can include the cost of special food in
the proper function of the body or prevent or treat illnessmedical expenses only if: or disease. You generally cannot include in medical ex-
penses the amount you pay for procedures such as face1) The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs,lifts, hair transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), teeth
2) The food alleviates or treats an illness, andwhitening, and liposuction.
3) The need for the food is substantiated by a physi-You can include in medical expenses the amount you
cian. pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve a
Page 13

Page 14 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deformity arising from, or directly related to, a congenital health coverage tax credit. For more information, see
Health Coverage Tax Credit, later.abnormality, a personal injury resulting from an accident
or trauma, or a disfiguring disease.
Household HelpExample. An individual undergoes surgery that
removes a breast as part of treatment for cancer. SheYou cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
household help, even if such help is recommended by apays a surgeon to reconstruct the breast. The surgery to
doctor. This is a personal expense that is not deductible.reconstruct the breast corrects a deformity directly related
However, you may be able to include certain expensesto the disease. The cost of the surgery is includible in her
paid to a person providing nursing-type services. Formedical expenses.
more information, see Nursing Services, earlier. Also,
certain maintenance or personal care services providedDancing Lessons for qualified long-term care can be included in medical
expenses. For more information, see QualifiedYou cannot include the cost of dancing lessons, swim-Long-Term Care Services, earlier.ming lessons, etc., even if they are recommended by a
doctor, if they are only for the improvement of general
Illegal Operations and Treatmentshealth.
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts youDiaper Service pay for illegal operations, treatments, or controlled sub-
stances whether rendered or prescribed by licensed orYou cannot include in medical expenses the amount youunlicensed practitioners.pay for diapers or diaper services, unless they are needed
to relieve the effects of a particular disease.
Insurance Premiums
Electrolysis or Hair Removal See Insurance Premiums under What Medical Expenses
Are Includible, earlier.See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Maternity ClothesFuneral Expenses
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts youYou cannot include in medical expenses amounts youpay for maternity clothes.pay for funerals. However, funeral expenses may be de-
ductible on the decedent’s federal estate tax return.
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
Future Medical Care You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
contribute to an Archer MSA. You cannot include medicalGenerally, you cannot include in medical expenses cur-expenses you pay for with a tax-free distribution from yourrent payments for medical care (including medical insur-Archer MSA. You also cannot use other funds equal to theance) to be provided substantially beyond the end of theamount of the distribution and include the expenses. Foryear. This rule does not apply in situations where themore information on Archer MSAs, see Publication 969,future care is purchased in connection with obtainingMedical Savings Accounts (MSAs).lifetime care of the type described under Long-Term Care,
earlier. Nonprescription Drugs and
MedicinesHair Transplant
Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical ex-See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier. penses amounts you pay for a drug that is not prescribed.
Health Club Dues Example. You doctor recommends that you take aspi-
rin. Because aspirin is a drug that does not require aYou cannot include in medical expenses health club dues,physician’s prescription, you cannot include its cost inor amounts paid to improve one’s general health or toyour medical expenses.relieve physical or mental discomfort not related to a
particular medical condition. Nutritional SupplementsYou cannot include in medical expenses the cost of
membership in any club organized for business, pleasure,You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of nutri-
recreation, or other social purpose. tional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements, “natu-
ral medicines,” etc. unless they are recommended by a
medical practitioner as treatment for a specific medical
Health Coverage Tax Credit
condition diagnosed by a physician. Otherwise, these
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts youitems are taken to maintain your ordinary good health,
pay for health insurance that you use in figuring your and are not for medical care.
Page 14

Page 15 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Personal Use Items How Do You Treat
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of an
Reimbursements?item ordinarily used for personal, living, or family pur-
poses unless it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate aYou can deduct as medical expenses only those amountsphysical or mental defect or illness. For example, the costpaid during the taxable year for which you received noof a toothbrush and toothpaste is a nondeductible per-insurance or other reimbursement.sonal expense.
Where an item purchased in a special form primarily toInsurance Reimbursement
alleviate a physical defect is one that in normal form is
You must reduce your total medical expenses for the yearordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposes, the
by all reimbursements for medical expenses that youexcess of the cost of the special form over the cost of the
receive from insurance or other sources during the year.normal form is a medical expense (see Braille Books and This includes payments from Medicare.Magazines under What Medical Expenses Are Includible, Even if a policy only provides reimbursement for cer-earlier). tain specific medical expenses, you must use amounts
you receive from that policy to reduce your total medical
Swimming Lessons expenses, including those it does not provide reimburse-
ment for.See Dancing Lessons, earlier.
Example. You have insurance policies which cover
Teeth Whitening your hospital and doctors’ bills but not your nursing bills.
The insurance you receive for the hospital and doctors’
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts paid tobills is more than their charges. In figuring your medical
whiten teeth that are discolored as a result of age. Seededuction, you must reduce the total amount you spent for
Cosmetic Surgery, earlier. medical care by the total amount of insurance you re-
ceived even if the policies do not cover some of your
medical expenses.
Veterinary Fees
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).A healthExcept for the care of guide dogs for the seeing-impairedreimbursement arrangement is an employer-funded planor hearing-impaired, or for other animals specially trainedthat reimburses employees for medical care expensesto assist persons with physical disabilities, you cannotand allows unused amounts to be carried forward. Aninclude veterinary fees in your medical expenses.HRA is funded solely by the employer and the reimburse-
ments for medical expenses, up to a maximum dollar
Weight-Loss Program amount for a coverage period, are not included in your
income.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of a
Other reimbursements.Generally, you do not reduceweight-loss program if the purpose of the weight loss is
medical expenses by payments you receive for:the improvement of appearance, general health, or sense
of well-being. You cannot include amounts you pay to lose
• Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or
weight unless the weight loss is a treatment for a specificfunction of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing,
etc.) or disfigurement to the extent the payment isdisease diagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hy-
based on the nature of the injury without regard topertension, or heart disease). This includes fees you pay
the amount of time lost from work, orfor membership in a weight reduction group and attend-
ance at periodic meetings. Also, you cannot include mem-• Loss of earnings.
bership dues in a gym, health club, or spa.
You must, however, reduce your medical expenses byYou cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages inany part of these payments that is designated for medicalmedical expenses because the diet food and beveragescosts. See How Do You Figure and Report the Deductionsubstitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-on Your Tax Return, later.tional needs. You cannot include the cost of special foodFor how to treat damages received for personal injuryin medical expenses unless all three of the followingor sickness, see Damages For Personal Injuries, later.requirements are met.
What If Your Insurance Reimbursement Is1) The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs.
More Than Your Medical Expenses?2) The food alleviates or treats an illness.
If you are reimbursed more than your medical expenses,3) The need for the food is substantiated by a physi-
you may have to include the excess in income. You maycian. want to use Figure 1 to help you decide if any of your
The amount you can include in medical expenses isreimbursement is taxable.
limited to the amount by which the cost of the special food
exceeds the cost of a normal diet.
Page 15

Page 16 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet B. Excess Reimbursement
Includible in Income When
You Have Only One Policy
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of
excess reimbursement you must include in income when
both you and your employer contributed to your medical
insurance and your employer’s contributions are not
included in your gross income.
1. Enter the amount contributed to
your medical insurance for the year
by your employer.............. 1.
2. Enter the total annual cost of the
policy....................... 2.
3. Divide line 1 by line 2........... 3.
4. Enter the amount of excess
reimbursement................ 4.
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the
amount of the excess reimburse-
ment you must include as other
income  on line 21, Form 1040.... 5.
Example. You are covered by your employer’s medi-
cal insurance policy. The annual premium is $2,000. Your
employer pays $600 of that amount, which is not included
in your gross income, and the balance of $1,400 is taken
out of your wages. You receive $500 excess reimburse-
ment for your medical expenses. The part of the excess
reimbursement you receive under the policy that is from
your employer’s contributions is figured as follows.
Worksheet B. Excess Reimbursement
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this publication.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
Includible in Income When
You Have Only One Policy—Premiums paid by you.If you pay the entire premium
for your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan similar Illustrated
to medical insurance, and your insurance payments or
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount ofother reimbursements are more than your total medical
excess reimbursement you must include in income whenexpenses for the year, you have excess reimbursement. both you and your employer contributed to your medicalGenerally, you do not include the excess reimbursementinsurance and your employer’s contributions are notin your gross income. However, gross income does in-included in your gross income.clude total payments in excess of $220 a day ($80,300 a
year) for qualified long-term care services. 1.Enter the amount contributed to
your medical insurance for the yearPremiums paid by you and your employer.If both you by your employer............. 1. 600and your employer contribute to your medical insurance
plan and your employer’s contributions are not included in2.Enter the total annual cost of the
your gross income, you must include in your gross incomepolicy...................... 2. 2,000
the part of your excess reimbursement that is from your3.Divide line 1 by line 2.......... 3. 30%employer’s contribution.
You can figure the amount of the excess reimburse-4.Enter the amount of excess
ment you must include in gross income using Worksheet reimbursement............... 4. 500
B. 5.Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the
amount of the excess reimburse-
ment you must include as other
income  on line 21, Form 1040 . . .5. 150
You must include in your gross income 30% (.30) of
$500, or $150, of the excess reimbursement you received
for medical expenses under the policy.
Premiums paid by your employer.If your employer or
your former employer pays the total cost of your medical
Page 16

Page 17 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
insurance plan and your employer’s contributions are notExample. You are covered by your employer’s health
included in your income, you must report all of your insurance policy. The annual premium is $1,200. Your
excess reimbursement as other income. employer pays $300 and the balance of $900 is deducted
from your wages. You also paid the entire premium ($250)
More than one policy.If you are covered under morefor a personal health insurance policy.
than one policy, the cost of at least one of which is paid byDuring the year, you paid medical expenses of $3,600.
both you and your employer, you must first divide theIn the same year, you were reimbursed $2,400 under your
medical expenses among the policies to figure the excessemployer’s policy and $1,600 under your own personal
reimbursement from each policy. Then divide the policypolicy. The amount you must report as other income is
costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement thatfigured as follows.
is from your employer’s contribution. Any excess reim-
bursement that is due to your employer’s contributions is
Worksheet C. Excess Reimbursement
includible in your income. Includible in Income When
You can figure the part of the excess reimbursement You Have More Than Onethat is from your employer’s contribution by using Work- Policy—Illustratedsheet C. Use Worksheet C only if both you and your
employer paid part of the cost of at least one policy. If youInstructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of
had more than one policy, but you did not share in the costexcess reimbursement you must include as income on your
of at least one policy, do not use Worksheet C. tax return when a) you are reimbursed under two or more
health insurance policies, b) at least one of which is paid for
by both you and your employer, and c) your employer’s
Worksheet C. Excess Reimbursement contributions are not included in your gross income. If youIncludible in Income When and your employer did not share in the cost of at least one
policy, do not use this worksheet.You Have More Than One
Policy
1. Enter the reimbursement from your
employer’s policy................ 1. 2,400Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of
excess reimbursement you must include as income on your2. Enter the reimbursement from yourtax return when a) you are reimbursed under two or more
own policy..................... 2. 1,600health insurance policies, b) at least one of which is paid for
by both you and your employer, and c) your employer’s 3. Add lines 1 and 2............... 3. 4,000contributions are not included in your gross income. If you
and your employer did not share in the cost of at least one4. Divide line 1 by line 3............ 4. .60policy, do not use this worksheet.
5. Enter the total medical expenses you
paid during the year. If this amount is1. Enter the reimbursement from your
at least as much as the amount on lineemployer’s policy................ 1.
3, stop here because there is no2. Enter the reimbursement from your excess reimbursement............ 5. 3,600own policy..................... 2.
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5........... 6. 2,1603. Add lines 1 and 2............... 3.
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1......... 7. 2404. Divide line 1 by line 3............. 4.
8. Enter employer’s contribution to the5. Enter the total medical expenses you annual cost of the employer’s policy8. 300paid during the year. If this amount is
9. Enter total premium of employer’sat least as much as the amount on
policy........................ 9. 1,200line 3, stop here because there is no
excess reimbursement............ 5. 10.Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the
percentage of your total excess6. Multiply line 4 by line 5........... 6.
reimbursement you must report as7. Subtract line 6 from line 1......... 7. other income................... 10. .25
8. Enter employer’s contribution to the 11.Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is theannual cost of the employer’s policy8. amount of your total excess
reimbursement you must report as9. Enter total annual cost of the other income on line 21, Form 104011. 60employer’s policy................ 9.
10.Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the
percentage of your total excess
What If You Receive Insurancereimbursement you must report as
other income................... 10.
Reimbursement in a Later Year?
11.Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical expensesamount of your total excess you deducted in an earlier year, you generally must reportreimbursement you must report as the reimbursement as income up to the amount youother income on line 21, Form 104011. previously deducted as medical expenses.
Page 17

Page 18 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
However, you do not report as income the amount ofHow Do You Figure Your Deduction?reimbursement you received up to the amount of your
medical deductions that did not reduce your tax for theTo figure your medical and dental expense deduction,
earlier year. complete lines 1–4 of Schedule A, Form 1040, as follows:
For more information about the recovery of an amount
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlierLine 1.Enter the amount you paid for medical expensesyear, see Recoveries in Publication 525, Taxable and after reducing the amount by payments you received fromNontaxable Income. insurance and other sources.
What If You Are Reimbursed for Medical Line 2.Enter your adjusted gross income from Form
Expenses You Did Not Deduct? 1040, line 35.
If you did not deduct a medical expense in the year you
Line 3.Multiply the amount on line 2 (adjusted grosspaid it because your medical expenses were not more
income) by 7.5% (.075) and enter the result.than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, or because you
did not itemize deductions, do not include the reimburse-
ment, up to the amount of the expense, in income. How-Line 4.If line 3 is more than line 1, enter zero. Otherwise,
ever, if the reimbursement is more than the expense, seesubtract the amount on line 3 from the amount on line 1.
What If Your Insurance Reimbursement Is More ThanThis is your deduction for medical and dental expenses.
Your Medical Expenses, earlier.
Example. Bill and Helen Jones belong to a group med-
Example. Last year, you had $500 of medical ex- ical plan and part of their insurance is paid by Bill’s
penses. You cannot deduct the $500 because it is lessemployer. They file a joint return, and their adjusted gross
than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income. If, in a laterincome is $33,004. The following list shows the netyear, you are reimbursed for any of the $500 of medicalamounts, after insurance reimbursements, that Bill andexpenses, you do not include that amount in your grossHelen paid this year for medical expenses.income.
1) For themselves, Bill and Helen paid $375 for pre-
scription medicines and drugs, $337 for hospital
bills, $439 for doctor bills, $295 for hospitalizationHow Do You Figure and
insurance, $380 for medical and surgical insurance,
Report the Deduction on Your and $33 for transportation for medical treatment,
which totals $1,859.
Tax Return?
2) For Grace Taylor (Helen’s dependent mother), they
paid $300 for doctors, $300 for insulin, and $175 forOnce you have determined which medical care expenses
eyeglasses, which totals $775.you can include, figure and report the deduction on your
tax return. 3) For Betty Jones (Bill’s dependent sister), they paid
$450 for doctors and $350 for prescription
What Tax Form Do You Use? medicines and drugs, which totals $800.
Bill and Helen add all their medical and dental ex-You report your medical expense deduction on Schedule penses together ($1,859 + $775 + $800 = $3,434). TheyA, Form 1040. You cannot claim medical expenses onfigure their deduction on the medical and dental expensesForm 1040A or Form 1040EZ. An example of a filled-inpart of Schedule A, Form 1040, as shown.medical and dental expense part of Schedule A is shown.
Bill and Helen Jones 000 00 0000
3,434
2,475
33,004
959
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A and B (Form 1040).
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and 
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-2)1
22
3Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 35
(99)
2003
Page 18

Page 19 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recordkeeping. For each medical expense, Worksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical
you should keep a record of: Equipment or Property Sold
RECORDS
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of
medical equipment or property in one year and sold the• The name and address of each person you paid, equipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will
and give you the adjusted basis of the equipment or property
you sold.
• The amount and date of each payment.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment
or property................. 1.You should also keep a statement or itemized invoice
showing the following. 2. Enter your total includible
medical expenses for the year• What medical care was received.
you included the cost in your• Who received the care. medical expenses........... 2.
• The nature and purpose of any other medical ex-3. Divide line 1 by line 2......... 3.penses.
4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the• Who the other medical expenses were for. year the cost was included in
your medical expenses........ 4.• The amount of the other medical expenses and the
date of payment. 5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your
allowable itemized deductions forDo not send these records with your return.
the year you purchased the
equipment or property were not
more than your AGI for that year,Sale of Medical Equipment or stop here. This is the adjusted
basis of the equipment orProperty property. If your allowable
itemized deductions for the yearIf you deduct the cost of medical equipment or property inyou purchased the equipment orone year and sell it in a later year, you may have a taxableproperty were more than yourgain. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling priceAGI for that year, complete lines
that is more than the adjusted basis of the equipment or6 through 11................ 5.
property. 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1...... 6.The adjusted basis is the portion of the cost of the
equipment or property that you could not deduct because7. Enter your total allowable
of the 7.5% limit used to compute the medical deduction.itemized deductions for the year
Use Worksheet D below to figure the adjusted basis of thethe cost was included in your
equipment or property. medical expenses........... 7.
8. Divide line 6 by line 7......... 8.
9. Enter your AGI for the year the
cost was included in your
medical expenses........... 9.
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7...... 10.
11. Multiply line 8 by line 10....... 11.
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your
allowable itemized deductions for
the year you purchased the
equipment or property were
more than your AGI for that year,
this is the adjusted basis of the
equipment or property........ 12.
Next, use Worksheet E to figure the total gain or loss on
the sale of the medical equipment or property.
Page 19

Page 20 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale of Worksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical
Medical Equipment or Equipment or Property
Property Sold—Illustrated
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure totalInstructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of
gain or loss on the sale of medical equipment or property medical equipment or property in one year and sold the
that you deducted in an earlier year. equipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will
give you the adjusted basis of the equipment or property
you sold.
1.Enter the amount that the medical
equipment or property sold for.... 1.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment2.Enter your selling expenses...... 2. or property................ 1. 3,000
3.Subtract line 2 from line 1........ 3. 2. Enter your total includible
medical expenses for the year4.Enter the adjusted basis of the you included the cost in yourequipment or property from line 5 or medical expenses.......... 2. 13,750line 12 of Worksheet D.......... 4.
3. Divide line 1 by line 2........ 3. .2185.Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is
the total gain or loss from the sale of 4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for thethe medical equipment or property.5. year the cost was included in
your medical expenses....... 4. 1,125
If you have a loss, it is not deductible. If you have a5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If yourgain, it is includible in your income. The part of the gainallowable itemized deductionsthat is a recovery of an amount you previously deducted isfor the year you purchased thetaxable as ordinary income. Enter it on line 21, Form equipment or property were not1040. Any part of the gain that is more than the recoverymore than your AGI for thatof an amount you previously deducted, is taxable as a year, stop here. This is thecapital gain. Enter it on Schedule D (Form 1040). adjusted basis of theFor more information about the recovery of an amountequipment or property. If yourthat you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlierallowable itemized deductionsyear, see Recoveries in Publication 525. for the year you purchased the
equipment or property were
Example. You have a heart condition and difficulty more than your AGI for that
breathing. Your doctor prescribed oxygen equipment to year, complete lines 6 through
help you breathe. Last year, you bought the oxygen 1 1 ...................... 5. 245
equipment for $3,000. You itemized deductions and in-6. Subtract line 5 from line 1..... 6. 2,755cluded it in your medical expense deduction.
Last year you also paid $10,750 for deductible medical7. Enter your total allowable
services and $6,400 for other itemized deductions. Youritemized deductions for the year
adjusted gross income (AGI) was $15,000. the cost was included in your
Taking into account the 7.5% limit on medical ex- medical expenses .......... 7. 19,025
penses, your allowable itemized deductions totaled 8. Divide line 6 by line 7........ 8. .145$19,025, figured as follows:
9. Enter your AGI for the year the
Oxygen equipment..................... 3,000 cost was included in your
Medical services....................... 10,750 medical expenses.......... 9. 15,000
Total medical expenses................. 13,750 10. Subtract line 9 from line 7..... 10. 4,0257.5% of AGI (.075 × $15,000)............. −1,125
Allowable medical expense deduction....... 12,625 11. Multiply line 8 by line 10...... 11. 584Other itemized deductions............... 6,400
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your
allowable itemized deductionsAllowable itemized deductions............ 19,025
for the year you purchased the
equipment or property were
more than your AGI for thatYou figure your adjusted basis as shown on the filled-inyear, this is the adjusted basisWorksheet D. of the equipment or property. . .12. 829
This year you sold the oxygen equipment for $2,025
and you had selling expenses of $25. You must report on
this year’s tax return part of the $2,000 as ordinary in-
come. To compute the part of the sales price that is
taxable, you must determine the gain by subtracting the
total adjusted basis from the selling price.
Page 20

Page 21 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale of
Impairment-Related WorkMedical Equipment or
Property—Illustrated Expenses
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure gain or
If you are disabled, you can take a business deduction forloss on the sale of medical equipment or property that you
deducted in an earlier year. expenses that are necessary for you to be able to work. If
you take a business deduction for these impairment-re-
1. Enter the amount that the medical lated work expenses, they are not subject to the 7.5% limit
equipment or property sold for.... 1. 2,025 that applies to medical expenses.
You are disabled if you have:2. Enter your selling expenses...... 2. 25
• A physical or mental disability (for example, blind-3. Subtract line 2 from line 1........ 3. 2,000
ness or deafness) that functionally limits your being4. Enter the adjusted basis of the employed, orequipment or property from line 5 or
• A physical or mental impairment (for example, aline 12 of Worksheet D.......... 4. 829
sight or hearing impairment) that substantially limits5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is one or more of your major life activities, such asthe total gain or loss from the sale of performing manual tasks, walking, speaking,the medical equipment or property.5. 1,171 breathing, learning, or working.
Determining gain.The taxable gain is the amount ofImpairment-related expenses defined.Impairment-re-the selling price that is more than the equipment’s ad-lated expenses are those ordinary and necessary busi-justed basis. You realized a gain of $1,171. In this case,ness expenses that are:the entire amount represents the recovery of an amount
• Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily,previously deducted for federal income tax purposes and
is taxable as ordinary income. • For goods and services not required or used, other
than incidentally, in your personal activities, and
• Not specifically covered under other income taxDamages For Personal Injuries laws.
If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal injury
Where to report.If you are self-employed, deduct thesuit, part of that award may be for medical expenses that
business expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C,you deducted in an earlier year. If it is, you must include
C–EZ, E, or F) used to report your business income andthat part in your income in the year you receive it to the
expenses.extent it reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.
See What If You Receive Insurance Reimbursement in aIf you are an employee, complete Form 2106 , Em-
Later Year, discussed earlier. ployee Business Expenses, or Form 2106–EZ , Un-
reimbursed Employee Business Expenses. Enter on line
Example. You sued this year for injuries you suffered27, Schedule A (Form 1040) that part of the amount on
in an accident last year. You sought $10,000 for yourline 10 of Form 2106, or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ, that is
injuries and did not itemize your damages. Last year, yourelated to your impairment. Enter the amount that is unre-
paid $500 for medical expenses for your injuries. Youlated to your impairment on line 20, Schedule A (Form
deducted those expenses on last year’s tax return. This 1040). Your impairment-related work expenses are not
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap-year you settled your lawsuit for $2,000. Your settlement
plies to other employee business expenses.did not itemize or allocate the damages. The $2,000 is
first presumed to be for the medical expenses that you
Example. You are blind. You must use a reader to dodeducted. The $500 is includible in your income this year
your work. You use the reader both during your regularbecause the entire $500 was allowed as a medical ex-
working hours at your place of work and outside yourpense deduction last year.
regular working hours away from your place of work. The
reader’s services are only for your work. You can deductFuture medical expenses.If you receive an amount in
your expenses for the reader as business expenses.settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries, part of
that award may be for future medical expenses. If it is, you
must reduce any future medical expenses for these inju-
ries until the amount you received has been completely
Health Insurance Costs forused.
Self-Employed Persons
Example. You were injured in an accident. You sued
and sought a judgment of $50,000 for your injuries. YouIf you were self-employed and had a net profit for the year,
settled the suit for $45,000. The settlement provided thatwere a general partner (or a limited partner receiving
$10,000 of the $45,000 was for future medical expensesguaranteed payments), or received wages from an S
for your injuries. You cannot include the first $10,000 thatcorporation in which you were a more than 2% share-
you pay for medical expenses for those injuries. holder (who is treated as a partner), you may be able to
Page 21

Page 22 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct, as an adjustment to income, up to 100% of the 4) Are not in prison.
amount paid for medical and qualified long-term careYou qualify for this credit on a month-by-month basis. Ifinsurance on behalf of yourself, your spouse, and depen-you qualify, you can claim a credit equal to 65% of thedents. premiums you pay for qualified health insurance.The insurance plan must be established under yourYou can either take this credit on your tax return ortrade or business, and you cannot take this deduction tohave it paid on your behalf in advance to your insurancethe extent that the amount of the deduction is more thancompany. Your payments and any payments paid on youryour earned income from that trade or business. behalf in advance are treated as having been made on theYou may not take this deduction for any month in whichfirst day of the month for which they are made. If the credityou were eligible to participate in any subsidized healthis paid on your behalf in advance, that amount will reduceplan maintained by your employer or your spouse’s em-the amount of the credit you can claim on your tax return.ployer. This rule is applied separately to plans that provideIf you received National Emergency Grant (NEG) pay-long-term care insurance and plans that do not providements during 2003 for qualified health insurance, thatlong-term care insurance. amount will also reduce the amount of the credit you canIf you qualify to take the deduction, use the Self-Em- claim.ployed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in the
Form 1040 instructions to figure the amount you can
Eligible Individualdeduct. But, if any of the following applies, do not use the
worksheet. You are an eligible individual for any month during which
one of the following is true.
• You had more than one source of income subject to
self-employment tax.
1) You receive a TAA for individuals under the Trade• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or Act of 1974 for at least one day in the month.Form 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
2) You would receive a TAA but do not because you• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-termhave not yet exhausted your unemployment bene-care insurance to figure the deduction. fits, and are covered under a TAA certification.
If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-3) You are a worker receiving a supplemental wagetions, use the worksheet in Publication 535, Business allowance under section 246 of the Trade Act ofExpenses, to figure your deduction. 1974 for such month.
4) You are at least 55 years old as of the first day ofNote. If advance payments of the health coverage taxthe month and are receiving pension benefits fromcredit were made on your behalf to your insurance com-the PBGC.pany, do not include any advance payments made for you
when figuring the amount you may deduct for insuranceOnce you qualify under (1) or (2) above, you remain
premiums. Also, if you are claiming the health coverageeligible for the first month that you otherwise cease to be
tax credit, subtract the amount shown on line 4 of Formeligible.
8885 (reduced by any advance payments shown on line 6
of that form) from the total insurance premiums you paid.Example. You receive a TAA for individuals during
May, but do not receive another for the rest of the year.
Where to report.You take this deduction on Form 1040,You are eligible for the health coverage tax credit for both
line 29. If you itemize your deductions and do not claimMay and June.
100% of your self-employed health insurance on line 29,You are not an eligible individual if an exemption caninclude any remaining premiums with all other medicalbe claimed for you on another person’s tax return.care expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to the
7.5% limit.
ATAA workers. Beginning in August, 2003, if you are
eligible for the Alternative Trade Adjustment Assistance
(ATAA) program, you are eligible for this credit for a
Health Coverage Tax Credit period not to exceed two years if you:
There is a health coverage tax credit available to certain1) Are covered by a qualifying certification,individuals who receive a pension benefit from the Pen-
2) Are reemployed not more than 26 weeks after thesion Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) or are eligible
date of separation from the adversely-affected em-to receive certain Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) or
ployment,who are eligible for the Alternate Trade Adjustment Assis-
tance (ATAA) program. You qualify for this credit if you:3) Are at least 50 years of age,
4) Do not earn more than $50,000 a year in wages1) Are an eligible individual,
from reemployment,2) Pay for qualified health insurance covering an
5) Are employed on a full-time basis, andeligible coverage month for yourself or for yourself
and qualifying family members, 6) Do not return to the employment from which you
were separated.3) Do not have other specified coverage, and
Page 22

Page 23 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualifying Family Member • Your dependent under age 13 for whom you can
claim an exemption.You can include the premiums you pay for qualified health
• Your spouse or dependent who is physically orinsurance for qualifying family members in figuring your
mentally not able to care for himself or herself.credit. Qualifying family members are:
• Your spouse, and
• Your dependents for whom you can claim an ex- Qualified Health Insurance
emption on your tax return. (For children whose
The following health insurance qualifies for the credit.parents are divorced, see Children of divorced
parents, later.) • COBRA continuation coverage. (This is coverage
However, if any otherwise qualifying family member hasthat employers with 20 or more employees must
other specified coverage (defined later), then that per-offer to employees or former employees and their
son is not a qualifying family member. Also, your spousebeneficiaries who have lost coverage because of
is not your qualifying family member if: certain events.)
• You are married on the last day of your tax year,• Coverage under a group health plan that is avail-
able through the employment of your spouse. (But• Your spouse is also an eligible individual, and see Other Specified Coverage, later.)
• You file separate returns. • Coverage under an individual health insurance pol-
icy if you were covered during the entire 30-day
Children of divorced parents.If a child is in the custodyperiod that ends on the date you separated from the
of one or both of the child’s parents for more than one-halfemployment which qualified you for the allowance
of the year, the child is generally considered the depen-or benefit as an eligible individual (defined ear-
dent of the parent having custody for the greater part oflier). For this purpose, coverage under an individual
the year (the custodial parent) if the parents either:health insurance policy includes medical insurance
offered to individuals and their families, but does• Are divorced or legally separated under a decree not include coverage under a federal, state, or otherof divorce or separate maintenance, group health insurance policy.
• Are separated under a written separation agree-
ment, or State-qualified health insurance.The following health
• Lived apart at all times during the last 6 months ofinsurance qualifies for the credit to the extent the sponsor-
the year. ing state elects to have it apply.
• State-based continuation coverage provided by theFor purposes of the health coverage tax credit, a child
state under a state law that requires such coverage.in this situation is treated as the dependent of the custo-
dial parent even if: • Coverage offered through a qualified state high-risk
pool.1) The custodial parent cannot claim an exemption for
• Coverage under a health insurance program offeredthe dependent child because that parent released
to state employees or a similar state-based healthany claim to the exemption for the year, or
insurance program.2) There is a pre-1985 decree or agreement that enti-
• Coverage through an arrangement entered into bytles the noncustodial parent to the exemption.
the state and a group health plan, an issuer of
health insurance coverage, an administrator, or anLegally separated.You are not considered married if
employer.you are legally separated from your spouse under a
decree of divorce or separate maintenance. You can • Coverage offered through a state arrangement withclaim the credit on a separate return. a private sector health care coverage purchasing
pool.Married and living apart.You are not considered mar-
• Coverage under a state-operated health plan thatried and can claim the credit if all of the following apply.
does not receive any federal financial participation.
• You file a separate return.
To find out which plans are qualified for your state, you• Your home is the home of a qualifying person can:(defined later) for more than half the year.
• Visit the website, www.irs.gov, type “hctc” in the• You pay more than half the cost of keeping up your
IRS keyword box, click on “go,” and then underhome for the year.
Resources, click on A list of Qualified Health Plans• Your spouse does not live in your home for the lastorganized by state, or6 months of the year.
• You can call 1–866–628–4282  (tollfree) (or TDD/
Qualifying person.A qualifying person is any of the TTY 1–866–626–4282) between 7:00 a.m. and
following individuals. 7:00 p.m. central time, Monday through Friday.
Page 23

Page 24 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) Are covered by qualified health insurance (de-Nonqualified Health Insurance fined earlier) that you pay for,
The following health insurance does not qualify for the 3) Do not have other specified coverage (definedcredit. later), and
1) Medicare supplemental (Medigap) insurance, Tri-4) Are not imprisoned under federal, state, or local
care supplemental insurance, or similar supplemen-authority.
tal insurance to an employer-sponsored group If you file a joint return, only one spouse has to satisfy thehealth plan. requirements.
2) Any insurance if substantially all of the coverage is:
a) Coverage for on-site medical clinics, Other Specified Coverage
b) Hospital indemnity or other fixed indemnity insur-Even if you are otherwise eligible, you are not eligible forance, the credit for a month if, as of the first day of the month,
you have other specified coverage. Other specified cover-c) Accident or disability income insurance (or a
combination of the two), age is coverage under the following.
d) Liability insurance, 1) Any insurance which constitutes medical care (un-
less substantially all of that insurance is for benefitse) A supplement to liability insurance,
listed earlier under (1) or (2) under Nonqualifiedf) Workers’ compensation or similar insurance, Health Insurance) if at least 50% of the cost of the
coverage is paid by an employer (or former em-g) Automobile medical payment insurance,
ployer) of you or your spouse.h) Credit-only insurance,
2) Any of the following government health programs:i) Limited scope dental or vision benefits,
a) Medicare Part A or Part B,j) Benefits for long-term care, nursing home care,
home health care, community-based care (or b) Medicaid, or the State Children’s Health Insur-
any combination), or ance Program (SCHIP),
k) Coverage only for a specified disease or illness.c) The Federal Employees Health Benefit Plan
(FEHBP), or
3) Coverage under a flexible spending or similar ar-d) Tricare, the medical and dental care program forrangement. members and certain former members of the uni-
formed services and their dependents.Insurance that covers other individuals.If you have
qualified health insurance that covers anyone besides
yourself and your qualifying family member(s), (defined Two important points here are that you are not
earlier), you may not be able to take into account all ofentitled to the credit for a month, if on the first day
your payments. You cannot treat an amount as paid for of that month, you are either:
CAUTION
!
insurance for yourself and qualifying family members un-
less all of the following requirements are met.
1) Covered by Medicare, or• The charge for insurance for yourself and qualifying
2) Covered by a group health plan available throughfamily members is either separately stated in the
your or your spouse’s employer and the employercontract or furnished to you by the insurance com-
contributes 50% or more of the premium.pany in a separate statement.
• The amount you paid for insurance for yourself and
qualifying family members is not more than theHow To Reportcharge that is stated in the contract or furnished by
the insurance company. To claim the credit, complete Form 8885, Health Cover-
age Tax Credit, and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form
• The amount stated in the contract or furnished by1040NR. Report the credit on Form 1040, line 67, or Formthe insurance company is not unreasonably large in1040NR, line 62, and check box c. You cannot claim therelation to the total charges under the contract.credit on Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
You must attach invoices and proof of payment for any
amounts you include on line 2 of Form 8885 for which youEligible Coverage Month did not receive an advance payment. If you file your return
electronically, attach the invoices and proof of payment toEligibility for the credit is determined on a monthly basis.your Form 8453. Proof of payment may include a pay stubAn eligible coverage month is any month in which, as ofif insurance is through a spouse’s employment, a bankthe first day of the month, you: check, or bank statement for premiums that are automati-
cally deducted from your account.1) Are an eligible individual (defined earlier),
Page 24

Page 25 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you claim this credit, you cannot take the same Internet. You can access the IRS web site 24
expenses that you use to figure your health coverage tax hours a day, 7 days a week at www.irs.gov to:
credit into account in determining your:
• Medical and dental expenses on Schedule A (Form
1040),
• E-file. Access commercial tax preparation and e-file
services available for free to eligible taxpayers.• Self-employed health insurance deduction, or
• Check the amount of advance child tax credit pay-• Archer Medical Savings Account (MSA) distribu- ments you received in 2003.tions.
• Check the status of your 2003 refund. Click on
“Where’s My Refund” and then on “Go Get My Re-
fund Status.” Be sure to wait at least 6 weeks from
Refundable and Advanceable the date you filed your return (3 weeks if you filed
electronically) and have your 2003 tax return avail-You can claim this credit and receive a refund even if you
able because you will need to know your filing sta-do not owe any taxes or earn any income.
tus and the exact whole dollar amount of yourYou can get your credit in advance by calling the HCTC
refund.customer contact center at 1–866–628–4282  (tollfree)
(or TDD/TTY 1–866–626–4282) between 7:00 a.m. and
• Download forms, instructions, and publications.7:00 p.m. central time, Monday through Friday, to regis-
• Order IRS products on-line.ter. The Treasury Department will pay your insurer 65% of
your health insurance premiums as you pay the remaining• See answers to frequently asked tax questions.35%. The amount of the credit you can claim on your tax
• Search publications on-line by topic or keyword.return will be reduced by the amount of the credit you
receive in advance. • Figure your withholding allowances using our Form
W-4 calculator.
• Send us comments or request help by e-mail.How To Get Tax Help
• Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
e-mail.You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get more
• Get information on starting and operating a smallinformation from the IRS in several ways. By selecting thebusiness.method that is best for you, you will have quick and easy
access to tax help. You can also reach us using File Transfer Protocol at
ftp.irs.gov.Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you have at-
tempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully, you
Fax. You can get over 100 of the most requestedshould contact your Taxpayer Advocate.
forms and instructions 24 hours a day, 7 days aThe Taxpayer Advocate independently represents
week, by fax. Just call 703–368–9694  from youryour interests and concerns within the IRS by protecting
fax machine. Follow the directions from the prompts.your rights and resolving problems that have not been
When you order forms, enter the catalog number for thefixed through normal channels. While Taxpayer Advo-
form you need. The items you request will be faxed to you.cates cannot change the tax law or make a technical tax
decision, they can clear up problems that resulted fromFor help with transmission problems, call
previous contacts and ensure that your case is given a703–487–4608.
complete and impartial review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
Long-distance charges may apply.• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at
1–877–777–4778.
• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office in Phone. Many services are available by phone.
your area.
• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a
TTY/TDD user.
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call• Visit the web site at www.irs.gov/advocate. 1–800–829–3676 to order current-year forms, in-
structions, and publications and prior-year formsFor more information, see Publication 1546, The Tax- and instructions. You should receive your orderpayer Advocate Service of the IRS. within 10 days.
Free tax services.To find out what services are avail-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your taxable, get Publication 910, Guide to Free Tax Services. It questions at 1–800–829–1040.contains a list of free tax publications and an index of tax
topics. It also describes other free tax information serv-• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help
ices, including tax education and assistance programs solving tax problems every business day in IRS
and a list of TeleTax topics. Taxpayer Assistance Centers. An employee can ex-
Page 25

Page 26 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
plain IRS letters, request adjustments to your ac- look in the phone book under “United States Gov-
count, or help you set up a payment plan. Call yourernment, Internal Revenue Service.”
local Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appoint-
ment. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov or Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-look in the phone book under “United States Gov- tions, and publications to the Distribution Centerernment, Internal Revenue Service.” nearest to you and receive a response within 10
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/ workdays after your request is received. Use the address
TDD equipment, call 1–800–829– 4059 to ask tax that applies to your part of the country.
or account questions or to order forms and publica-• Western part of U.S.:tions. Western Area Distribution Center
• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to listen to Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.• Central part of U.S.:
• Refund information. If you would like to check the Central Area Distribution Center
status of your 2003 refund, call 1–800–829 4477 P.O. Box 8903for automated refund information and follow the re-Bloomington, IL 61702–8903corded instructions or call 1–800–829–1954 . Be
• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign addresses:sure to wait at least 6 weeks from the date you filed
Eastern Area Distribution Centeryour return (3 weeks if you filed electronically) and
P.O. Box 85074have your 2003 tax return available because you
Richmond, VA 23261–5074will need to know your filing status and the exact
whole dollar amount of your refund.
CD-ROM for tax products. You can order IRS
Publication 1796, Federal Tax Products onEvaluating the quality of our telephone services. To
CD-ROM, and obtain:ensure that IRS representatives give accurate, courteous,
and professional answers, we use several methods to
evaluate the quality of our telephone services. One• Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.method is for a second IRS representative to sometimes
• Prior-year forms and instructions.listen in on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask
some callers to complete a short survey at the end of the• Frequently requested tax forms that may be filled incall. electronically, printed out for submission, and saved
for recordkeeping.
Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-• Internal Revenue Bulletins.able on a walk-in basis.
Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical Information
Service (NTIS) on the Internet at www.irs.gov/cdorders
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices, for $22 (no handling fee) or call 1–877–233–6767  toll
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,free to buy the CD-ROM for $22 (plus a $5 handling fee).
instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-The first release is available in early January and the final
braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city andrelease is available in late February.county government offices, credit unions, and office
supply stores have a collection of products avail- CD-ROM for small businesses. IRS Publica-
able to print from a CD-ROM or photocopy from tion 3207, Small Business Resource Guide, is a
reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS offices and must for every small business owner or any
libraries have the Internal Revenue Code, regula-taxpayer about to start a business. This handy, interactive
tions, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and CumulativeCD contains all the business tax forms, instructions andBulletins available for research purposes. publications needed to successfully manage a business.
In addition, the CD provides an abundance of other help-• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer
ful information, such as how to prepare a business plan,Assistance Center every business day to ask tax
finding financing for your business, and much more. Thequestions or get help with a tax problem. An em-
ployee can explain IRS letters, request adjustmentsdesign of the CD makes finding information easy and
to your account, or help you set up a payment plan.quick and incorporates file formats and browsers that can
You can set up an appointment by calling your localbe run on virtually any desktop or laptop computer.
Center and, at the prompt, leaving a message re-It is available in early April. You can get a free copy byquesting Everyday Tax Solutions help. A represen-calling 1–800–829–3676  or by visiting the web site attative will call you back within 2 business days towww.irs.gov/smallbiz.schedule an in-person appointment at your conve-
nience. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov or
Page 26

Page 27 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Conferences, medical.........1 0 2106 .....................2 1
2106 –EZ .................2 1Contact lenses...............67.5% limit...................3
8885 .....................2 4Controlled substances.....13, 14
Founder’s fee................7Cosmetic surgery............1 3A Free tax services............2 5Credit, health coverageAbortion ....................5 Funeral expenses............1 4t a x ...................14, 22Acupuncture .................5 Future:Crutches ....................6Addiction: Medical care.............9 ,  1 4Alcohol....................5
DDrug ......................7
GDamages received ...........2 1Adopted child medical
Gain or loss on sale of medicalDancing lessons.............1 4expense ...................3
equipment or propertyDecedent’s medicalAGI limitation................3
worksheet ................2 0expenses ..................4Alcoholism ..................5
Glasses .....................7Definition of medicalAmbulance ..................5
Guide dog ...................7expenses ..................2Artificial limb................5
Gym (See Health club dues)Dental treatment (See also TeethArtificial teeth................5
whitening).................7Aspirin ....................1 4
Dentures (See Artificial teeth) HAssistance (See Tax help)
Dependent’s medical Hair: (See also Wig)Assisted living (See Nursing home) expenses ..................3 Removal (See Cosmetic surgery)ATAA workers, health Dependents with disabilities....9 Transplant (See Cosmetic surgery)coverage tax credit.........2 2
Diagnostic devices............7 Health:Athletic club (See Health club
Diaper service...............1 4 Club dues.................1 4dues)
Coverage tax credit....... 14, 22Disability expenses..........2 1Autoette (See Wheelchair)
Institute (See also Health clubDisability, learning (See SpecialAutomobile (See Car) dues)....................7education)
Insurance for self-employedDisabled dependent careB persons.................2 1expenses ..................7Baby sitting.................1 3 Maintenance organizationDrug addiction...............7Bandages ...................5 (HMO) ...................7Drugs (See Medicines) . . . 7, 10, 14Birth control pills.............5 ReimbursementDues, health club............1 4Braille books and magazines....5 arrangement (HRA)......8 ,  1 5
Spa (See Health club dues)E Hearing aid..................7C Education, special...........1 1 Hearing-ear dog (See Guide dog)Capital asset, operation and Electrolysis (See Cosmetic Help (See Tax help)upkeep ....................6 surgery) Home:Capital expense worksheet.....6 Employer-sponsored health Care (See Nursing services)Capital expenses.............5 insurance plan.............8 Improvements (See CapitalC a r......................6 ,  1 2Employment taxes ...........1 1 expenses)Child: Equipment, medical, sale of....1 9 Hospital services (See alsoAdopted ...................3 Excess reimbursement Lodging) ..................7Care .....................1 3 worksheets ............ 16, 17 Hotels, motels (See Lodging)Learning disability (See Special Expenses includible this year . . . 2Household help .............1 4education) Expenses, capital.............5 How to figure yourMissing....................2
Eye surgery..................7 deduction ................1 8Of divorced or separated
Eyeglasses ..................7parents..................4 How to report:
Paint removal, lead based......9 Health coverage tax credit.....2 4
Patterning exercises.........1 2 Health insurance costs forF
Special education...........1 1 self-employed persons......2 2Fertility enhancement..........7
With disabilities..............9 Impairment-related workFiguring the deduction........1 8
expenses................2 1Chiropractor.................6 Flexible spending Medical and dentalChristian Science arrangement ...............8 expenses................1 8practitioner................6 Food: (See Meals)
Chronically ill................9 Weight-loss program......13, 15
Comments on publication......2 IForm:
Community property ..........3 1040 (Schedule A)..........1 8 Illegal:
Computer data bank..........1 0 1040X .....................2 Operations and treatments....1 4
Page 27

Page 28 of 28 of Publication 502 8:34 - 27-OCT-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Substances (See Controlled More information (See Tax help) Senior housing ( See Nursing
substances) home)Multiple support agreement.....4
Impairment-related Separate returns ..............3
expenses .................2 1 Services:N
In vitro fertilization.............7 Household help.............1 4Nursing home ...............1 1
Legal .....................9Insulin.................. 10, 14 Nursing services (See also Medical...................1 0Insurance: Chronically ill Nursing...................1 1Credit for..................2 2 individuals)............ 11, 13
Settlement of damage suit.....2 1Employer-sponsored..........8 Nutritional supplements.......1 4
Not includible...............8 Sick leave...................8
Premiums ..................7 Spouse’s medical expenses....3OPremiums paid by you and Standard mileage rate......1 ,  1 2Operations (See also Cosmeticyour employer............1 6 Sterilization.................1 2surgery)..................1 1Premiums paid by your Stop-smoking program .......1 2Optometrist (See Eyeglasses)employer................1 6 Suggestions for publication.....2Organ donors (See Transplants)Premiums you pay..........1 6 Support, multiple agreement....4Osteopath ..................1 1Prepaid....................8 Surgery (See Operations)Oxygen ....................1 1Reimbursement ............1 5 Breast reconstruction.........5Reimbursement for expenses Cosmetic .................1 3not deducted.............1 8 P E y e.......................7Reimbursement more than Paint removal, lead-based......9 Swimming lessons (See Dancingexpenses................1 5 Parents, divorced or lessons)Reimbursement received in a separated..................4later year................1 7 Parking fees and tolls.........1 2 TSelf-employed persons.......2 1 Patterning exercises.........1 2 Tax Form (See Form)Personal injuries, damages Tax help ...................2 5L f o r ......................2 1Taxes, employment ..........1 1Laboratory fees..............9 Personal use items...........1 5 Taxpayer Advocate...........2 5Lawsuit ....................2 1 Plastic surgery (See Cosmetic Teeth whitening.............1 5Lead-based paint removal......9 surgery) Telephone ..................1 2Learning disability (See Special Premiums: Television..................1 2education) Insurance..................7 Therapy ....................1 2Legal fees...................9 Paid by you................1 6
Transplants.................1 2Lessons: Paid by you and your
Transportation........... 12, 13Dancing ..................1 4 employer................1 6
S w i m m i n g.................1 5 Travel (See Trips)Paid by your employer.......1 6
Lifetime care.................9 Qualified long-term care......1 0 Trips (See also Lodging).......1 3
Lodging .....................9 Prepaid insurance............8 TTY/TDD information.........2 5
Long-term: Property, medical, sale of.....1 9 Tuition, medical expenses
Care ....................8 ,  9 included in................1 3Prosthesis (See Artificial limb)
Care insurance contracts.....1 0 Psychiatric care.............1 1
Care services...............9 Psychoanalysis .............1 1 V
Psychologist................1 1 Vasectomy .................1 3
M Publications (See Tax help) Veterinary fees..............1 5
Married filing separately........3 Vision correction surgery (See Eye
Maternity clothes............1 4 surgery)R
Meals ......................1 0 Radial keratotomy............7
Medical: WRecordkeeping ..............1 9
Care, future................1 4 Weight-loss program......13, 15Rehabilitation facility (See NursingConferences...............1 0 home) What expenses are includible . . . 4Expenses, adopted child’s......3 Reimbursements ............1 5 What records to keep.........1 9Expenses, decedent’s.........4 Rental property, improvements Wheelchair .................1 3Expenses, defined...........2 t o ........................6 Whose expenses areExpenses, dependent’s........3 includible..................3Expenses, spouse’s..........3
W i g .......................1 3SInformation plan............1 0
Work expenses:Sale of medical property......1 9Savings accounts (MSAs).....1 4
Disabled dependent care......7Seeing-eye dog (See Guide dog)Services..................1 0
Impairment-related..........2 1Self-employed persons,Medicare ....................8
health insuranceMedicines ............... 10, 14 ■deduction ..............1 ,  2 1Mentally retarded, home for....1 1
Mileage rate..............1 ,  1 2
Page 28