Contents
What's New .................. 2
Reminders ................... 2
Introduction .................. 2
Chapter 1. Rental Income and 
Expenses (If No Personal Use 
of Dwelling) ............... 2
Rental Income .............. 2
Rental Expenses ............. 3
Chapter 2. Depreciation of Rental 
Property ................. 5
The Basics ................ 6
Claiming the Special 
Depreciation Allowance ....... 8
MACRS Depreciation .......... 8
Claiming the Correct Amount of 
Depreciation ............ 11
Chapter 3. Reporting Rental 
Income, Expenses, and 
Losses ................. 12
Which Forms To Use ......... 12
Limits on Rental Losses ........ 12
At-Risk Rules ........... 13
Passive Activity Limits ...... 13
Casualties and Thefts ......... 14
Example ................. 14
Chapter 4. Special Situations ...... 15
Condominiums ............. 15
Cooperatives .............. 15
Property Changed to Rental 
Use ................. 15
Renting Part of Property ........ 16
Not Rented for Profit .......... 16
Example—Property Changed to 
Rental Use ............. 16
Chapter 5. Personal Use of 
Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home) ............ 17
Dividing Expenses ........... 17
Dwelling Unit Used as a Home .... 18
Reporting Income and 
Deductions ............. 19
Worksheet 5-1. Worksheet for 
Figuring Rental Deductions 
for a Dwelling Unit Used as a 
Home ................ 20
Chapter 6. How To Get Tax Help .... 21
Index ..................... 24
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments 
related to Publication 527, such as legislation 
enacted after it was published, go to 
www.irs.gov/pub527.
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 527
Cat. No. 15052W
Residential
Rental
Property
(Including Rental of 
Vacation Homes)
For use in preparing
2013 Returns
Get forms and other Information
faster and easier by
Internet at IRS.gov
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 25  17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dec 10, 2013

What's New
Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT).  Begin-
ning in 2013, you may be subject to the Net In-
vestment Income Tax (NIIT). NIIT is a 3.8% tax 
on the lesser of net investment income or the 
excess of modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) over the threshold amount. Net invest-
ment income may include rental income and 
other income from passive activities. Use Form 
8960, Net Investment Income Tax, to figure this 
tax. For more information on NIIT, go to IRS.gov 
and enter “Net Investment Income Tax” in the 
search box.
Reminders
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
dren. Photographs of missing children selected 
by the Center may appear in this publication on 
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can 
help bring these children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST 
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Introduction
Do you own a second house that you rent out 
all the time? Do you own a vacation home that 
you rent out when you or your family isn't using 
it?
These are two common types of residential 
rental activities discussed in this publication. In 
most cases, all rental income must be reported 
on your tax return, but there are differences in 
the expenses you are allowed to deduct and in 
the way the rental activity is reported on your re-
turn.
First, this publication will look at the 
rental-for-profit activity in which there is no per-
sonal use of the property. We will look at types 
of income and when each is reported, and at 
types of expenses and which are deductible.
Chapter 2  discusses depreciation as it ap-
plies to your rental real estate activity—what 
property can be depreciated and how to figure 
it.
Chapter 3 covers the actual reporting of your 
rental income and deductions, including casual-
ties and thefts, limitations on losses, and claim-
ing the correct amount of depreciation.
Special rental situations are grouped to-
gether in chapter 4 . These include condomini-
ums, cooperatives, property changed to rental 
use, renting only part of your property, and a 
not-for-profit rental activity.
Finally, in chapter 5, we will look at the rules 
for rental income and expenses when there is 
also personal use of the dwelling unit, such as a 
vacation home.
Sale or exchange of rental property.  For in-
formation on how to figure and report any gain 
or loss from the sale, exchange or other dispo-
sition of your rental property, see Publication 
544, Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets.
Sale of main home used as rental prop­
erty. For information on how to figure and 
report any gain or loss from the sale or other 
disposition of your main home that you also 
used as rental property, see Publication 523, 
Selling Your Home.
Tax­free exchange of rental property oc­
casionally used for personal purposes.  If 
you meet certain qualifying use standards, you 
may qualify for a tax-free exchange (a like-kind 
or section 1031 exchange) of one piece of 
rental property you own for a similar piece of 
rental property, even if you have used the rental 
property for personal purposes.
For information on the qualifying use stand-
ards, see Rev. Proc. 2008–16, 2008 IRB 547, at 
http://www.irs.gov/irb/2008-10_IRB/ar12.html. 
For more information on like-kind exchanges, 
see chapter 1 of Publication 544.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and your 
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications Division
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. 
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including 
the area code, in your correspondence.
You can send your comments from 
www.irs.gov/formspubs/. Click on “More Infor-
mation” and then on “Comment on Tax Forms 
and Publications”.
Although we cannot respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments as 
we revise our tax products.
Ordering forms and publications.  Visit 
www.irs.gov/formspubs/ to download forms and 
publications, call 1-800-TAX-FORM 
(1-800-829-3676), or write to the address below 
and receive a response within 10 days after 
your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
Tax questions. If you have a tax question, 
check the information available on IRS.gov or 
call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax 
questions sent to either of the above ad-
dresses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car 
Expenses
Selling Your Home
Depreciating Property Placed in 
Service Before 1987
Business Expenses
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
  463
  523
  534
  535
  544
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Basis of Assets
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
Depreciation and Amortization
Election To Postpone Determination 
as To Whether the Presumption 
Applies That an Activity Is Engaged 
in for Profit
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
Supplemental 
Income and Loss
 See chapter 6, How To Get Tax Help for infor-
mation about getting these publications and 
forms.
1.
Rental Income 
and Expenses (If 
No Personal Use 
of Dwelling)
This chapter discusses the various types of 
rental income and expenses for a residential 
rental activity with no personal use of the dwell-
ing. Generally, each year you will report all in-
come and deduct all out-of-pocket expenses in 
full. The deduction to recover the cost of your 
rental property—depreciation—is taken over a 
prescribed number of years, and is discussed in 
chapter 2, Depreciation of Rental Property.
If your rental income is from property 
you also use personally or rent to 
someone at less than a fair rental 
price, first read the information in chapter 5 , 
Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vaca-
tion Home).
Rental Income
In most cases, you must include in your gross 
income all amounts you receive as rent. Rental 
income is any payment you receive for the use 
or occupation of property. In addition to 
amounts you receive as normal rental pay-
ments, there are other amounts that may be 
rental income.
When To Report
When you report rental income on your tax re-
turn generally depends on whether you are a 
  547
  551
  925
  946
  4562
  5213
  8582
  Schedule E (Form 1040)
CAUTION
!
Page 2 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2  Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling)

cash basis taxpayer or use an accrual method. 
Most individual taxpayers use the cash method.
Cash method. You are a cash basis taxpayer 
if you report income on your return in the year 
you actually or constructively receive it, regard-
less of when it was earned. You constructively 
receive income when it is made available to 
you, for example, by being credited to your 
bank account.
Accrual method.  If you are an accrual basis 
taxpayer, you generally report income when 
you earn it, rather than when you receive it. You 
generally deduct your expenses when you incur 
them, rather than when you pay them.
More information.  See Publication 538, Ac-
counting Periods and Methods, for more infor-
mation about when you constructively receive 
income and accrual methods of accounting.
Types of Income
The following are common types of rental in-
come.
Advance rent.  Advance rent is any amount 
you receive before the period that it covers. In-
clude advance rent in your rental income in the 
year you receive it regardless of the period cov-
ered or the method of accounting you use.
Example. On March 18, 2013, you signed 
a 10-year lease to rent your property. During 
2013, you received $9,600 for the first year's 
rent and $9,600 as rent for the last year of the 
lease. You must include $19,200 in your rental 
income in the first year.
Canceling a lease.  If your tenant pays you to 
cancel a lease, the amount you receive is rent. 
Include the payment in your income in the year 
you receive it regardless of your method of ac-
counting.
Expenses paid by tenant.  If your tenant pays 
any of your expenses, those payments are 
rental income. Because you must include this 
amount in income, you can also deduct the ex-
penses if they are deductible rental expenses. 
For more information, see Rental Expenses , 
later.
Example 1. Your tenant pays the water and 
sewage bill for your rental property and deducts 
the amount from the normal rent payment. Un-
der the terms of the lease, your tenant does not 
have to pay this bill. Include the utility bill paid 
by the tenant and any amount received as a 
rent payment in your rental income. You can de-
duct the utility payment made by your tenant as 
a rental expense.
Example 2. While you are out of town, the 
furnace in your rental property stops working. 
Your tenant pays for the necessary repairs and 
deducts the repair bill from the rent payment. In-
clude the repair bill paid by the tenant and any 
amount received as a rent payment in your 
rental income. You can deduct the repair pay-
ment made by your tenant as a rental expense.
Property or services.  If you receive property 
or services as rent, instead of money, include 
the fair market value of the property or services 
in your rental income.
If the services are provided at an agreed 
upon or specified price, that price is the fair 
market value unless there is evidence to the 
contrary.
Example. Your tenant is a house painter. 
He offers to paint your rental property instead of 
paying 2 months rent. You accept his offer.
Include in your rental income the amount the 
tenant would have paid for 2 months rent. You 
can deduct that same amount as a rental ex-
pense for painting your property.
Security deposits.  Do not include a security 
deposit in your income when you receive it if 
you plan to return it to your tenant at the end of 
the lease. But if you keep part or all of the se-
curity deposit during any year because your 
tenant does not live up to the terms of the lease, 
include the amount you keep in your income in 
that year.
If an amount called a security deposit is to 
be used as a final payment of rent, it is advance 
rent. Include it in your income when you receive 
it.
Other Sources of Rental Income
Lease with option to buy.  If the rental agree-
ment gives your tenant the right to buy your 
rental property, the payments you receive under 
the agreement are generally rental income. If 
your tenant exercises the right to buy the prop-
erty, the payments you receive for the period af-
ter the date of sale are considered part of the 
selling price.
Part interest.  If you own a part interest in 
rental property, you must report your part of the 
rental income from the property.
Rental of property also used as your home.
If you rent property that you also use as your 
home and you rent it less than 15 days during 
the tax year, do not include the rent you receive 
in your income and do not deduct rental expen-
ses. However, you can deduct on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), Itemized Deductions, the interest, 
taxes, and casualty and theft losses that are al-
lowed for nonrental property. See chapter 5 , 
Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vaca-
tion Home).
Rental Expenses
In most cases, the expenses of renting your 
property, such as maintenance, insurance, 
taxes, and interest, can be deducted from your 
rental income.
Personal use of rental property.  If you 
sometimes use your rental property for personal 
purposes, you must divide your expenses be-
tween rental and personal use. Also, your rental 
expense deductions may be limited. See chap-
ter 5 , Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home).
Part interest.  If you own a part interest in 
rental property, you can deduct expenses you 
paid according to your percentage of owner-
ship.
Example. Roger owns a one-half undivided 
interest in a rental house. Last year he paid 
$968 for necessary repairs on the property. 
Roger can deduct $484 (50% × $968) as a 
rental expense. He is entitled to reimbursement 
for the remaining half from the co-owner.
When To Deduct
You generally deduct your rental expenses in 
the year you pay them.
If you use the accrual method, see Publica-
tion 538 for more information.
Types of Expenses
Listed below are the most common rental ex-
penses.
Advertising.
Auto and travel expenses.
Cleaning and maintenance.
Commissions.
Depreciation.
Insurance.
Interest (other).
Legal and other professional fees.
Local transportation expenses.
Management fees.
Mortgage interest paid to banks, etc.
Points.
Rental payments.
Repairs.
Taxes.
Utilities.
Some of these expenses, as well as other less 
common ones, are discussed below.
Depreciation. Depreciation is a capital ex-
pense. It is the mechanism for recovering your 
cost in an income producing property and must 
be taken over the expected life of the property.
You can begin to depreciate rental property 
when it is ready and available for rent. See 
Placed in Service  under When Does Deprecia-
tion Begin and End in chapter 2.
Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you 
pay an insurance premium for more than one 
year in advance, for each year of coverage you 
can deduct the part of the premium payment 
that will apply to that year. You cannot deduct 
the total premium in the year you pay it. See 
chapter 6 of Publication 535 for information on 
deductible premiums.
Interest expense.  You can deduct mortgage 
interest you pay on your rental property. When 
you refinance a rental property for more than 
the previous outstanding balance, the portion of 
the interest allocable to loan proceeds not rela-
ted to rental use generally cannot be deducted 
Page 3 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling)  Page 3

as a rental expense. Chapter 4 of Publication 
535 explains mortgage interest in detail.
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage 
on your rental property cannot be deducted as 
interest. These expenses, which include mort-
gage commissions, abstract fees, and record-
ing fees, are capital expenses that are part of 
your basis in the property.
Form 1098, Mortgage Interest State­
ment. If you paid $600 or more of mortgage in-
terest on your rental property to any one per-
son, you should receive a Form 1098 or similar 
statement showing the interest you paid for the 
year. If you and at least one other person (other 
than your spouse if you file a joint return) were 
liable for, and paid interest on, the mortgage, 
and the other person received the Form 1098, 
report your share of the interest on Schedule E 
(Form 1040), line 13. Attach a statement to your 
return showing the name and address of the 
other person. On the dotted line next to line 13, 
enter “See attached.”
Legal and other professional fees.  You can 
deduct, as a rental expense, legal and other 
professional expenses such as tax return prep-
aration fees you paid to prepare Schedule E, 
Part I. For example, on your 2013 Schedule E 
you can deduct fees paid in 2013 to prepare 
Part I of your 2012 Schedule E. You can also 
deduct, as a rental expense, any expense 
(other than federal taxes and penalties) you 
paid to resolve a tax underpayment related to 
your rental activities.
Local benefit taxes.  In most cases, you can-
not deduct charges for local benefits that in-
crease the value of your property, such as 
charges for putting in streets, sidewalks, or wa-
ter and sewer systems. These charges are non-
depreciable capital expenditures and must be 
added to the basis of your property. However, 
you can deduct local benefit taxes that are for 
maintaining, repairing, or paying interest 
charges for the benefits.
Local transportation expenses.  You may be 
able to deduct your ordinary and necessary lo-
cal transportation expenses if you incur them to 
collect rental income or to manage, conserve, 
or maintain your rental property. However, 
transportation expenses incurred to travel be-
tween your home and a rental property gener-
ally constitute nondeductible commuting costs 
unless you use your home as your principal 
place of business. See Publication 587, Busi-
ness Use of Your Home, for information on de-
termining if your home office qualifies as a prin-
cipal place of business.
Generally, if you use your personal car, 
pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you 
can deduct the expenses using one of two 
methods: actual expenses or the standard mile-
age rate. For 2013, the standard mileage rate 
for business use is 56.5 cents per mile. For 
more information, see chapter 4 of Publication 
463. 
To deduct car expenses under either 
method, you must keep records that 
follow the rules in chapter 5 of Publica-
tion 463. In addition, you must complete Form 
4562, Part V, and attach it to your tax return.
Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct your or-
dinary and necessary expenses for managing, 
conserving, or maintaining rental property from 
the time you make it available for rent.
Rental of equipment. You can deduct the rent 
you pay for equipment that you use for rental 
purposes. However, in some cases, lease con-
tracts are actually purchase contracts. If so, you 
cannot deduct these payments. You can re-
cover the cost of purchased equipment through 
depreciation.
Rental of property.  You can deduct the rent 
you pay for property that you use for rental pur-
poses. If you buy a leasehold for rental purpo-
ses, you can deduct an equal part of the cost 
each year over the term of the lease.
Travel expenses.  You can deduct the ordi-
nary and necessary expenses of traveling away 
from home if the primary purpose of the trip is to 
collect rental income or to manage, conserve, 
or maintain your rental property. You must prop-
erly allocate your expenses between rental and 
nonrental activities. You cannot deduct the cost 
of traveling away from home if the primary pur-
pose of the trip is to improve the property. The 
cost of improvements is recovered by taking 
depreciation. For information on travel expen-
ses, see chapter 1 of Publication 463.
To deduct travel expenses, you must 
keep records that follow the rules in 
chapter 5 of Publication 463.
Uncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax-
payer, do not deduct uncollected rent. Because 
you have not included it in your income, it is not 
deductible.
If you use an accrual method, report income 
when you earn it. If you are unable to collect the 
rent, you may be able to deduct it as a business 
bad debt. See chapter 10 of Publication 535 for 
more information about business bad debts.
Vacant rental property.  If you hold property 
for rental purposes, you may be able to deduct 
your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-
ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or 
maintaining the property while the property is 
vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss of 
rental income for the period the property is va-
cant.
Vacant while listed for sale.  If you sell 
property you held for rental purposes, you can 
deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses 
for managing, conserving, or maintaining the 
property until it is sold. If the property is not held 
out and available for rent while listed for sale, 
the expenses are not deductible rental expen-
ses.
RECORDS
RECORDS
Points
The term “points” is often used to describe 
some of the charges paid, or treated as paid, by 
a borrower to take out a loan or a mortgage. 
These charges are also called loan origination 
fees, maximum loan charges, or premium 
charges. Any of these charges (points) that are 
solely for the use of money are interest. Be-
cause points are prepaid interest, you generally 
cannot deduct the full amount in the year paid, 
but must deduct the interest over the term of the 
loan.
The method used to figure the amount of 
points you can deduct each year follows the 
original issue discount (OID) rules. In this case, 
points are equivalent to OID, which is the differ-
ence between:
The amount borrowed (redemption price at 
maturity, or principal) and
The proceeds (issue price).
The first step is to determine whether your 
total OID (which you may have on bonds or 
other investments in addition to the mortgage 
loan), including the OID resulting from the 
points, is insignificant or de minimis. If the OID 
is not de minimis , you must use the con-
stant-yield method to figure how much you can 
deduct.
De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it is 
less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated 
redemption price at maturity (principal amount 
of the loan) multiplied by the number of full 
years from the date of original issue to maturity 
(term of the loan).
If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one 
of the following ways to figure the amount of 
points you can deduct each year.
On a constant-yield basis over the term of 
the loan.
On a straight line basis over the term of the 
loan.
In proportion to stated interest payments.
In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
You make this choice by deducting the OID 
(points) in a manner consistent with the method 
chosen on your timely filed tax return for the tax 
year in which the loan is issued.
Example. Carol Madison took out a 
$100,000 mortgage loan on January 1, 2013, to 
buy a house she will use as a rental during 
2013. The loan is to be repaid over 30 years. 
During 2013, Carol paid $10,000 of mortgage 
interest (stated interest) to the lender. When the 
loan was made, she paid $1,500 in points to the 
lender. The points reduced the principal amount 
of the loan from $100,000 to $98,500, resulting 
in $1,500 of OID. Carol determines that the 
points (OID) she paid are de minimis based on 
the following computation.
Redemption price at maturity (principal 
amount of the loan) ............... $100,000
Multiplied by: The term of the 
loan in complete years ............ × 30
Multiplied by ..................... × .0025
De minimis amount ............ $  7,500
Page 4 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4  Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling)

The points (OID) she paid ($1,500) are less 
than the de minimis  amount ($7,500). There-
fore, Carol has de minimis  OID and she can 
choose one of the four ways discussed earlier 
to figure the amount she can deduct each year. 
Under the straight line method, she can deduct 
$50 each year for 30 years.
Constant-yield method.  If the OID is not de 
minimis, you must use the constant-yield 
method to figure how much you can deduct 
each year.
You figure your deduction for the first year in 
the following manner.
1. Determine the issue price of the loan. If 
you paid points on the loan, the issue price 
generally is the difference between the 
principal and the points.
2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to ma-
turity (defined later).
3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-
ments (defined later) from the result in (2). 
This is the OID you can deduct in the first 
year.
Yield to maturity (YTM).  This rate is gen-
erally shown in the literature you receive from 
your lender. If you do not have this information, 
consult your lender or tax advisor. In general, 
the YTM is the discount rate that, when used in 
computing the present value of all principal and 
interest payments, produces an amount equal 
to the principal amount of the loan.
Qualified stated interest (QSI).  In gen-
eral, this is the stated interest that is uncondi-
tionally payable in cash or property (other than 
another loan of the issuer) at least annually over 
the term of the loan at a fixed rate.
Example—Year 1. The facts are the same 
as in the previous example. The yield to matur-
ity on Carol's loan is 10.2467%, compounded 
annually.
She figured the amount of points (OID) she 
could deduct in 2013 as follows.
Principal amount of the loan .......... $100,000
Minus: Points (OID) ................ – 1,500
Issue price of the loan .............. $ 98,500
Multiplied by: YTM ................ × .102467
Total .......................... 10,093
Minus: QSI ...................... – 10,000
Points (OID) deductible in 2013 .... $     93
To figure your deduction in any subsequent 
year, you start with the adjusted issue price. To 
get the adjusted issue price, add to the issue 
price figured in Year 1 any OID previously de-
ducted. Then follow steps (2) and (3), earlier.
Example—Year 2.  Carol figured the de-
duction for 2014 as follows.
Issue price ...................... $98,500
Plus: Points (OID) deducted 
in 2013 ....................... + 93
Adjusted issue price ............... $98,593
Multiplied by: YTM ................ × .102467
Total .......................... 10,103
Minus: QSI ...................... – 10,000
Points (OID) deductible in 2014 .... $ 103
Loan or mortgage ends.  If your loan or mort-
gage ends, you may be able to deduct any re-
maining points (OID) in the tax year in which the 
loan or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may 
end due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclo-
sure, or similar event. However, if the refinanc-
ing is with the same lender, the remaining 
points (OID) generally are not deductible in the 
year in which the refinancing occurs, but may 
be deductible over the term of the new mort-
gage or loan.
Points when loan refinance is more than 
the previous outstanding balance.  When 
you refinance a rental property for more than 
the previous outstanding balance, the portion of 
the points allocable to loan proceeds not rela-
ted to rental use generally cannot be deducted 
as a rental expense. For example, if an individ-
ual refinanced a loan with a balance of 
$100,000, the amount of the new loan was 
$120,000, and the taxpayer used $20,000 to 
purchase a car, points allocable to the $20,000 
would be treated as nondeductible personal in-
terest.
Repairs and Improvements
Generally, an expense for repairing or maintain-
ing your rental property may be deducted if you 
are not required to capitalize the expense.
Improvements. You must capitalize any ex-
pense you pay to improve your rental property. 
An expense is for an improvement if it results in 
a betterment to your property, restores your 
property, or adapts your property to a new or 
different use.
Betterments. Expenses that may result in 
a betterment to your property include expenses 
for fixing a pre-existing defect or condition, en-
larging or expanding your property, or increas-
ing the capacity, strength, or quality of your 
property.
Restoration. Expenses that may be for re-
storation include expenses for replacing a sub-
stantial structural part of your property, repairing 
damage to your property after you properly ad-
justed the basis of your property as a result of a 
casualty loss, or rebuilding your property to a 
like-new condition.
Adaptation. Expenses that may be for 
adaptation include expenses for altering your 
property to a use that is not consistent with the 
intended ordinary use of your property when 
you began renting the property.
Separate the costs of repairs and im-
provements, and keep accurate re-
cords. You will need to know the cost 
of improvements when you sell or depreciate 
your property.
The expenses you capitalize for improving 
your property can generally be depreciated as if 
the improvement were separate property.
2.
Depreciation of 
Rental Property
You recover the cost of income producing prop-
erty through yearly tax deductions. You do this 
by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-
ing some of the cost each year on your tax re-
turn.
Three factors determine how much depreciation 
you can deduct each year: (1) your basis in the 
property, (2) the recovery period for the prop-
erty, and (3) the depreciation method used. You 
cannot simply deduct your mortgage or princi-
pal payments, or the cost of furniture, fixtures 
and equipment, as an expense.
You can deduct depreciation only on the part of 
your property used for rental purposes. Depre-
ciation reduces your basis for figuring gain or 
loss on a later sale or exchange.
You may have to use Form 4562 to figure and 
report your depreciation. See Which Forms To 
Use in chapter 3. Also see Publication 946.
Section 179 deduction.  The section 179 de-
duction is a means of recovering part or all of 
RECORDS
Examples of Improvements
Additions
Bedroom
Bathroom
Deck
Garage
Porch
Patio
 
Lawn & Grounds
Landscaping
Driveway
Walkway
Fence
Retaining wall
Sprinkler system
Swimming pool
Miscellaneous
Storm windows, doors
New roof
Central vacuum
Wiring upgrades
Satellite dish
Security system 
 
Heating & Air Conditioning
Heating system
Central air conditioning
Furnace
Duct work
Central humidifier
Filtration system
Plumbing
Septic system
Water heater
Soft water system
Filtration system
 
Interior Improvements
Built-in appliances
Kitchen modernization
Flooring
Wall-to-wall carpeting
 
Insulation
Attic
Walls, floor
Pipes, duct work
Table 1-1.
Page 5 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property  Page 5

the cost of certain qualifying property in the year 
you place the property in service. This deduc-
tion is not allowed for property used in connec-
tion with residential rental property. See chap-
ter 2 of Publication 946.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).  If you use 
accelerated depreciation, you may be subject to 
the AMT. Accelerated depreciation allows you 
to deduct more depreciation earlier in the recov-
ery period than you could deduct using a 
straight line method (same deduction each 
year).
The prescribed depreciation methods for 
rental real estate are not accelerated, so the de-
preciation deduction is not adjusted for the 
AMT. However, accelerated methods are gen-
erally used for other property connected with 
rental activities (for example, appliances and 
wall-to-wall carpeting).
To find out if you are subject to the AMT, 
see the Instructions for Form 6251.
The Basics
The following section discusses the information 
you will need to have about the rental property 
and the decisions to be made before figuring 
your depreciation deduction.
What Rental Property
Can Be Depreciated?
You can depreciate your property if it meets all 
the following requirements.
You own the property.
You use the property in your business or 
income-producing activity (such as rental 
property).
The property has a determinable useful 
life.
The property is expected to last more than 
one year.
Property you own. To claim depreciation, you 
usually must be the owner of the property. You 
are considered as owning property even if it is 
subject to a debt.
Rented property. Generally, if you pay rent 
for property, you cannot depreciate that prop-
erty. Usually, only the owner can depreciate it. 
However, if you make permanent improvements 
to leased property, you may be able to depreci-
ate the improvements. See Additions or im-
provements to property, later in this chapter, un-
der Recovery Periods Under GDS.
Cooperative apartments. If you are a ten-
ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing corpo-
ration and rent your cooperative apartment to 
others, you can deduct depreciation on your 
stock in the corporation. See chapter 4, Special 
Situations.
Property having a determinable useful life.
To be depreciable, your property must have a 
determinable useful life. This means that it must 
be something that wears out, decays, gets used 
up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value from 
natural causes.
What Rental Property
Cannot Be Depreciated?
Certain property cannot be depreciated. This in-
cludes land and certain excepted property.
Land. You cannot depreciate the cost of land 
because land generally does not wear out, be-
come obsolete, or get used up. But if it does, 
the loss is accounted for upon disposition. The 
costs of clearing, grading, planting, and land-
scaping are usually all part of the cost of land 
and cannot be depreciated.
Although you cannot depreciate land, you 
can depreciate certain land preparation costs, 
such as landscaping costs, incurred in prepar-
ing land for business use. These costs must be 
so closely associated with other depreciable 
property that you can determine a life for them 
along with the life of the associated property.
Example. You built a new house to use as 
a rental and paid for grading, clearing, seeding, 
and planting bushes and trees. Some of the 
bushes and trees were planted right next to the 
house, while others were planted around the 
outer border of the lot. If you replace the house, 
you would have to destroy the bushes and trees 
right next to it. These bushes and trees are 
closely associated with the house, so they have 
a determinable useful life. Therefore, you can 
depreciate them. Add your other land prepara-
tion costs to the basis of your land because 
they have no determinable life and you cannot 
depreciate them.
Excepted property.  Even if the property 
meets all the requirements listed earlier under 
What Rental Property Can Be Depreciated , you 
cannot depreciate the following property.
Property placed in service and disposed of 
(or taken out of business use) in the same 
year.
Equipment used to build capital improve-
ments. You must add otherwise allowable 
depreciation on the equipment during the 
period of construction to the basis of your 
improvements.
For more information, see chapter 1 of Publica-
tion 946.
When Does Depreciation 
Begin and End?
You begin to depreciate your rental property 
when you place it in service for the production 
of income. You stop depreciating it either when 
you have fully recovered your cost or other ba-
sis, or when you retire it from service, whichever 
happens first.
Placed in Service
You place property in service in a rental activity 
when it is ready and available for a specific use 
in that activity. Even if you are not using the 
property, it is in service when it is ready and 
available for its specific use.
Example 1.  On November 22 of last year, 
you purchased a dishwasher for your rental 
property. The appliance was delivered on De-
cember 7, but was not installed and ready for 
use until January 3 of this year. Because the 
dishwasher was not ready for use last year, it is 
not considered placed in service until this year.
If the appliance had been installed and 
ready for use when it was delivered in Decem-
ber of last year, it would have been considered 
placed in service in December, even if it was 
not actually used until this year.
Example 2.  On April 6, you purchased a 
house to use as residential rental property. You 
made extensive repairs to the house and had it 
ready for rent on July 5. You began to advertise 
the house for rent in July and actually rented it 
beginning September 1. The house is consid-
ered placed in service in July when it was ready 
and available for rent. You can begin to depreci-
ate the house in July.
Example 3. You moved from your home in 
July. During August and September you made 
several repairs to the house. On October 1, you 
listed the property for rent with a real estate 
company, which rented it on December 1. The 
property is considered placed in service on Oc-
tober 1, the date when it was available for rent.
Conversion to business use.  If you place 
property in service in a personal activity, you 
cannot claim depreciation. However, if you 
change the property's use to business or the 
production of income, you can begin to depreci-
ate it at the time of the change. You place the 
property in service for business or income-pro-
ducing use on the date of the change.
Example. You bought a house and used it 
as your personal home several years before 
you converted it to rental property. Although its 
specific use was personal and no depreciation 
was allowable, you placed the home in service 
when you began using it as your home. You can 
begin to claim depreciation in the year you con-
verted it to rental property because at that time 
its use changed to the production of income.
Idle Property
Continue to claim a deduction for depreciation 
on property used in your rental activity even if it 
is temporarily idle (not in use). For example, if 
you must make repairs after a tenant moves 
out, you still depreciate the rental property dur-
ing the time it is not available for rent.
Cost or Other Basis
Fully Recovered
You must stop depreciating property when the 
total of your yearly depreciation deductions 
equals your cost or other basis of your property. 
For this purpose, your yearly depreciation de-
ductions include any depreciation that you were 
allowed to claim, even if you did not claim it. 
See Basis of Depreciable Property, later.
Retired From Service
You stop depreciating property when you retire 
it from service, even if you have not fully recov-
ered its cost or other basis. You retire property 
Page 6 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6  Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

from service when you permanently withdraw it 
from use in a trade or business or from use in 
the production of income because of any of the 
following events.
You sell or exchange the property.
You convert the property to personal use.
You abandon the property.
The property is destroyed.
Depreciation Methods
Generally, you must use the Modified Acceler-
ated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) to de-
preciate residential rental property placed in 
service after 1986.
If you placed rental property in service be-
fore 1987, you are using one of the following 
methods.
ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-
tem) for property placed in service after 
1980 but before 1987.
Straight line or declining balance method 
over the useful life of property placed in 
service before 1981.
See MACRS Depreciation, later, for more infor-
mation.
Rental property placed in service before 
2013. Continue to use the same method of fig-
uring depreciation that you used in the past.
Use of real property changed.  Generally, 
you must use MACRS to depreciate real prop-
erty that you acquired for personal use before 
1987 and changed to business or income-pro-
ducing use after 1986. This includes your resi-
dence that you changed to rental use. See 
Property Owned or Used in 1986  in Publication 
946, chapter 1, for those situations in which 
MACRS is not allowed.
Improvements made after 1986. Treat an im-
provement made after 1986 to property you 
placed in service before 1987 as separate de-
preciable property. As a result, you can depreci-
ate that improvement as separate property un-
der MACRS if it is the type of property that 
otherwise qualifies for MACRS depreciation. 
For more information about improvements, see 
Additions or improvements to property , later in 
this chapter under Recovery Periods Under 
GDS.
This publication discusses MACRS 
depreciation only. If you need informa-
tion about depreciating property 
placed in service before 1987, see Publication 
534.
Basis of Depreciable 
Property
The basis of property used in a rental activity is 
generally its adjusted basis when you place it in 
service in that activity. This is its cost or other 
basis when you acquired it, adjusted for certain 
items occurring before you place it in service in 
the rental activity.
If you depreciate your property under 
MACRS, you may also have to reduce your 
CAUTION
!
basis by certain deductions and credits with re-
spect to the property.
Basis and adjusted basis are explained in 
the following discussions.
If you used the property for personal 
purposes before changing it to rental 
use, its basis for depreciation is the 
lesser of its adjusted basis or its fair market 
value when you change it to rental use. See Ba-
sis of Property Changed to Rental Use  in chap-
ter 4.
Cost Basis
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. 
The cost is the amount you pay for it in cash, in 
debt obligation, in other property, or in services. 
Your cost also includes amounts you pay for:
Sales tax charged on the purchase (but 
see Exception next),
Freight charges to obtain the property, and
Installation and testing charges.
Exception. If you deducted state and local 
general sales taxes as an itemized deduction 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), do not include 
those sales taxes as part of your cost basis. 
Such taxes were deductible before 1987 and 
after 2003.
Loans with low or no interest.  If you buy 
property on any time-payment plan that charges 
little or no interest, the basis of your property is 
your stated purchase price, less the amount 
considered to be unstated interest. See Unsta-
ted Interest and Original Issue Discount (OID) in 
Publication 537, Installment Sales.
Real property.  If you buy real property, such 
as a building and land, certain fees and other 
expenses you pay are part of your cost basis in 
the property.
Real estate taxes.  If you buy real property 
and agree to pay real estate taxes on it that 
were owed by the seller and the seller does not 
reimburse you, the taxes you pay are treated as 
part of your basis in the property. You cannot 
deduct them as taxes paid.
If you reimburse the seller for real estate 
taxes the seller paid for you, you can usually 
deduct that amount. Do not include that amount 
in your basis in the property.
Settlement fees and other costs. The fol-
lowing settlement fees and closing costs for 
buying the property are part of your basis in the 
property.
Abstract fees.
Charges for installing utility services.
Legal fees.
Recording fees.
Surveys.
Transfer taxes.
Title insurance.
Any amounts the seller owes that you 
agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-
est, recording or mortgage fees, charges 
for improvements or repairs, and sales 
commissions.
CAUTION
!
The following are settlement fees and clos-
ing costs you cannot include in your basis in the 
property.
1. Fire insurance premiums.
2. Rent or other charges relating to occu-
pancy of the property before closing.
3. Charges connected with getting or refi-
nancing a loan, such as:
a. Points (discount points, loan origina-
tion fees),
b. Mortgage insurance premiums,
c. Loan assumption fees,
d. Cost of a credit report, and
e. Fees for an appraisal required by a 
lender.
Also, do not include amounts placed in es-
crow for the future payment of items such as 
taxes and insurance.
Assumption of a mortgage.  If you buy 
property and become liable for an existing mort-
gage on the property, your basis is the amount 
you pay for the property plus the amount re-
maining to be paid on the mortgage.
Example. You buy a building for $60,000 
cash and assume a mortgage of $240,000 on it. 
Your basis is $300,000.
Separating cost of land and buildings.  If 
you buy buildings and your cost includes the 
cost of the land on which they stand, you must 
divide the cost between the land and the build-
ings to figure the basis for depreciation of the 
buildings. The part of the cost that you allocate 
to each asset is the ratio of the fair market value 
of that asset to the fair market value of the 
whole property at the time you buy it.
If you are not certain of the fair market val-
ues of the land and the buildings, you can di-
vide the cost between them based on their as-
sessed values for real estate tax purposes.
Example. You buy a house and land for 
$200,000. The purchase contract does not 
specify how much of the purchase price is for 
the house and how much is for the land.
The latest real estate tax assessment on the 
property was based on an assessed value of 
$160,000, of which $136,000 was for the house 
and $24,000 was for the land.
You can allocate 85% ($136,000 ÷ 
$160,000) of the purchase price to the house 
and 15% ($24,000 ÷ $160,000) of the purchase 
price to the land.
Your basis in the house is $170,000 (85% of 
$200,000) and your basis in the land is $30,000 
(15% of $200,000).
Basis Other Than Cost
You cannot use cost as a basis for property that 
you received:
In return for services you performed;
In an exchange for other property;
As a gift;
From your spouse, or from your former 
spouse as the result of a divorce; or
Page 7 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property  Page 7

As an inheritance.
If you received property in one of these 
ways, see Publication 551 for information on 
how to figure your basis.
Adjusted Basis
To figure your property's basis for depreciation, 
you may have to make certain adjustments (in-
creases and decreases) to the basis of the 
property for events occurring between the time 
you acquired the property and the time you 
placed it in service for business or the produc-
tion of income. The result of these adjustments 
to the basis is the adjusted basis.
Increases to basis.  You must increase the 
basis of any property by the cost of all items 
properly added to a capital account. These in-
clude the following.
The cost of any additions or improvements 
made before placing your property into 
service as a rental that have a useful life of 
more than 1 year.
Amounts spent after a casualty to restore 
the damaged property.
The cost of extending utility service lines to 
the property.
Legal fees, such as the cost of defending 
and perfecting title, or settling zoning is-
sues.
Additions or improvements.  Add to the 
basis of your property the amount an addition or 
improvement actually cost you, including any 
amount you borrowed to make the addition or 
improvement. This includes all direct costs, 
such as material and labor, but does not include 
your own labor. It also includes all expenses re-
lated to the addition or improvement.
For example, if you had an architect draw up 
plans for remodeling your property, the archi-
tect's fee is a part of the cost of the remodeling. 
Or, if you had your lot surveyed to put up a 
fence, the cost of the survey is a part of the cost 
of the fence.
Keep separate accounts for depreciable ad-
ditions or improvements made after you place 
the property in service in your rental activity. For 
information on depreciating additions or im-
provements, see Additions or improvements to 
property, later in this chapter, under Recovery 
Periods Under GDS.
The cost of landscaping improve-
ments is usually treated as an addition 
to the basis of the land, which is not 
depreciable. However, see What Rental Prop-
erty Cannot Be Depreciated, earlier.
Assessments for local improvements.
Assessments for items which tend to increase 
the value of property, such as streets and side-
walks, must be added to the basis of the prop-
erty. For example, if your city installs curbing on 
the street in front of your house, and assesses 
you and your neighbors for its cost, you must 
add the assessment to the basis of your prop-
erty. Also add the cost of legal fees paid to ob-
tain a decrease in an assessment levied against 
property to pay for local improvements. You 
cannot deduct these items as taxes or depreci-
ate them.
CAUTION
!
However, you can deduct as taxes, charges 
or assessments for maintenance, repairs, or in-
terest charges related to the improvements. Do 
not add them to your basis in the property.
Deducting vs. capitalizing costs.  Do not 
add to your basis costs you can deduct as cur-
rent expenses. However, there are certain costs 
you can choose either to deduct or to capitalize. 
If you capitalize these costs, include them in 
your basis. If you deduct them, do not include 
them in your basis.
The costs you may choose to deduct or cap-
italize include carrying charges, such as interest 
and taxes, that you must pay to own property.
For more information about deducting or 
capitalizing costs and how to make the election, 
see Carrying Charges in Publication 535, chap-
ter 7.
Decreases to basis.  You must decrease the 
basis of your property by any items that repre-
sent a return of your cost. These include the fol-
lowing.
Insurance or other payment you receive as 
the result of a casualty or theft loss. 
Casualty loss not covered by insurance for 
which you took a deduction.
Amount(s) you receive for granting an 
easement. 
Residential energy credits you were al-
lowed before 1986, or after 2005, if you 
added the cost of the energy items to the 
basis of your home. 
Exclusion from income of subsidies for en-
ergy conservation measures.
Special depreciation allowance claimed on 
qualified property.
Depreciation you deducted, or could have 
deducted, on your tax returns under the 
method of depreciation you chose. If you 
did not deduct enough or deducted too 
much in any year, see Depreciation under 
Decreases to Basis in Publication 551.
If your rental property was previously used 
as your main home, you must also decrease the 
basis by the following.
Gain you postponed from the sale of your 
main home before May 7, 1997, if the re-
placement home was converted to your 
rental property.
District of Columbia first-time homebuyer 
credit allowed on the purchase of your 
main home after August 4, 1997 and be-
fore January 1, 2012.
Amount of qualified principal residence in-
debtedness discharged on or after January 
1, 2007.
Claiming the Special 
Depreciation Allowance
For 2013, your residential rental property may 
qualify for a special depreciation allowance. 
This allowance is figured before you figure your 
regular depreciation deduction. See Publication 
946, chapter 3, for details. Also see the Instruc-
tions for Form 4562, Line 14.
If you qualify for, but choose not to take, a 
special depreciation allowance, you must attach 
a statement to your return. The details of this 
election are in Publication 946, chapter 3, and 
the Instructions for Form 4562, Line 14.
MACRS Depreciation
Most business and investment property placed 
in service after 1986 is depreciated using 
MACRS. 
This section explains how to determine 
which MACRS depreciation system applies to 
your property. It also discusses other informa-
tion you need to know before you can figure de-
preciation under MACRS. This information in-
cludes the property's:
Recovery class,
Applicable recovery period,
Convention,
Placed-in-service date,
Basis for depreciation, and
Depreciation method.
Depreciation Systems
MACRS consists of two systems that determine 
how you depreciate your property—the General 
Depreciation System (GDS) and the Alternative 
Depreciation System (ADS). You must use 
GDS unless you are specifically required by law 
to use ADS or you elect to use ADS.
Excluded Property
You cannot use MACRS for certain personal 
property (such as furniture or appliances) 
placed in service in your rental property in 2013 
if it had been previously placed in service be-
fore 1987 when MACRS became effective.
In most cases, personal property is exclu-
ded from MACRS if you (or a person related to 
you) owned or used it in 1986 or if your tenant is 
a person (or someone related to the person) 
who owned or used it in 1986. However, the 
property is not excluded if your 2013 deduction 
under MACRS (using a half-year convention) is 
less than the deduction you would have under 
ACRS. For more information, see What Method 
Can You Use To Depreciate Your Property?  in 
Publication 946, chapter 1.
Electing ADS
If you choose, you can use the ADS method for 
most property. Under ADS, you use the straight 
line method of depreciation.
The election of ADS for one item in a class 
of property generally applies to all property in 
that class that is placed in service during the tax 
year of the election. However, the election ap-
plies on a property-by-property basis for resi-
dential rental property and nonresidential real 
property.
If you choose to use ADS for your residential 
rental property, the election must be made in 
the first year the property is placed in service. 
Once you make this election, you can never re-
voke it.
Page 8 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8  Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

For property placed in service during 2013, 
you make the election to use ADS by entering 
the depreciation on Form 4562, Part III, Sec-
tion C, line 20c.
Property Classes Under GDS
Each item of property that can be depreciated 
under MACRS is assigned to a property class, 
determined by its class life. The property class 
generally determines the depreciation method, 
recovery period, and convention.
The property classes under GDS are: 
3-year property,
5-year property,
7-year property,
10-year property,
15-year property,
20-year property,
Nonresidential real property, and
Residential rental property.
Under MACRS, property that you placed in 
service during 2013 in your rental activities gen-
erally falls into one of the following classes.
5­year property. This class includes com-
puters and peripheral equipment, office 
machinery (typewriters, calculators, cop-
iers, etc.), automobiles, and light trucks.
This class also includes appliances, 
carpeting, furniture, etc., used in a residen-
tial rental real estate activity.
Depreciation on automobiles, other 
property used for transportation, comput-
ers and related peripheral equipment, and 
property of a type generally used for enter-
tainment, recreation, or amusement is limi-
ted. See chapter 5 of Publication 946.
7­year property. This class includes of-
fice furniture and equipment (desks, file 
cabinets, etc.). This class also includes 
any property that does not have a class life 
and that has not been designated by law 
as being in any other class.
15­year property. This class includes 
roads, fences, and shrubbery (if deprecia-
ble).
Residential rental property. This class 
includes any real property that is a rental 
building or structure (including a mobile 
home) for which 80% or more of the gross 
rental income for the tax year is from dwell-
ing units. It does not include a unit in a ho-
tel, motel, inn, or other establishment 
where more than half of the units are used 
on a transient basis. If you live in any part 
of the building or structure, the gross rental 
income includes the fair rental value of the 
part you live in. 
The other property classes do not 
generally apply to property used in 
rental activities. These classes are not 
discussed in this publication. See Publication 
946 for more information.
CAUTION
!
Recovery Periods
Under GDS
The recovery period of property is the number 
of years over which you recover its cost or other 
basis. The recovery periods are generally lon-
ger under ADS than GDS.
The recovery period of property depends on 
its property class. Under GDS, the recovery pe-
riod of an asset is generally the same as its 
property class.
Class lives and recovery periods for most 
assets are listed in Appendix B  of Publication 
946. See Table 2-1 for recovery periods of 
property commonly used in residential rental 
activities.
Qualified Indian reservation property. 
Shorter recovery periods are provided under 
MACRS for qualified Indian reservation prop-
erty placed in service on Indian reservations. 
For more information, see chapter 4 of Publica-
tion 946.
Additions or improvements to property.
Treat additions or improvements you make to 
your depreciable rental property as separate 
property items for depreciation purposes.
The property class and recovery period of 
the addition or improvement is the one that 
would apply to the original property if you had 
placed it in service at the same time as the ad-
dition or improvement.
The recovery period for an addition or im-
provement to property begins on the later of:
The date the addition or improvement is 
placed in service, or
The date the property to which the addition 
or improvement was made is placed in 
service.
Example. You own a residential rental 
house that you have been renting since 1986 
and depreciating under ACRS. You built an ad-
dition onto the house and placed it in service in 
2013. You must use MACRS for the addition. 
Under GDS, the addition is depreciated as resi-
dential rental property over 27.5 years.
MACRS Recovery Periods for 
Property Used in
Rental Activities
Table 2-1.
Keep for Your Records
MACRS Recovery Period 
Type of Property
General
Depreciation
System
Alternative
Depreciation
System 
Computers and their peripheral equipment ............. 5 years 5 years
Office machinery, such as:
    Typewriters
    Calculators
    Copiers ................................... 5 years 6 years
Automobiles ................................... 5 years 5 years
Light trucks .................................... 5 years 5 years
Appliances, such as:
    Stoves
    Refrigerators ............................... 5 years 9 years
Carpets ....................................... 5 years 9 years
Furniture used in rental property ..................... 5 years 9 years
Office furniture and equipment, such as:
    Desks
    Files ..................................... 7 years 10 years
Any property that does not have a class life and that has not
    been designated by law as being in any other 
class ......................................... 7 years 12 years
Roads ........................................ 15 years 20 years
Shrubbery ..................................... 15 years 20 years
Fences ....................................... 15 years 20 years
Residential rental property (buildings or structures)
    and structural components such as furnaces,
    waterpipes, venting, etc. ....................... 27.5 years 40 years
Additions and improvements, such as a new roof ........ The same recovery period as 
that of the property to which 
the addition or improvement is 
made, determined as if the 
property were placed in 
service at the same time as 
the addition or improvement.
Page 9 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property  Page 9

Conventions
A convention is a method established under 
MACRS to set the beginning and end of the re-
covery period. The convention you use deter-
mines the number of months for which you can 
claim depreciation in the year you place prop-
erty in service and in the year you dispose of 
the property.
Mid-month convention. A mid-month conven-
tion is used for all residential rental property and 
nonresidential real property. Under this conven-
tion, you treat all property placed in service, or 
disposed of, during any month as placed in 
service, or disposed of, at the midpoint of that 
month.
Mid-quarter convention.  A mid-quarter con-
vention must be used if the mid-month conven-
tion does not apply and the total depreciable 
basis of MACRS property placed in service in 
the last 3 months of a tax year (excluding non-
residential real property, residential rental prop-
erty, and property placed in service and dis-
posed of in the same year) is more than 40% of 
the total basis of all such property you place in 
service during the year.
Under this convention, you treat all property 
placed in service, or disposed of, during any 
quarter of a tax year as placed in service, or dis-
posed of, at the midpoint of the quarter.
Example. During the tax year, Tom Martin 
purchased the following items to use in his 
rental property. He elects not to claim the spe-
cial depreciation allowance discussed earlier.
A dishwasher for $400 that he placed in 
service in January.
Used furniture for $100 that he placed in 
service in September.
A refrigerator for $800 that he placed in 
service in October.
Tom uses the calendar year as his tax year. 
The total basis of all property placed in service 
that year is $1,300. The $800 basis of the refrig-
erator placed in service during the last 3 months 
of his tax year exceeds $520 (40% × $1,300). 
Tom must use the mid-quarter convention in-
stead of the half-year convention for all three 
items.
Half-year convention.  The half-year conven-
tion is used if neither the mid-quarter conven-
tion nor the mid-month convention applies. Un-
der this convention, you treat all property 
placed in service, or disposed of, during a tax 
year as placed in service, or disposed of, at the 
midpoint of that tax year.
If this convention applies, you deduct a half 
year of depreciation for the first year and the 
last year that you depreciate the property. You 
deduct a full year of depreciation for any other 
year during the recovery period.
Figuring Your Depreciation 
Deduction
You can figure your MACRS depreciation de-
duction in one of two ways. The deduction is 
substantially the same both ways. You can ei-
ther:
Actually compute the deduction using the 
depreciation method and convention that 
apply over the recovery period of the prop-
erty, or
Use the percentage from the MACRS per-
centage tables.
In this publication we will use the percent-
age tables. For instructions on how to compute 
the deduction, see chapter 4 of Publication 946.
Residential rental property.  You must use 
the straight line method and a mid-month con-
vention for residential rental property. In the first 
year that you claim depreciation for residential 
rental property, you can claim depreciation only 
for the number of months the property is in use, 
and you must use the mid-month convention 
(explained under Conventions, earlier).
5-, 7-, or 15-year property. For property in the 
5- or 7-year class, use the 200% declining bal-
ance method and a half-year convention. How-
ever, in limited cases you must use the 
mid-quarter convention, if it applies. For prop-
erty in the 15-year class, use the 150% 
Table 2-2. Optional MACRS GDS Percentage Tables
a. MACRS 5-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
20.00%
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
b. MACRS 7-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
c. MACRS 15-Year Property (150% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
d. Residential Rental Property-GDS  (27.5-year S/L with mid-month convention)
14.29%
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
5.00%
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
3.485% 3.636%
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
1.970
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
7 5.90 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90
8 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90 5.90
7 8.93 8.75 8.87 8.86 8.73
Page 10 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10  Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

declining balance method and a half-year con-
vention.
You can also choose to use the 150% de-
clining balance method for property in the 5- or 
7-year class. The choice to use the 150% 
method for one item in a class of property ap-
plies to all property in that class that is placed in 
service during the tax year of the election. You 
make this election on Form 4562. In Part III, col-
umn (f), enter “150 DB.” Once you make this 
election, you cannot change to another method.
If you use either the 200% or 150% declin-
ing balance method, you figure your deduction 
using the straight line method in the first tax 
year that the straight line method gives you an 
equal or larger deduction.
You can also choose to use the straight line 
method with a half-year or mid-quarter conven-
tion for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property. The choice to 
use the straight line method for one item in a 
class of property applies to all property in that 
class that is placed in service during the tax 
year of the election. You elect the straight line 
method on Form 4562. In Part III, column (f), 
enter “S/L.” Once you make this election, you 
cannot change to another method.
MACRS Percentage Tables
You can use the percentages in Table 2-2, ear-
lier, to compute annual depreciation under 
MACRS. The tables show the percentages for 
the first few years or until the change to the 
straight line method is made. See Appendix A 
of Publication 946 for complete tables. The per-
centages in Tables 2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c make 
the change from declining balance to straight 
line in the year that straight line will give a larger 
deduction.
If you elect to use the straight line method 
for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property, or the 150% de-
clining balance method for 5- or 7-year prop-
erty, use the tables in Appendix A of Publication 
946.
How to use the percentage tables. You must 
apply the table rates to your property's unadjus-
ted basis (defined below) each year of the re-
covery period.
Once you begin using a percentage table to 
figure depreciation, you must continue to use it 
for the entire recovery period unless there is an 
adjustment to the basis of your property for a 
reason other than:
1. Depreciation allowed or allowable, or
2. An addition or improvement that is depre-
ciated as a separate item of property.
If there is an adjustment for any reason 
other than (1) or (2), for example, because of a 
deductible casualty loss, you can no longer use 
the table. For the year of the adjustment and for 
the remaining recovery period, figure deprecia-
tion using the property's adjusted basis at the 
end of the year and the appropriate deprecia-
tion method, as explained earlier under Figuring 
Your Depreciation Deduction . See Figuring the 
Deduction Without Using the Tables  in Publica-
tion 946, chapter 4.
Unadjusted basis. This is the same basis 
you would use to figure gain on a sale (see 
Basis of Depreciable Property, earlier), but with-
out reducing your original basis by any MACRS 
depreciation taken in earlier years.
However, you do reduce your original basis 
by other amounts claimed on the property, in-
cluding:
Any amortization,
Any section 179 deduction, and
Any special depreciation allowance.
For more information, see chapter 4 of Publica-
tion 946.
Tables 2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c.  The percen-
tages in these tables take into account the 
half-year and mid-quarter conventions. Use Ta-
ble 2-2a for 5-year property, Table 2-2b for 
7-year property, and Table 2-2c for 15-year 
property. Use the percentage in the second col-
umn (half-year convention) unless you are re-
quired to use the mid-quarter convention  (ex-
plained earlier). If you must use the mid-quarter 
convention, use the column that corresponds to 
the calendar year quarter in which you placed 
the property in service.
Example 1. You purchased a stove and re-
frigerator and placed them in service in June. 
Your basis in the stove is $600 and your basis 
in the refrigerator is $1,000. Both are 5-year 
property. Using the half-year convention col-
umn in Table 2-2a, the depreciation percentage 
for Year 1 is 20%. For that year your deprecia-
tion deduction is $120 ($600 × .20) for the stove 
and $200 ($1,000 × .20) for the refrigerator.
For Year 2, the depreciation percentage is 
32%. That year's depreciation deduction will be 
$192 ($600 × .32) for the stove and $320 
($1,000 × .32) for the refrigerator.
Example 2.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1 , except you buy the refrigerator in 
October instead of June. Since the refrigerator 
was placed in service in the last 3 months of the 
tax year, and its basis ($1,000) is more than 
40% of the total basis of all property placed in 
service during the year ($1,600 × .40 = $640), 
you are required to use the mid-quarter conven-
tion to figure depreciation on both the stove and 
refrigerator.
Because you placed the refrigerator in serv-
ice in October, you use the fourth quarter col-
umn of Table 2-2a and find the depreciation 
percentage for Year 1 is 5%. Your depreciation 
deduction for the refrigerator is $50 ($1,000 
x .05).
Because you placed the stove in service in 
June, you use the second quarter column of Ta-
ble 2-2a and find the depreciation percentage 
for Year 1 is 25%. For that year, your deprecia-
tion deduction for the stove is $150 ($600 
x .25).
Table 2-2d. Use this table when you are using 
the GDS 27.5 year option for residential rental 
property. Find the row for the month that you 
placed the property in service. Use the percen-
tages listed for that month to figure your depre-
ciation deduction. The mid-month convention is 
taken into account in the percentages shown in 
the table. Continue to use the same row 
(month) under the column for the appropriate 
year.
Example. You purchased a single family 
rental house for $185,000 and placed it in serv-
ice on February 8. The sales contract showed 
that the building cost $160,000 and the land 
cost $25,000. Your basis for depreciation is its 
original cost, $160,000. This is the first year of 
service for your residential rental property and 
you decide to use GDS which has a recovery 
period of 27.5 years. Using Table 2-2d, you find 
that the percentage for property placed in serv-
ice in February of Year 1 is 3.182%. That year's 
depreciation deduction is $5,091 ($160,000 
x .03182).
Figuring MACRS 
Depreciation Under ADS
Table 2–1, earlier, shows the ADS recovery pe-
riods for property used in rental activities.
See Appendix B in Publication 946 for other 
property. If your property is not listed in Appen-
dix B, it is considered to have no class life. Un-
der ADS, personal property with no class life is 
depreciated using a recovery period of 12 
years.
Use the mid-month convention for residen-
tial rental property and nonresidential real prop-
erty. For all other property, use the half-year or 
mid-quarter convention, as appropriate. 
See Publication 946 for ADS depreciation 
tables.
Claiming the Correct 
Amount of Depreciation
You should claim the correct amount of depreci-
ation each tax year. If you did not claim all the 
depreciation you were entitled to deduct, you 
must still reduce your basis in the property by 
the full amount of depreciation that you could 
have deducted. For more information, see De-
preciation under Decreases to Basis in Publica-
tion 551.
If you deducted an incorrect amount of de-
preciation for property in any year, you may be 
able to make a correction by filing Form 1040X, 
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. If 
you are not allowed to make the correction on 
an amended return, you can change your ac-
counting method to claim the correct amount of 
depreciation.
Filing an amended return.  You can file an 
amended return to correct the amount of depre-
ciation claimed for any property in any of the fol-
lowing situations.
You claimed the incorrect amount because 
of a mathematical error made in any year.
You claimed the incorrect amount because 
of a posting error made in any year.
You have not adopted a method of ac-
counting for property placed in service by 
you in tax years ending after December 29, 
2003.
You claimed the incorrect amount on prop-
erty placed in service by you in tax years 
ending before December 30, 2003.
Generally, you adopt a method of account-
ing for depreciation by using a permissible 
Page 11 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property  Page 11

method of determining depreciation when you 
file your first tax return for the property used in 
your rental activity. This also occurs when you 
use the same impermissible method of deter-
mining depreciation (for example, using the 
wrong MACRS recovery period) in two or more 
consecutively filed tax returns.
 If an amended return is allowed, you must 
file it by the later of the following dates.
3 years from the date you filed your original 
return for the year in which you did not de-
duct the correct amount. A return filed be-
fore an unextended due date is considered 
filed on that due date.
2 years from the time you paid your tax for 
that year.
Changing your accounting method.  To 
change your accounting method, you generally 
must file Form 3115, Application for Change in 
Accounting Method, to get the consent of the 
IRS. In some instances, that consent is auto-
matic. For more information, see Changing 
Your Accounting Method in Publication 946,
chapter 1.
3.
Reporting
Rental Income, 
Expenses, and 
Losses
Figuring the net income or loss for a residential 
rental activity may involve more than just listing 
the income and deductions on Schedule E 
(Form 1040). There are activities which do not 
qualify to use Schedule E, such as when the ac-
tivity is not engaged in to make a profit or when 
you provide substantial services in conjunction 
with the property.
There are also the limitations which may need 
to be applied if you have a net loss on Sched-
ule E. There are two: (1) the limitation based on 
the amount of investment you have at risk in 
your rental activity, and (2) the special limits im-
posed on passive activities.
You may also have a gain or loss related to your 
rental property from a casualty or theft. This is 
considered separately from the income and ex-
pense information you report on Schedule E.
Which Forms To Use
The basic form for reporting residential rental in-
come and expenses is Schedule E (Form 
1040). However, do not use that schedule to re-
port a not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented for 
Profit, in chapter 4. There are also other rental 
situations in which forms other than Schedule E 
would be used.
Schedule E (Form 1040)
If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and 
provide basic services such as heat and light, 
trash collection, etc., you normally report your 
rental income and expenses on Schedule E, 
Part I.
List your total income, expenses, and depre-
ciation for each rental property. Be sure to enter 
the number of fair rental and personal use days 
on line 2.
If you have more than three rental or royalty 
properties, complete and attach as many 
Schedules E as are needed to list the proper-
ties. Complete lines 1 and 2 for each property. 
However, fill in lines 23a through 26 on only one 
Schedule E.
On Schedule E, page 1, line 18, enter the 
depreciation you are claiming for each property. 
To find out if you need to attach Form 4562, see 
Form 4562, later.
If you have a loss from your rental real es-
tate activity, you also may need to complete 
one or both of the following forms.
Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. See 
At-Risk Rules, later. Also see Publication 
925.
Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-
tions. See Passive Activity Limits, later.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in-
come or loss from partnerships, S corporations, 
estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-
ment conduits. If you need to use page 2 of 
Schedule E, be sure to use page 2 of the same 
Schedule E you used to enter your rental activ-
ity on page 1. Also, include the amount from 
line 26 (Part I) in the “Total income or (loss)” on 
line 41 (Part V).
Form 4562.  You must complete and attach 
Form 4562 for rental activities only if you are 
claiming:
Depreciation, including the special depre-
ciation allowance, on property placed in 
service during 2013;
Depreciation on listed property (such as a 
car), regardless of when it was placed in 
service; or
Any other car expenses, including the 
standard mileage rate or lease expenses.
Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your own 
worksheet. You do not have to attach these 
computations to your return, but you should 
keep them in your records for future reference.
See Publication 946 for information on pre-
paring Form 4562.
Schedule C (Form 1040), 
Profit or Loss From Business
Generally, Schedule C is used when you pro-
vide substantial services in conjunction with the 
property or the rental is part of a trade or busi-
ness as a real estate dealer.
Providing substantial services.  If you pro-
vide substantial services that are primarily for 
your tenant's convenience, such as regular 
cleaning, changing linen, or maid service, you 
report your rental income and expenses on 
Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From 
Business, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net 
Profit From Business. Use Form 1065, U.S. Re-
turn of Partnership Income, if your rental activity 
is a partnership (including a partnership with 
your spouse unless it is a qualified joint ven-
ture). Substantial services do not include the 
furnishing of heat and light, cleaning of public 
areas, trash collection, etc. For information, see 
Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business. 
Also, you may have to pay self-employment tax 
on your rental income using Schedule SE (Form 
1040), Self-Employment Tax. For a discussion 
of “substantial services,” see Real Estate Rents 
in Publication 334, chapter 5.
Qualified Joint Venture
If you and your spouse each materially partici-
pate (see Material participation  under Passive 
Activity Limits, later) as the only members of a 
jointly owned and operated real estate busi-
ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year, 
you can make a joint election to be treated as a 
qualified joint venture instead of a partnership. 
This election, in most cases, will not increase 
the total tax owed on the joint return, but it does 
give each of you credit for social security earn-
ings on which retirement benefits are based 
and for Medicare coverage if your rental income 
is subject to self-employment tax.
If you make this election, you must report 
rental real estate income on Schedule E (or 
Schedule C if you provide substantial services). 
You will not be required to file Form 1065 for 
any year the election is in effect. Rental real es-
tate income generally is not included in net 
earnings from self-employment subject to 
self-employment tax and generally is subject to 
the passive activity limits.
If you and your spouse filed a Form 1065 for 
the year prior to the election, the partnership 
terminates at the end of the tax year immedi-
ately preceding the year the election takes ef-
fect.
For more information on qualified joint ven-
tures, go to IRS.gov and enter “qualified joint 
venture” in the search box.
Limits on
Rental Losses
If you have a loss from your rental real estate 
activity, two sets of rules may limit the amount 
of loss you can deduct. You must consider 
these rules in the order shown below. Both are 
discussed in this section.
1. At-risk rules. These rules are applied first if 
there is investment in your rental real es-
tate activity for which you are not at risk. 
This applies only if the real property was 
placed in service after 1986.
2. Passive activity limits. Generally, rental 
real estate activities are considered pas-
sive activities and losses are not 
deductible unless you have income from 
Page 12 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12  Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses

other passive activities to offset them. 
However, there are exceptions.
At-Risk Rules
You may be subject to the at-risk rules if you 
have:
A loss from an activity carried on as a trade 
or business or for the production of in-
come, and
Amounts invested in the activity for which 
you are not fully at risk.
Losses from holding real property (other 
than mineral property) placed in service before 
1987 are not subject to the at-risk rules.
In most cases, any loss from an activity sub-
ject to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the ex-
tent of the total amount you have at risk in the 
activity at the end of the tax year. You are con-
sidered at risk in an activity to the extent of cash 
and the adjusted basis of other property you 
contributed to the activity and certain amounts 
borrowed for use in the activity. Any loss that is 
disallowed because of the at-risk limits is trea-
ted as a deduction from the same activity in the 
next tax year. See Publication 925 for a discus-
sion of the at-risk rules.
Form 6198.  If you are subject to the at-risk 
rules, file Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, with 
your tax return.
Passive Activity Limits
In most cases, all rental real estate activities 
(except those of certain real estate professio-
nals, discussed later) are passive activities. For 
this purpose, a rental activity is an activity from 
which you receive income mainly for the use of 
tangible property, rather than for services. For a 
discussion of activities that are not considered 
rental activities, see Rental Activities in Publica-
tion 925.
Deductions or losses from passive activities 
are limited. You generally cannot offset income, 
other than passive income, with losses from 
passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes on 
income, other than passive income, with credits 
resulting from passive activities. Any excess 
loss or credit is carried forward to the next tax 
year. Exceptions to the rules for figuring passive 
activity limits for personal use of a dwelling unit 
and for rental real estate with active participa-
tion are discussed later.
For a detailed discussion of these rules, see 
Publication 925.
Real estate professionals.  If you are a real 
estate professional, complete line 43 of Sched-
ule E.
You qualify as a real estate professional for 
the tax year if you meet both of the following re-
quirements.
More than half of the personal services you 
perform in all trades or businesses during 
the tax year are performed in real property 
trades or businesses in which you materi-
ally participate.
You perform more than 750 hours of serv-
ices during the tax year in real property 
trades or businesses in which you materi-
ally participate.
If you qualify as a real estate professional, 
rental real estate activities in which you materi-
ally participated are not passive activities. For 
purposes of determining whether you materially 
participated in your rental real estate activities, 
each interest in rental real estate is a separate 
activity unless you elect to treat all your inter-
ests in rental real estate as one activity.
Do not count personal services you perform 
as an employee in real property trades or busi-
nesses unless you are a 5% owner of your em-
ployer. You are a 5% owner if you own (or are 
considered to own) more than 5% of your em-
ployer's outstanding stock, or capital or profits 
interest.
Do not count your spouse's personal serv-
ices to determine whether you met the require-
ments listed earlier to qualify as a real estate 
professional. However, you can count your 
spouse's participation in an activity in determin-
ing if you materially participated.
Real property trades or businesses.  A 
real property trade or business is a trade or 
business that does any of the following with real 
property.
Develops or redevelops it.
Constructs or reconstructs it.
Acquires it.
Converts it.
Rents or leases it.
Operates or manages it.
Brokers it.
Choice to treat all interests as one activity. 
If you were a real estate professional and had 
more than one rental real estate interest during 
the year, you can choose to treat all the inter-
ests as one activity. You can make this choice 
for any year that you qualify as a real estate 
professional. If you forgo making the choice for 
one year, you can still make it for a later year.
If you make the choice, it is binding for the 
tax year you make it and for any later year that 
you are a real estate professional. This is true 
even if you are not a real estate professional in 
any intervening year. (For that year, the excep-
tion for real estate professionals will not apply in 
determining whether your activity is subject to 
the passive activity rules.)
See the Instructions for Schedule E for infor-
mation about making this choice.
Material participation. Generally, you materi-
ally participated in an activity for the tax year if 
you were involved in its operations on a regular, 
continuous, and substantial basis during the 
year. For details, see Publication 925 or the In-
structions for Schedule C.
Participating spouse.  If you are married, 
determine whether you materially participated in 
an activity by also counting any participation in 
the activity by your spouse during the year. Do 
this even if your spouse owns no interest in the 
activity or files a separate return for the year.
Form 8582.  You may have to complete Form 
8582 to figure the amount of any passive activ-
ity loss for the current tax year for all activities 
and the amount of the passive activity loss al-
lowed on your tax return. See Form 8582 not re-
quired, later in this chapter, to determine if you 
must complete Form 8582.
If you are required to complete Form 8582 
and are also subject to the at-risk rules, include 
the amount from Form 6198, line 21 (deductible 
loss) in column (b) of Form 8582, Worksheet 1 
or 3, as required.
Exception for Personal Use of 
Dwelling Unit
If you used the rental property as a home during 
the year, any income, deductions, gain, or loss 
allocable to such use shall not be taken into ac-
count for purposes of the passive activity loss 
limitation. Instead, follow the rules explained in 
chapter 5 , Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (In-
cluding Vacation Home).
Exception for Rental Real Estate 
With Active Participation
If you or your spouse actively participated in a 
passive rental real estate activity, you may be 
able to deduct up to $25,000 of loss from the 
activity from your nonpassive income. This spe-
cial allowance is an exception to the general 
rule disallowing losses in excess of income 
from passive activities. Similarly, you may be 
able to offset credits from the activity against 
the tax on up to $25,000 of nonpassive income 
after taking into account any losses allowed un-
der this exception.
Example. Jane is single and has $40,000 
in wages, $2,000 of passive income from a limi-
ted partnership, and $3,500 of passive loss 
from a rental real estate activity in which she ac-
tively participated. $2,000 of Jane's $3,500 loss 
offsets her passive income. The remaining 
$1,500 loss can be deducted from her $40,000 
wages.
The special allowance is not available 
if you were married, lived with your 
spouse at any time during the year, 
and are filing a separate return.
Active participation. You actively participated 
in a rental real estate activity if you (and your 
spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental prop-
erty and you made management decisions or 
arranged for others to provide services (such as 
repairs) in a significant and bona fide  sense. 
Management decisions that may count as ac-
tive participation include approving new ten-
ants, deciding on rental terms, approving ex-
penditures, and other similar decisions.
Example. Mike is single and had the follow-
ing income and losses during the tax year:
Salary ....................... $42,300
Dividends ..................... 300
Interest ...................... 1,400
Rental loss .................... (4,000)
The rental loss was from the rental of a 
house Mike owned. Mike had advertised and 
rented the house to the current tenant himself. 
He also collected the rents, which usually came 
CAUTION
!
Page 13 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses  Page 13

by mail. All repairs were either made or 
contracted out by Mike.
Although the rental loss is from a passive 
activity, because Mike actively participated in 
the rental property management he can use the 
entire $4,000 loss to offset his other income.
Maximum special allowance.  The maximum 
special allowance is:
$25,000 for single individuals and married 
individuals filing a joint return for the tax 
year,
$12,500 for married individuals who file 
separate returns for the tax year and lived 
apart from their spouses at all times during 
the tax year, and
$25,000 for a qualifying estate reduced by 
the special allowance for which the surviv-
ing spouse qualified.
If your modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if 
married filing separately), you can deduct your 
loss up to the amount specified above. If your 
MAGI is more than $100,000 (more than 
$50,000 if married filing separately), your spe-
cial allowance is limited to 50% of the difference 
between $150,000 ($75,000 if married filing 
separately) and your MAGI.
Generally, if your MAGI is $150,000 or more 
($75,000 or more if you are married filing sepa-
rately), there is no special allowance.
Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).
This is your adjusted gross income from Form 
1040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, 
line 38, or Form 1040NR, U.S. Nonresident 
Alien Income Tax Return, line 37, figured with-
out taking into account:
1. The taxable amount of social security or 
equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement bene-
fits,
2. The deductible contributions to traditional 
individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and 
section 501(c)(18) pension plans,
3. The exclusion from income of interest from 
Series EE and I U.S. savings bonds used 
to pay higher educational expenses,
4. The exclusion of amounts received under 
an employer's adoption assistance pro-
gram,
5. Any passive activity income or loss inclu-
ded on Form 8582,
6. Any rental real estate loss allowed to real 
estate professionals,
7. Any overall loss from a publicly traded 
partnership (see Publicly Traded Partner-
ships (PTPs) in the Instructions for Form 
8582),
8. The deduction allowed for one-half of 
self-employment tax,
9. The deduction allowed for interest paid on 
student loans,
10. The deduction for qualified tuition and re-
lated fees, and
11. The domestic production activities deduc-
tion (see the Instructions for Form 8903).
Form 8582 not required.  Do not complete 
Form 8582 if you meet all of the following condi-
tions.
Your only passive activities were rental real 
estate activities in which you actively par-
ticipated.
Your overall net loss from these activities is 
$25,000 or less ($12,500 or less if married 
filing separately and you lived apart from 
your spouse all year).
If married filing separately, you lived apart 
from your spouse all year.
You have no prior year unallowed losses 
from these (or any other passive) activities.
You have no current or prior year unal-
lowed credits from passive activities.
Your MAGI is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or 
less if married filing separately and you 
lived apart from your spouse all year).
You do not hold any interest in a rental real 
estate activity as a limited partner or as a 
beneficiary of an estate or a trust.
If you meet all of the conditions listed above, 
your rental real estate activities are not limited 
by the passive activity rules and you do not 
have to complete Form 8582. On lines 23a 
through 23e of your Schedule E, enter the appli-
cable amounts.
Casualties and Thefts
As a result of a casualty or theft, you may have 
a loss related to your rental property. You may 
be able to deduct the loss on your income tax 
return.
Casualty. This is the damage, destruction, or 
loss of property resulting from an identifiable 
event that is sudden, unexpected, or unusual. 
Such events include a storm, fire, or earth-
quake.
Theft. This is defined as the unlawful taking 
and removing of your money or property with 
the intent to deprive you of it.
Gain from casualty or theft.  It is also possi-
ble to have a gain from a casualty or theft if you 
receive money, including insurance, that is 
more than your adjusted basis in the property. 
Generally, you must report this gain. However, 
under certain circumstances, you may defer 
paying tax by choosing to postpone reporting 
the gain. To do this, you generally must buy re-
placement property within 2 years after the 
close of the first tax year in which any part of 
your gain is realized. In certain circumstances, 
the replacement period can be greater than 2 
years; see Replacement Period  in Publication 
547 for more information. The cost of the re-
placement property must be equal to or more 
than the net insurance or other payment you re-
ceived.
More information.  For information on busi-
ness and nonbusiness casualty and theft los-
ses, see Publication 547.
How to report.  If you had a casualty or theft 
that involved property used in your rental activ-
ity, figure the net gain or loss in Section B of 
Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. Follow the 
Instructions for Form 4684 for where to carry 
your net gain or loss.
Example
In February 2008, Marie Pfister bought a 
rental house for $135,000 (house $120,000 and 
land $15,000) and immediately began renting it 
out. In 2013, she rented it all 12 months for a 
monthly rental fee of $1,125. In addition to her 
rental income of $13,500 (12 x $1,125), Marie 
had the following expenses.
Mortgage interest ................... $8,000
Fire insurance (1-year policy) ........... 250
Miscellaneous repairs ................ 400
Real estate taxes imposed and paid ...... 500
Maintenance ...................... 200
Marie depreciates the residential rental 
property under MACRS GDS. This means using 
the straight line method over a recovery period 
of 27.5 years.
She uses Table 2-2d to find her depreciation 
percentage. Because she placed the property 
in service in February 2008, she continues to 
use that row of Table 2-2d. For year 6, the rate 
is 3.636%.
Marie figures her net rental income or loss 
for the house as follows:
Total rental income received 
($1,125 × 12) ...................... $13,500
Minus: Expenses
Mortgage interest .......... $8,000
Fire insurance ............. 250
Miscellaneous repairs ........ 400
Real estate taxes .......... 500
Maintenance .............. 200
Total expenses ................... 9,350
Balance .......................... $4,150
Minus: Depreciation ($120,000 x 
3.636%) ........................ 4,363
Net rental (loss) for house ......... ($213)
Marie had a net loss for the year. Because 
she actively participated in her passive rental 
real estate activity and her loss was less than 
$25,000, she can deduct the loss on her return. 
Marie also meets all of the requirements for not 
having to file Form 8582. She uses Schedule E, 
Part I, to report her rental income and expen-
ses. She enters her income, expenses, and de-
preciation for the house in the column for Prop-
erty A and enters her loss on line 22. Form 4562 
is not required.
Page 14 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14  Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses

4.
Special 
Situations
This chapter discusses some rental real estate 
activities that are subject to additional rules.
Condominiums
A condominium is most often a dwelling unit in 
a multi-unit building, but can also take other 
forms, such as a townhouse or garden apart-
ment.
If you own a condominium, you also own a 
share of the common elements, such as land, 
lobbies, elevators, and service areas. You and 
the other condominium owners may pay dues 
or assessments to a special corporation that is 
organized to take care of the common ele-
ments.
Special rules apply if you rent your condo-
minium to others. You can deduct as rental ex-
penses all the expenses discussed in chapters 
1 and 2. In addition, you can deduct any dues 
or assessments paid for maintenance of the 
common elements.
You cannot deduct special assessments 
you pay to a condominium management corpo-
ration for improvements. However, you may be 
able to recover your share of the cost of any im-
provement by taking depreciation.
Cooperatives
If you live in a cooperative, you do not own your 
apartment. Instead, a corporation owns the 
apartments and you are a tenant-stockholder in 
the cooperative housing corporation. If you rent 
your apartment to others, you usually can de-
duct, as a rental expense, all the maintenance 
fees you pay to the cooperative housing corpo-
ration.
In addition to the maintenance fees paid to 
the cooperative housing corporation, you can 
deduct your direct payments for repairs, up-
keep, and other rental expenses, including in-
terest paid on a loan used to buy your stock in 
the corporation.
Depreciation
You will be depreciating your stock in the corpo-
ration rather than the apartment itself. Figure 
your depreciation deduction as follows.
1. Figure the depreciation for all the depreci-
able real property owned by the corpora-
tion. (Depreciation methods are discussed 
in chapter 2 of this publication and Publi-
cation 946.) If you bought your coopera-
tive stock after its first offering, figure the 
depreciable basis of this property as fol-
lows.
a. Multiply your cost per share by the to-
tal number of outstanding shares.
b. Add to the amount figured in (a) any 
mortgage debt on the property on the 
date you bought the stock.
c. Subtract from the amount figured in 
(b) any mortgage debt that is not for 
the depreciable real property, such as 
the part for the land.
2. Subtract from the amount figured in (1) 
any depreciation for space owned by the 
corporation that can be rented but cannot 
be lived in by tenant-stockholders.
3. Divide the number of your shares of stock 
by the total number of shares outstanding, 
including any shares held by the corpora-
tion.
4. Multiply the result of (2) by the percentage 
you figured in (3). This is your depreciation 
on the stock.
Your depreciation deduction for the year 
cannot be more than the part of your adjusted 
basis (defined in chapter 2 ) in the stock of the 
corporation that is allocable to your rental prop-
erty.
Payments added to capital account.  Pay-
ments earmarked for a capital asset or improve-
ment, or otherwise charged to the corporation's 
capital account are added to the basis of your 
stock in the corporation. For example, you can-
not deduct a payment used to pave a commun-
ity parking lot, install a new roof, or pay the prin-
cipal of the corporation's mortgage.
Treat as a capital cost the amount you were 
assessed for capital items. This cannot be more 
than the amount by which your payments to the 
corporation exceeded your share of the corpo-
ration's mortgage interest and real estate taxes.
Your share of interest and taxes is the 
amount the corporation elected to allocate to 
you, if it reasonably reflects those expenses for 
your apartment. Otherwise, figure your share in 
the following manner.
1. Divide the number of your shares of stock 
by the total number of shares outstanding, 
including any shares held by the corpora-
tion.
2. Multiply the corporation's deductible inter-
est by the number you figured in (1). This 
is your share of the interest.
3. Multiply the corporation's deductible taxes 
by the number you figured in (1). This is 
your share of the taxes.
Property Changed
to Rental Use
If you change your home or other property (or a 
part of it) to rental use at any time other than the 
beginning of your tax year, you must divide 
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance, 
between rental use and personal use.
You can deduct as rental expenses only the 
part of the expense that is for the part of the 
year the property was used or held for rental 
purposes.
You cannot deduct depreciation or insur-
ance for the part of the year the property was 
held for personal use. However, you can in-
clude the home mortgage interest, qualified 
mortgage insurance premiums, and real estate 
tax expenses for the part of the year the prop-
erty was held for personal use as an itemized 
deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Example. Your tax year is the calendar 
year. You moved from your home in May and 
started renting it out on June 1. You can deduct 
as rental expenses seven-twelfths of your 
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance.
Starting with June, you can deduct as rental 
expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-
ally billed monthly, such as utilities.
When figuring depreciation, treat the prop-
erty as placed in service on June 1.
Basis of Property
Changed to Rental Use
When you change property you held for per-
sonal use to rental use (for example, you rent 
your former home), the basis for depreciation 
will be the lesser of fair market value or adjus-
ted basis on the date of conversion.
Fair market value.  This is the price at which 
the property would change hands between a 
willing buyer and a willing seller, neither having 
to buy or sell, and both having reasonable 
knowledge of all the relevant facts. Sales of 
similar property, on or about the same date, 
may be helpful in figuring the fair market value 
of the property.
Figuring the basis. The basis for depreciation 
is the lesser of:
The fair market value of the property on the 
date you changed it to rental use, or
Your adjusted basis on the date of the 
change—that is, your original cost or other 
basis of the property, plus the cost of per-
manent additions or improvements since 
you acquired it, minus deductions for any 
casualty or theft losses claimed on earlier 
years' income tax returns and other de-
creases to basis. For other increases and 
decreases to basis, see Adjusted Basis in 
chapter 2.
Example. Several years ago you built your 
home for $140,000 on a lot that cost you 
$14,000. Before changing the property to rental 
use this year, you added $28,000 of permanent 
improvements to the house and claimed a 
$3,500 casualty loss deduction for damage to 
the house. Part of the improvements qualified 
for a $500 residential energy credit, which you 
claimed on your 2010 tax return. Because land 
is not depreciable, you can only include the cost 
of the house when figuring the basis for depre-
ciation.
The adjusted basis of the house at the time 
of the change in its use was $164,000 
($140,000 + $28,000 − $3,500 − $500).
Page 15 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Special Situations  Page 15

On the date of the change in use, your prop-
erty had a fair market value of $168,000, of 
which $21,000 was for the land and $147,000 
was for the house.
The basis for depreciation on the house is 
the fair market value on the date of the change 
($147,000), because it is less than your adjus-
ted basis ($164,000).
Cooperatives
If you change your cooperative apartment to 
rental use, figure your allowable depreciation as 
explained earlier. (Depreciation methods are 
discussed in chapter 2  of this publication and 
Publication 946.) The basis of all the deprecia-
ble real property owned by the cooperative 
housing corporation is the smaller of the follow-
ing amounts.
The fair market value of the property on the 
date you change your apartment to rental 
use. This is considered to be the same as 
the corporation's adjusted basis minus 
straight line depreciation, unless this value 
is unrealistic.
The corporation's adjusted basis in the 
property on that date. Do not subtract de-
preciation when figuring the corporation's 
adjusted basis.
If you bought the stock after its first offering, 
the corporation's adjusted basis in the property 
is the amount figured in (1) under Depreciation 
(under Cooperatives, near the beginning of this 
chapter). The fair market value of the property is 
considered to be the same as the corporation's 
adjusted basis figured in this way minus straight 
line depreciation, unless the value is unrealistic.
Figuring the Depreciation 
Deduction
To figure the deduction, use the depreciation 
system in effect when you convert your resi-
dence to rental use. Generally, that will be 
MACRS for any conversion after 1986. Treat 
the property as placed in service on the conver-
sion date.
Example. Your converted residence (see 
previous example under Figuring the basis) was 
available for rent on August 1. Using Table 2-2d 
(see chapter 2), the percentage for Year 1 be-
ginning in August is 1.364% and the deprecia-
tion deduction for Year 1 is $2,005 ($147,000 
× .01364).
Renting Part of Property
If you rent part of your property, you must divide 
certain expenses between the part of the prop-
erty used for rental purposes and the part of the 
property used for personal purposes, as though 
you actually had two separate pieces of prop-
erty.
You can deduct the expenses related to the 
part of the property used for rental purposes, 
such as home mortgage interest, qualified mort-
gage insurance premiums, and real estate 
taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Form 
1040). You can also deduct as rental expenses 
a portion of other expenses that normally are 
nondeductible personal expenses, such as ex-
penses for electricity, or painting the outside of 
the house.
There is no change in the types of expenses 
deductible for the personal-use part of your 
property. Generally, these expenses may be 
deducted only if you itemize your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
You cannot deduct any part of the cost of 
the first phone line even if your tenants have un-
limited use of it.
You do not have to divide the expenses that 
belong only to the rental part of your property. 
For example, if you paint a room that you rent, 
or if you pay premiums for liability insurance in 
connection with renting a room in your home, 
your entire cost is a rental expense. If you install 
a second phone line strictly for your tenant's 
use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-
ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-
ciation on the part of the house used for rental 
purposes as well as on the furniture and equip-
ment you use for rental purposes.
How to divide expenses.  If an expense is for 
both rental use and personal use, such as mort-
gage interest or heat for the entire house, you 
must divide the expense between rental use 
and personal use. You can use any reasonable 
method for dividing the expense. It may be rea-
sonable to divide the cost of some items (for ex-
ample, water) based on the number of people 
using them. The two most common methods for 
dividing an expense are (1) the number of 
rooms in your home, and (2) the square footage 
of your home.
Example. You rent a room in your house. 
The room is 12 × 15 feet, or 180 square feet. 
Your entire house has 1,800 square feet of floor 
space. You can deduct as a rental expense 
10% of any expense that must be divided be-
tween rental use and personal use. If your heat-
ing bill for the year for the entire house was 
$600, $60 ($600 × .10) is a rental expense. The 
balance, $540, is a personal expense that you 
cannot deduct.
Duplex. A common situation is the duplex 
where you live in one unit and rent out the other. 
Certain expenses apply to the entire property, 
such as mortgage interest and real estate 
taxes, and must be split to determine rental and 
personal expenses.
Example. You own a duplex and live in one 
half, renting the other half. Both units are ap-
proximately the same size. Last year, you paid 
a total of $10,000 mortgage interest and $2,000 
real estate taxes for the entire property. You 
can deduct $5,000 mortgage interest and 
$1,000 real estate taxes on Schedule E (Form 
1040), and if you itemize your deductions, you 
can deduct the other $5,000 mortgage interest 
and $1,000 real estate taxes on Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
Not Rented for Profit
If you do not rent your property to make a profit, 
you can deduct your rental expenses only up to 
the amount of your rental income. You cannot 
deduct a loss or carry forward to the next year 
any rental expenses that are more than your 
rental income for the year.
Where to report.  Report your not-for-profit 
rental income on Form 1040 or 1040NR, 
line 21. For example, if you are filing Form 
1040, you can include your mortgage interest 
and any qualified mortgage insurance premi-
ums (if you use the property as your main home 
or second home), real estate taxes, and casu-
alty losses on the appropriate lines of Sched-
ule A (Form 1040) if you itemize your deduc-
tions.
If you itemize your deductions, claim your 
other rental expenses, subject to the rules ex-
plained in chapter 1 of Publication 535, as mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 23, or Schedule A (Form 
1040NR), line 9. You can deduct these expen-
ses only if they, together with certain other mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions, total more than 
2% of your adjusted gross income.
Presumption of profit. If your rental income is 
more than your rental expenses for at least 3 
years out of a period of 5 consecutive years, 
you are presumed to be renting your property to 
make a profit.
Postponing decision.  If you are starting 
your rental activity and do not have 3 years 
showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-
sumption made after you have the 5 years of 
experience required by the test. You may 
choose to postpone the decision of whether the 
rental is for profit by filing Form 5213. You must 
file Form 5213 within 3 years after the due date 
of your return (determined without extensions) 
for the year in which you first carried on the ac-
tivity or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiving 
written notice from the Internal Revenue Serv-
ice proposing to disallow deductions attributa-
ble to the activity.
More information. For more information about 
the rules for an activity not engaged in for profit, 
see Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publi-
cation 535.
Example—Property 
Changed to Rental Use
In January, Eileen Johnson bought a condomin-
ium apartment to live in. Instead of selling the 
house she had been living in, she decided to 
change it to rental property. Eileen selected a 
tenant and started renting the house on Febru-
ary 1. Eileen charges $750 a month for rent and 
collects it herself. Eileen also received a $750 
security deposit from her tenant. Because she 
plans to return it to her tenant at the end of the 
lease, she does not include it in her income. 
Her rental expenses for the year are as follows.
Mortgage interest ................ $1,800
Fire insurance (1-year policy) ........ 100
Miscellaneous repairs (after renting) ... 297
Real estate taxes imposed and paid ... 1,200
Eileen must divide the real estate taxes, 
mortgage interest, and fire insurance between 
Page 16 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16  Chapter 4 Special Situations

the personal use of the property and the rental 
use of the property. She can deduct 
eleven-twelfths of these expenses as rental ex-
penses. She can include the balance of the al-
lowable taxes and mortgage interest on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040) if she itemizes. She cannot 
deduct the balance of the fire insurance be-
cause it is a personal expense.
Eileen bought this house in 1984 for 
$35,000. Her property tax was based on as-
sessed values of $10,000 for the land and 
$25,000 for the house. Before changing it to 
rental property, Eileen added several improve-
ments to the house. She figures her adjusted 
basis as follows:
Improvements Cost
House ....................... $25,000
Remodeled kitchen .............. 4,200
Recreation room ............... 5,800
New roof ..................... 1,600
Patio and deck ................. 2,400
Adjusted basis ............ $39,000
On February 1, when Eileen changed her 
house to rental property, the property had a fair 
market value of $152,000. Of this amount, 
$35,000 was for the land and $117,000 was for 
the house.
Because Eileen's adjusted basis is less than 
the fair market value on the date of the change, 
Eileen uses $39,000 as her basis for deprecia-
tion.
As specified for residential rental property, 
Eileen must use the straight line method of de-
preciation over the GDS or ADS recovery pe-
riod. She chooses the GDS recovery period of 
27.5 years.
She uses Table 2-2d to find her depreciation 
percentage. Since she placed the property in 
service in February, the percentage is 3.182%.
On April 1, Eileen bought a new dishwasher 
for the rental property at a cost of $425. The 
dishwasher is personal property used in a rental 
real estate activity, which has a 5-year recovery 
period. She uses Table 2-2a to find the percent-
age for Year 1 under “Half-year convention” 
(20%) to figure her depreciation deduction.
On May 1, Eileen paid $4,000 to have a fur-
nace installed in the house. The furnace is resi-
dential rental property. Because she placed the 
property in service in May, the percentage from 
Table 2-2d is 2.273%.
Eileen figures her net rental income or loss 
for the house as follows:
Total rental income received 
($750 × 11) ..................... $8,250
Minus: Expenses
Mortgage interest ($1,800 × 
1112) ................... $1,650
Fire insurance ($100 × 
1112) ................... 92
Miscellaneous repairs ...... 297
Real estate taxes ($1,200 × 
1112) ................... 1,100
Total expenses .................. 3,139
Balance ......................... $5,111
Minus: Depreciation
House ($39,000 
× .03182) ............... $1,241
Dishwasher ($425 × .20) ... 85
Furnace ($4,000 
× .02273) ............... 91
Total depreciation ................ 1,417
Net rental income for 
house .............. $3,694
Eileen uses Schedule E, Part I, to report her 
rental income and expenses. She enters her in-
come, expenses, and depreciation for the 
house in the column for Property A. Since all 
property was placed in service this year, Eileen 
must use Form 4562 to figure the depreciation. 
See the Instructions for Form 4562 for more in-
formation on preparing the form.
5.
Personal Use of 
Dwelling Unit 
(Including 
Vacation Home)
If you have any personal use of a dwelling unit 
(including a vacation home) that you rent, you 
must divide your expenses between rental use 
and personal use. In general, your rental expen-
ses will be no more than your total expenses 
multiplied by a fraction; the denominator of 
which is the total number of days the dwelling 
unit is used and the numerator of which is the 
total number of days actually rented at a fair 
rental price. Only your rental expenses may de-
ducted on Schedule E (Form 1040). Some of 
your personal expenses may be deductible if 
you itemize your deductions on Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
You must also determine if the dwelling unit is 
considered a home. The amount of rental ex-
penses that you can deduct may be limited if 
the dwelling unit is considered a home. 
Whether a dwelling unit is considered a home 
depends on how many days during the year are 
considered to be days of personal use. There is 
a special rule if you used the dwelling unit as a 
home and you rented it for less than 15 days 
during the year.
Dwelling unit.  A dwelling unit includes a 
house, apartment, condominium, mobile home, 
boat, vacation home, or similar property. It also 
includes all structures or other property belong-
ing to the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit has ba-
sic living accommodations, such as sleeping 
space, a toilet, and cooking facilities.
A dwelling unit does not include property (or 
part of the property) used solely as a hotel, mo-
tel, inn, or similar establishment. Property is 
used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar es-
tablishment if it is regularly available for occu-
pancy by paying customers and is not used by 
an owner as a home during the year.
Example. You rent a room in your home 
that is always available for short-term occu-
pancy by paying customers. You do not use the 
room yourself and you allow only paying cus-
tomers to use the room. This room is used 
solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establish-
ment and is not a dwelling unit.
Dividing Expenses
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and per-
sonal purposes, divide your expenses between 
the rental use and the personal use based on 
the number of days used for each purpose.
When dividing your expenses, follow these 
rules.
Any day that the unit is rented at a fair 
rental price is a day of rental use even if 
you used the unit for personal purposes 
that day. (This rule does not apply when 
determining whether you used the unit as a 
home.)
Any day that the unit is available for rent 
but not actually rented is not a day of rental 
use.
Fair rental price.  A fair rental price for your 
property generally is the amount of rent that a 
person who is not related to you would be will-
ing to pay. The rent you charge is not a fair 
rental price if it is substantially less than the 
rents charged for other properties that are simi-
lar to your property in your area.
Ask yourself the following questions when 
comparing another property with yours.
Is it used for the same purpose?
Is it approximately the same size?
Is it in approximately the same condition?
Does it have similar furnishings?
Is it in a similar location?
If any of the answers are no, the properties 
probably are not similar.
Example. Your beach cottage was availa-
ble for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92 
days). Except for the first week in August (7 
days), when you were unable to find a renter, 
you rented the cottage at a fair rental price dur-
ing that time. The person who rented the cot-
tage for July allowed you to use it over the 
weekend (2 days) without any reduction in or 
Page 17 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)  Page 17

refund of rent. Your family also used the cottage 
during the last 2 weeks of May (14 days). The 
cottage was not used at all before May 17 or af-
ter August 31.
You figure the part of the cottage expenses 
to treat as rental expenses as follows.
The cottage was used for rental a total of 
85 days (92 − 7). The days it was available 
for rent but not rented (7 days) are not 
days of rental use. The July weekend (2 
days) you used it is rental use because you 
received a fair rental price for the week-
end.
You used the cottage for personal purpo-
ses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in May).
The total use of the cottage was 99 days 
(14 days personal use + 85 days rental 
use).
Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) of 
the cottage expenses.
Note. When determining whether you used 
the cottage as a home, the July weekend (2 
days) you used it is considered personal use 
even though you received a fair rental price for 
the weekend. Therefore, you had 16 days of 
personal use and 83 days of rental use for this 
purpose. Because you used the cottage for per-
sonal purposes more than 14 days and more 
than 10% of the days of rental use (8 days), you 
used it as a home. If you have a net loss, you 
may not be able to deduct all of the rental ex-
penses. See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home , 
next.
Dwelling Unit Used as a 
Home
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and per-
sonal purposes, the tax treatment of the rental 
expenses you figured earlier under Dividing Ex-
penses and rental income depends on whether 
you are considered to be using the dwelling unit 
as a home.
You use a dwelling unit as a home during 
the tax year if you use it for personal purposes 
more than the greater of:
1. 14 days, or
2. 10% of the total days it is rented to others 
at a fair rental price.
See What is a day of personal use, later.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal purpo-
ses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price 
(discussed earlier), do not count that day as a 
day of rental use in applying (2) above. Instead, 
count it as a day of personal use in applying 
both (1) and (2) above.
What is a day of personal use? A day of per-
sonal use of a dwelling unit is any day that the 
unit is used by any of the following persons.
1. You or any other person who owns an in-
terest in it, unless you rent it to another 
owner as his or her main home under a 
shared equity financing agreement (de-
fined later). However, see Days used as a 
main home before or after renting, later.
2. A member of your family or a member of 
the family of any other person who owns 
an interest in it, unless the family member 
uses the dwelling unit as his or her main 
home and pays a fair rental price. Family 
includes only your spouse, brothers and 
sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, an-
cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and 
lineal descendants (children, grandchil-
dren, etc.).
3. Anyone under an arrangement that lets 
you use some other dwelling unit.
4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.
Main home. If the other person or member 
of the family in (1) or (2) above has more than 
one home, his or her main home is ordinarily 
the one he or she lived in most of the time.
Shared equity financing agreement. This 
is an agreement under which two or more per-
sons acquire undivided interests for more than 
50 years in an entire dwelling unit, including the 
land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-
tled to occupy the unit as his or her main home 
upon payment of rent to the other co-owner or 
owners.
Donation of use of the property. You use 
a dwelling unit for personal purposes if:
You donate the use of the unit to a charita-
ble organization,
The organization sells the use of the unit at 
a fund-raising event, and
The “purchaser” uses the unit.
Examples. The following examples show 
how to determine if you have days of personal 
use.
Example 1.  You and your neighbor are 
co-owners of a condominium at the beach. Last 
year, you rented the unit to vacationers when-
ever possible. The unit was not used as a main 
home by anyone. Your neighbor used the unit 
for 2 weeks last year; you did not use it at all.
Because your neighbor has an interest in 
the unit, both of you are considered to have 
used the unit for personal purposes during 
those 2 weeks.
Example 2.  You and your neighbors are 
co-owners of a house under a shared equity fi-
nancing agreement. Your neighbors live in the 
house and pay you a fair rental price.
Even though your neighbors have an inter-
est in the house, the days your neighbors live 
there are not counted as days of personal use 
by you. This is because your neighbors rent the 
house as their main home under a shared 
equity financing agreement.
Example 3. You own a rental property that 
you rent to your son. Your son does not own 
any interest in this property. He uses it as his 
main home and pays you a fair rental price.
Your son's use of the property is not per-
sonal use by you because your son is using it 
as his main home, he owns no interest in the 
property, and he is paying you a fair rental 
price.
Example 4.  You rent your beach house to 
Rosa. Rosa rents her cabin in the mountains to 
you. You each pay a fair rental price.
You are using your beach house for per-
sonal purposes on the days that Rosa uses it 
because your house is used by Rosa under an 
arrangement that allows you to use her cabin.
Example 5. You rent an apartment to your 
mother at less than a fair rental price. You are 
using the apartment for personal purposes on 
the days that your mother rents it because you 
rent it for less than a fair rental price.
Days used for repairs and maintenance.
Any day that you spend working substantially 
full time repairing and maintaining (not improv-
ing) your property is not counted as a day of 
personal use. Do not count such a day as a day 
of personal use even if family members use the 
property for recreational purposes on the same 
day.
Example. Corey owns a cabin in the moun-
tains that he rents for most of the year. He 
spends a week at the cabin with family mem-
bers. Corey works on maintenance of the cabin 
3 or 4 hours each day during the week and 
spends the rest of the time fishing, hiking, and 
relaxing. Corey's family members, however, 
work substantially full time on the cabin each 
day during the week. The main purpose of be-
ing at the cabin that week is to do maintenance 
work. Therefore, the use of the cabin during the 
week by Corey and his family will not be consid-
ered personal use by Corey.
Days used as a main home before or af­
ter renting.  For purposes of determining 
whether a dwelling unit was used as a home, 
you may not have to count days you used the 
property as your main home before or after rent-
ing it or offering it for rent as days of personal 
use. Do not count them as days of personal use 
if:
You rented or tried to rent the property for 
12 or more consecutive months.
You rented or tried to rent the property for 
a period of less than 12 consecutive 
months and the period ended because you 
sold or exchanged the property.
However, this special rule does not apply when 
dividing expenses between rental and personal 
use. See Property Changed to Rental Use  in 
chapter 4.
Example 1.  On February 29, 2012, you 
moved out of the house you had lived in for 6 
years because you accepted a job in another 
town. You rented your house at a fair rental 
price from March 15, 2012, to May 14, 2013 (14 
months). On June 1, 2013, you moved back 
into your old house.
The days you used the house as your main 
home from January 1 to February 29, 2012, and 
from June 1 to December 31, 2013, are not 
counted as days of personal use. Therefore, 
you would use the rules in chapter 1 when figur-
ing your rental income and expenses.
Example 2. On January 31, you moved out 
of the condominium where you had lived for 3 
years. You offered it for rent at a fair rental price 
beginning on February 1. You were unable to 
Page 18 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18  Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

rent it until April. On September 15, you sold the 
condominium.
The days you used the condominium as 
your main home from January 1 to January 31 
are not counted as days of personal use when 
determining whether you used it as a home.
Examples. The following examples show how 
to determine whether you used your rental 
property as a home.
Example 1.  You converted the basement 
of your home into an apartment with a bedroom, 
a bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the 
basement apartment at a fair rental price to col-
lege students during the regular school year. 
You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273 
days). You figured 10% of the total days rented 
to others at a fair rental price is 27 days.
During June (30 days), your brothers stayed 
with you and lived in the basement apartment 
rent free.
Your basement apartment was used as a 
home because you used it for personal purpo-
ses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your brothers 
is considered personal use. Your personal use 
(30 days) is more than the greater of 14 days or 
10% of the total days it was rented (27 days).
Example 2. You rented the guest bedroom 
in your home at a fair rental price during the lo-
cal college's homecoming, commencement, 
and football weekends (a total of 27 days). Your 
sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for 
the last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 
10% of the total days rented to others at a fair 
rental price is 3 days.
The room was used as a home because you 
used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That 
is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of 
the 27 days it was rented (3 days).
Example 3. You own a condominium apart-
ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair 
rental price for a total of 170 days during the 
year. For 12 of these days, the tenant was not 
able to use the apartment and allowed you to 
use it even though you did not refund any of the 
rent. Your family actually used the apartment for 
10 of those days. Therefore, the apartment is 
treated as having been rented for 160 (170 – 
10) days. You figured 10% of the total days ren-
ted to others at a fair rental price is 16 days. 
Your family also used the apartment for 7 other 
days during the year.
You used the apartment as a home because 
you used it for personal purposes for 17 days. 
That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% 
of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).
Minimal rental use.  If you use the dwelling 
unit as a home and you rent it less than 15 days 
during the year, that period is not treated as 
rental activity. See Used as a home but rented 
less than 15 days, later, for more information.
Limit on deductions.  Renting a dwelling unit 
that is considered a home is not a passive activ-
ity. Instead, if your rental expenses are more 
than your rental income, some or all of the ex-
cess expenses cannot be used to offset income 
from other sources. The excess expenses that 
cannot be used to offset income from other 
sources are carried forward to the next year and 
treated as rental expenses for the same prop-
erty. Any expenses carried forward to the next 
year will be subject to any limits that apply for 
that year. This limitation will apply to expenses 
carried forward to another year even if you do 
not use the property as your home for that sub-
sequent year.
To figure your deductible rental expenses 
for this year and any carryover to next year, use 
Worksheet 5–1.
Reporting Income and 
Deductions
Property not used for personal purposes.  If 
you do not use a dwelling unit for personal pur-
poses, see chapter 3  for how to report your 
rental income and expenses.
Property used for personal purposes. If you 
do use a dwelling unit for personal purposes, 
then how you report your rental income and ex-
penses depends on whether you used the 
dwelling unit as a home.
Not used as a home.  If you use a dwelling 
unit for personal purposes, but not as a home, 
report all the rental income in your income. 
Since you used the dwelling unit for personal 
purposes, you must divide your expenses be-
tween the rental use and the personal use as 
described earlier in this chapter under Dividing 
Expenses. The expenses for personal use are 
not deductible as rental expenses.
Your deductible rental expenses can be 
more than your gross rental income; however, 
see Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 3.
Used as a home but rented less than 15 
days. If you use a dwelling unit as a home and 
you rent it less than 15 days during the year, its 
primary function is not considered to be rental 
and it should not be reported on Schedule E 
(Form 1040). You are not required to report the 
rental income and rental expenses from this ac-
tivity. The expenses, including qualified mort-
gage interest, property taxes, and any qualified 
casualty loss will be reported as normally al-
lowed on Schedule A (Form 1040). See the In-
structions for Schedule A (Form 1040) for more 
information on deducting these expenses.
Used as a home and rented 15 days or 
more. If you use a dwelling unit as a home and 
rent it 15 days or more during the year, include 
all your rental income in your income. Since you 
used the dwelling unit for personal purposes, 
you must divide your expenses between the 
rental use and the personal use as described 
earlier in this chapter under Dividing Expenses. 
The expenses for personal use are not deducti-
ble as rental expenses.
If you had a net profit from renting the dwell-
ing unit for the year (that is, if your rental income 
is more than the total of your rental expenses, 
including depreciation), deduct all of your rental 
expenses. You do not need to use Worksheet 
5-1.
However, if you had a net loss from renting 
the dwelling unit for the year, your deduction for 
certain rental expenses is limited. To figure your 
deductible rental expenses and any carryover 
to next year, use Worksheet 5–1.
Page 19 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)  Page 19

Worksheet for Figuring Rental 
Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as 
a Home
Worksheet 5-1.
Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer “yes” to all of the following questions.
Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home.)
Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price ..................................... A.  
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ................................. B.  
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ............................... C.  
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ......... D.  
E. Total days of rental and personal use. Add lines C and D ......................... E.  
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E .................. F.    .      
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ......................................................................... 1.  
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified mortgage 
insurance premiums (see instructions) .......................................... 2a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes ....................................... b.  
 c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) .......... c.  
 d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) .................................... d.  
 e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E (see instructions) ............................................ 2e.  
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ................................................ 3.  
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ........................... 4a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums (see instructions) ................................................... b.  
 c. Carryover of operating expenses from 2012 worksheet .............................. c.  
 d. Add lines 4a–4c ............................................................ d.  
 e. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4d (see instructions) ............................ 4e.  
5. Subtract line 4e from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ................................................ 5.  
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ............ 6a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit ........................... b.  
 c. Carryover of excess casualty losses and depreciation from 2012 worksheet ............. c.  
 d. Add lines 6a–6c ............................................................ d.  
 e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d (see instructions) ............................................................... 6e.  
PART III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4e from line 4d ...................... 7a.  
 b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year.
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .................................................................. b.  
Page 20 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20  Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a 
Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
Worksheet 5-1 Instructions.
Keep for Your Records
Caution. Use the percentage determined in Part I, line F, to figure the rental portions to enter on lines 2a–2c, 4a–4b, and 6a–6b of 
Part II.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A as if you had not rented the unit. Do not 
include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example, do not include interest on a home equity loan used 
to pay off credit cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or pay college tuition. Include interest on a loan used to buy, build, or 
improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such a loan. Include the rental portion of this interest in the total you enter on line 2a of 
the worksheet.
Figure the qualified mortgage insurance premiums on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on line 13 of Schedule A as if 
you had not rented the unit. See the Schedule A instructions. However, figure your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line 38) 
without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. See Line 4b to deduct the part of the qualified mortgage 
insurance premiums not allowed because of the adjusted gross income limit. Include the rental portion of the amount from 
Schedule A, line 13, in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Schedule A or use it to figure the amount to deduct on line 13 of that schedule. Instead, figure the 
personal portion on a separate Schedule A. If you have deducted mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums 
on the dwelling unit on other forms, such as Schedule C or F, remember to reduce your Schedule A deduction by that amount.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A as if you had not rented the 
dwelling unit. To do this, complete Section A of Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts, treating the losses as personal losses. If any 
of the loss is due to a federally declared disaster, see the Instructions for Form 4684. On Form 4684, line 17, enter 10% of your 
adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the rental portion of the 
result from Form 4684, line 18, on line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to figure your personal losses on Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal portion on 
a separate Form 4684.
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used for 
rental activities other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also include rental agency fees, advertising, office 
supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses on Schedule E even if your rental expenses are 
more than your rental income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental portion of the mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums you could deduct 
on Schedule A if you had not rented the dwelling unit. If you had additional mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums that would not be deductible on Schedule A because of limits imposed on them, enter on line 4b of this worksheet the 
rental portion of those excess amounts. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit 
(as explained in the line 2a instructions).
Line 4e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a, 4b, and 4c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more than 
the amount on line 4e.*
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684 you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A. Enter the amount from Form 4684, line 10 ....................................  
B. Enter the rental portion of line A ............................................  
C. Enter the amount from line 2c of this worksheet ...............................  
D. Subtract line C from line B. Enter the result here and on line 6a of this worksheet ......  
Line 6e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a, 6b, and 6c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more than 
the amount on line 6e.*
*Allocating the limited deduction. If you cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4d or 6d this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you wish 
among the expenses included on line 4d or 6d. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
6.
How To Get Tax 
Help
Whether it's help with a tax issue, preparing 
your tax return or a need for a free publication 
or form, get the help you need the way you want 
it: online, use a smart phone, call or walk in to 
an IRS office or volunteer site near you.
Free help with your tax return.  You can get 
free help preparing your return nationwide from 
IRS-certified volunteers. The Volunteer Income 
Tax Assistance (VITA) program helps 
low-to-moderate income, elderly, people with 
disabilities, and limited English proficient tax-
payers. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program helps taxpayers age 60 and 
older with their tax returns. Most VITA and TCE 
sites offer free electronic filing and all volun-
teers will let you know about credits and deduc-
tions you may be entitled to claim. In addition, 
some VITA and TCE sites provide taxpayers 
the opportunity to prepare their own return with 
help from an IRS-certified volunteer. To find the 
nearest VITA or TCE site, you can use the VITA 
Locator Tool on IRS.gov, download the IRS2Go 
app, or call 1-800-906-9887.
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers 
the Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the 
nearest AARP Tax-Aide site, visit AARP's web-
site at www.aarp.org/money/taxaide or call 
1-888-227-7669. For more information on these 
programs, go to IRS.gov and enter “VITA” in the 
search box.
Internet. IRS.gov and IRS2Go are ready 
when you are —24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Download the free IRS2Go app from the 
iTunes app store or from Google Play. Use 
it to check your refund status, order tran-
scripts of your tax returns or tax account, 
watch the IRS YouTube channel, get IRS 
news as soon as it's released to the public, 
Page 21 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help  Page 21

subscribe to filing season updates or daily 
tax tips, and follow the IRS Twitter news 
feed, @IRSnews, to get the latest federal 
tax news, including information about tax 
law changes and important IRS programs.
Check the status of your 2013 refund with 
the Where's My Refund? application on 
IRS.gov or download the IRS2Go app and 
select the Refund Status option. The IRS 
issues more than 9 out of 10 refunds in 
less than 21 days. Using these applica-
tions, you can start checking on the status 
of your return within 24 hours after we re-
ceive your e-filed return or 4 weeks after 
you mail a paper return. You will also be 
given a personalized refund date as soon 
as the IRS processes your tax return and 
approves your refund. The IRS updates 
Where's My Refund? every 24 hours, usu-
ally overnight, so you only need to check 
once a day.
Use the Interactive Tax Assistant (ITA) to 
research your tax questions. No need to 
wait on the phone or stand in line. The ITA 
is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 
and provides you with a variety of tax infor-
mation related to general filing topics, de-
ductions, credits, and income. When you 
reach the response screen, you can print 
the entire interview and the final response 
for your records. New subject areas are 
added on a regular basis.
Answers not provided through ITA may be 
found in Tax Trails, one of the Tax Topics 
on IRS.gov which contain general individ-
ual and business tax information or by 
searching the IRS Tax Map, which in-
cludes an international subject index. 
You can use the IRS Tax Map, to search 
publications and instructions by topic or 
keyword. The IRS Tax Map integrates 
forms and publications into one research 
tool and provides single-point access to 
tax law information by subject. When the 
user searches the IRS Tax Map, they will 
be provided with links to related content in 
existing IRS publications, forms and in-
structions, questions and answers, and 
Tax Topics.
Coming this filing season, you can immedi-
ately view and print for free all 5 types of 
individual federal tax transcripts (tax re-
turns, tax account, record of account, 
wage and income statement, and certifica-
tion of non-filing) using Get Transcript. 
You can also ask the IRS to mail a return 
or an account transcript to you. Only the 
mail option is available by choosing the 
Tax Records option on the IRS2Go app by 
selecting Mail Transcript on IRS.gov or by 
calling 1-800-908-9946. Tax return and tax 
account transcripts are generally available 
for the current year and the past three 
years.
Determine if you are eligible for the EITC 
and estimate the amount of the credit with 
the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) 
Assistant.
Visit Understanding Your IRS Notice or 
Letter to get answers to questions about a 
notice or letter you received from the IRS.
If you received the First Time Homebuyer 
Credit, you can use the First Time 
Homebuyer Credit Account Look-up tool 
for information on your repayments and ac-
count balance.
Check the status of your amended return 
using Where's My Amended Return? Go to 
IRS.gov and enter Where's My Amended 
Return? in the search box. You can gener-
ally expect your amended return to be pro-
cessed up to 12 weeks from the date we 
receive it. It can take up to 3 weeks from 
the date you mailed it to show up in our 
system.
Make a payment using one of several safe 
and convenient electronic payment options 
available on IRS.gov. Select the Payment 
tab on the front page of IRS.gov for more 
information.
Determine if you are eligible and apply for 
an online payment agreement, if you owe 
more tax than you can pay today.
Figure your income tax withholding with 
the IRS Withholding Calculator on IRS.gov. 
Use it if you've had too much or too little 
withheld, your personal situation has 
changed, you're starting a new job or you 
just want to see if you're having the right 
amount withheld.
Determine if you might be subject to the Al-
ternative Minimum Tax by using the 
Alternative Minimum Tax Assistant on 
IRS.gov.
Request an Electronic Filing PIN by go-
ing to IRS.gov and entering Electronic Fil-
ing PIN in the search box.
Download forms, instructions and publica-
tions, including accessible versions for 
people with disabilities.
Locate the nearest Taxpayer Assistance 
Center (TAC) using the Office Locator tool 
on IRS.gov, or choose the Contact Us op-
tion on the IRS2Go app and search Local 
Offices. An employee can answer ques-
tions about your tax account or help you 
set up a payment plan. Before you visit, 
check the Office Locator on IRS.gov, or 
Local Offices under Contact Us on IRS2Go 
to confirm the address, phone number, 
days and hours of operation, and the serv-
ices provided. If you have a special need, 
such as a disability, you can request an ap-
pointment. Call the local number listed in 
the Office Locator, or look in the phone 
book under United States Government, In-
ternal Revenue Service.
Apply for an Employer Identification 
Number (EIN). Go to IRS.gov and enter 
Apply for an EIN in the search box.
Read the Internal Revenue Code, regula-
tions, or other official guidance.
Read Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Sign up to receive local and national tax 
news and more by email. Just click on 
“subscriptions” above the search box on 
IRS.gov and choose from a variety of op-
tions.
Phone. You can call the IRS, or you can carry 
it in your pocket with the IRS2Go app on your 
smart phone or tablet. Download the free 
IRS2Go app from the iTunes app store or from 
Google Play.
Call to locate the nearest volunteer help 
site, 1-800-906-9887 or you can use the 
VITA Locator Tool on IRS.gov, or down-
load the IRS2Go app. Low-to-moderate in-
come, elderly, people with disabilities, and 
limited English proficient taxpayers can get 
free help with their tax return from the na-
tionwide Volunteer Income Tax Assistance 
(VITA) program. The Tax Counseling for 
the Elderly (TCE) program helps taxpayers 
age 60 and older with their tax returns. 
Most VITA and TCE sites offer free elec-
tronic filing. Some VITA and TCE sites pro-
vide IRS-certified volunteers who can help 
prepare your tax return. Through the TCE 
program, AARP offers the Tax-Aide coun-
seling program; call 1-888-227-7669 to 
find the nearest Tax-Aide location.
Call the automated Where's My Refund? 
information hotline to check the status of 
your 2013 refund 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week at 1-800-829-1954. If you e-file, you 
can start checking on the status of your re-
turn within 24 hours after the IRS receives 
your tax return or 4 weeks after you've 
mailed a paper return. The IRS issues 
more than 9 out of 10 refunds in less than 
21 days. Where's My Refund? will give you 
a personalized refund date as soon as the 
IRS processes your tax return and ap-
proves your refund. Before you call this au-
tomated hotline, have your 2013 tax return 
handy so you can enter your social secur-
ity number, your filing status, and the exact 
whole dollar amount of your refund. The 
IRS updates Where's My Refund? every 
24 hours, usually overnight, so you only 
need to check once a day. Note, the above 
information is for our automated hotline. 
Our live phone and walk-in assistors can 
research the status of your refund only if 
it's been 21 days or more since you filed 
electronically or more than 6 weeks since 
you mailed your paper return.
Call the Amended Return Hotline, 
1-866-464-2050, to check the status of 
your amended return. You can generally 
expect your amended return to be pro-
cessed up to 12 weeks from the date we 
receive it. It can take up to 3 weeks from 
the date you mailed it to show up in our 
system.
Call 1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) 
to order current-year forms, instructions, 
publications, and prior-year forms and in-
structions (limited to 5 years). You should 
receive your order within 10 business 
days.
Call TeleTax, 1-800-829-4477, to listen to 
pre-recorded messages covering general 
and business tax information. If, between 
January and April 15, you still have ques-
tions about the Form 1040, 1040A, or 
1040EZ (like filing requirements, depend-
ents, credits, Schedule D, pensions and 
IRAs or self-employment taxes), call 
1-800-829-1040.
Call using TTY/TDD equipment, 
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or or-
der forms and publications. The TTY/TDD 
telephone number is for people who are 
deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech 
disability. These individuals can also con-
tact the IRS through relay services such as 
the Federal Relay Service.
Page 22 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22  Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help

Walk-in. You can find a selection of forms, 
publications and services — in-person.
Products. You can walk in to some post of-
fices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up 
certain forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, and city 
and county government offices have a col-
lection of products available to photocopy 
from reproducible proofs.
Services. You can walk in to your local 
TAC for face-to-face tax help. An em-
ployee can answer questions about your 
tax account or help you set up a payment 
plan. Before visiting, use the Office Locator 
tool on IRS.gov, or choose the Contact Us 
option on the IRS2Go app and search Lo-
cal Offices for days and hours of operation, 
and services provided.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, in-
structions, and publications to the address be-
low. You should receive a response within 10 
business days after your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
 
The Taxpayer Advocate Service Is Here to Help 
You. The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) 
is your voice at the IRS. Our job is to ensure 
that every taxpayer is treated fairly and that you 
know and understand your rights.
 
What can TAS do for you? We can offer you 
free help with IRS problems that you can't re-
solve on your own. We know this process can 
be confusing, but the worst thing you can do is 
nothing at all! TAS can help if you can't resolve 
your tax problem and:
Your problem is causing financial difficul-
ties for you, your family, or your business.
You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action.
You've tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn't responded by the date promised.
 
If you qualify for our help, you'll be assigned to 
one advocate who'll be with you at every turn 
and will do everything possible to resolve your 
problem. Here's why we can help:
TAS is an independent organization within 
the IRS.
Our advocates know how to work with the 
IRS.
Our services are free and tailored to meet 
your needs.
We have offices in every state, the District 
of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.
 
How can you reach us? If you think TAS can 
help you, call your local advocate, whose num-
ber is in your local directory and at Taxpayer 
Advocate, or call us toll-free at 1-877-777-4778.
 
How else does TAS help taxpayers?
 
TAS also works to resolve large-scale, systemic 
problems that affect many taxpayers. If you 
know of one of these broad issues, please re-
port it to us through our Systemic Advocacy 
Management System.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) serve in-
dividuals whose income is below a certain level 
and need to resolve tax problems such as au-
dits, appeals and tax collection disputes. Some 
clinics can provide information about taxpayer 
rights and responsibilities in different languages 
for individuals who speak English as a second 
language. Visit Taxpayer Advocate  or see IRS 
Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic 
List.
Page 23 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help  Page 23

Page 24 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
A
Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (ACRS) 8
 (See also Modified Accelerated 
Cost Recovery System 
(MACRS))
Effective date 7
Accounting methods:
Accrual method 3
Cash method 3
Change of method 12
Constructive receipt of 
income 3
Accrual method taxpayers 3
ACRS (Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System):
Effective date 7
Active participation 13
Activities not for profit 16
Additions to property 9
 (See also Improvements)
Basis 8
MACRS recovery period 9
Adjusted basis:
MACRS depreciation 8
Adjusted gross income (AGI):
Modified (See Modified 
adjusted gross income 
(MAGI))
Advance rent 3
Security deposits 3
Advertising 3
Allocation of expenses:
Change of property to rental 
use 15
How to divide expenses 17
Part of property rented 16
Personal use of rental 
property 3, 17
Alternative Depreciation System 
(ADS):
Election of 8
MACRS 8, 11
Alternative minimum tax (AMT):
Accelerated depreciation 
methods 6
Amended returns 11
Apartments:
Basement apartments 19
Dwelling units 17
Appraisal fees 7
Assessments, local (See Local 
assessments)
Assessments for 
maintenance 8
Assistance (See Tax help)
Assumption of mortgage 7
Attorneys' fees 7, 8
Automobiles:
MACRS recovery periods 9
B
Basis:
Adjusted basis 8
Assessments for local 
improvements 8
Basis other than cost 7
Cost basis 7
Decreases to 8
Deductions:
Capitalization of costs vs. 8
Not greater than basis 6
Fair market value 15
Increases to 8
MACRS depreciable basis 7
Property changed to rental 
use 15
C
Capital expenditures:
Deductions vs. effect on 
basis 8
Local benefit taxes 4
Mortgages, payments to 
obtain 4
Cars:
MACRS recovery periods 9
Cash method taxpayers 3
Casualty losses 14
Change of accounting 
method 12
Charitable contributions:
Use of property 18
Cleaning and maintenance 3
Closing costs 7
Commissions 3
Computers:
MACRS recovery periods 9
Condominiums 15, 17
Constructive receipt of 
income 3
Cooperative housing 6, 15, 17
Cost basis 7
Credit reports 7
Credits:
Residential energy credits 8
D
Days of personal use 18
Days used for repairs and 
maintenance 18
Deductions:
Capitalizing costs vs. effect on 
basis 8
Depreciation (See Depreciation
)
Limitations on 12
Passive activity 
losses (See Passive 
activity)
Depreciation 5–12
Alternative Depreciation 
System 
(ADS) (See Modified 
Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS))
Basis (See Basis)
Change of accounting 
method 12
Change of property to rental 
use 15
Claiming correct amount of 11
Declining balance method 7
Duration of property expected 
to last more than one 
year 6
Eligible property 6
First-year expensing 5
MACRS (See Modified 
Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS))
Methods 7, 10
Ownership of property 6
Rental expense 3
Rented property 6
Section 179 deduction 5
Special depreciation 
allowances 8
Straight line method 7
Useful life 6
Vacant rental property 4
Discount, bonds and notes 
issued at (See Original issue 
discount (OID))
Dividing of 
expenses (See Allocation of 
expenses)
Dwelling units:
Definition 17
Fair rental price 17
Personal use of 17, 18
E
Easements 8
Equipment rental expense 4
F
Fair market value (FMV) 15
Fair rental price 17
Fees:
Loan origination fees 4, 7
Points (See Points)
Settlement fees and other 
costs 7
Tax return preparation fees 4
First-year expensing 5
Form 1040:
Not rented for profit income 16
Part of property rented 16
Rental income and 
expenses 12
Schedule E 12
Form 1098:
Mortgage interest 4
Form 4684:
Casualties and thefts 14
Form 4797:
Sales of business property 14
Form 8582:
Passive activity losses 13, 14
Free tax services 21
G
Gains and losses:
At-risk rules 13
Casualty and theft losses 14
Limits on rental losses 12
Passive activity losses 13
Rental real estate activities 13
Sale of rental property 2, 14
General depreciation system 
(GDS) (See Modified 
Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS))
H
Help (See Tax help)
Home:
Main home 18
Use as rental 
property (See Use of home)
I
Improvements 5
 (See also Repairs)
Assessments for local 
improvements 8
Basis 8
Depreciation of rented 
property 6
MACRS recovery period 9
Insurance 3
Casualty or theft loss 
payments 8
Change of property to rental 
use 15
Fire insurance premiums, cost 
basis 7
Part of property rented 16
Premiums paid in advance 3
Title insurance, cost basis 7
Interest payments 3
 (See also Mortgages)
Loan origination fees 4
Rental expenses 3
L
Land:
Cost basis 7
Depreciation 6
Leases:
Cancellation payments 3
Equipment leasing 4
Limits:
Passive activity losses and 
credits 13
Rental losses 12
Loans:
Assumption fees 7
Charges connected with getting 
or refinancing, cost basis 7
Low or no interest 7
Origination fees 4
Local assessments 8
Losses (See Gains and losses)
M
Missing children, photographs 
of 2
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System 
(MACRS) 8–11
Additions or improvements to 
property 9
Adjusted basis 8
Alternative Depreciation 
System (ADS) 8, 11
Basis other than cost 7
Conventions 10
Cost basis 7
Depreciable basis 7
Effective date 7
Excluded property 8
General Depreciation System 
(GDS) 8–10
Nonresidential rental 
property 9
Property used in rental 
activities (Table 2-1) 9
Recovery periods 9, 10
Residential rental property 9, 
10
Special depreciation 
allowances 8
Modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) 14
Mortgages 4
Assumption of, cost basis 7
Change of property to rental 
use 15
End of, OID 5
Interest 3, 15, 16
Mortgage insurance 
premiums 7
Part of property rented 16
N
Nonresidential real property 9
Not-for-profit activities 16
O
Original issue discount 
(OID) 4, 5
Page 24 Publication 527 (2013)

Page 25 of 25  Fileid: … tions/P527/2013/A/XML/Cycle05/source 17:12 - 10-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
P
Part interest:
Expenses 3
Income 3
Passive activity:
Maximum special 
allowance 14
Personal property:
Rental income from 3
Personal use of rental 
property 15, 17
 (See also Property changed to 
rental use)
Placed-in-service date 6
Points 3, 4, 7
Pre-rental expenses 4
Principal residence (See Home)
Profit, property not rented 
for 16
Property changed to rental 
use 15
Basis 15
Publications (See Tax help)
R
Real estate professionals 13
Real estate taxes 7
Real property trades or 
businesses 13
Recordkeeping requirements:
Travel and transportation 
expenses 4
Recovery periods 9
Rent 7
Advance rent 3
Fair price 17
Rental expenses 3
Advertising 3
Allocation between rental and 
personal uses 17
Change of property to rental 
use 15
Cleaning and maintenance 3
Commissions 3
Depreciation 3
Dwelling unit used as home 18
Equipment rental 4
Home, property also used as 3
Improvements 5
Insurance 3
Interest payments 3
Local transportation 
expenses 3, 4
Part of property rented 16
Points 3, 4
Pre-rental expenses 4
Rental payments 3
Repairs 3, 5
Sale of property 4
Taxes 3
Tax return preparation fees 4
Tenant, paid by 3
Travel expenses 3
Utilities 3
Vacant rental property 4
Rental income:
Advance rent 3
Cancellation of lease 
payments 3
Dwelling unit used as home 18
Lease with option to buy 3
Not rented for profit 16
Part interest 3
Property received from 
tenant 3
Reporting 3, 12
Security deposit 3
Services received from 
tenant 3
Uncollected rent 4
Used as home 3
Rental losses 13
 (See also Gains and losses)
 (See also Passive activity)
Repairs 3, 5
 (See also Improvements)
Assessments for 
maintenance 8
Personal use of rental property 
exception for days used for 
repairs and 
maintenance 18
S
Sale of property:
Expenses 4
Gain or loss 2, 14
Main home 2
Section 179 deductions 5
Security deposits 3
Settlement fees 7
Shared equity financing 
agreements 18
Special depreciation 
allowances 8
Spouse:
Material participation 13
Standard mileage rates 4
Surveys 7
T
Tables and figures:
Improvements, examples of 
(Table 1-1) 5
MACRS optional tables 
(Table 2-2d) 11
MACRS optional tables (Tables 
2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c) 11
MACRS recovery periods for 
property used in rental 
activities (Table 2-1) 9
Tax credits:
Residential energy credits, 
effect on basis 8
Taxes:
Deduction of 3
Local benefit taxes 4
Real estate taxes 7
Transfer taxes 7
Tax help 21
Tax return preparation fees 4
Theft losses 14
Title insurance 7
Transfer taxes 7
Travel and transportation 
expenses:
Local transportation 
expenses 3, 4
Recordkeeping 4
Rental expenses 3
Standard mileage rate 4
U
Uncollected rent:
Income 4
Use of home:
Before or after renting 18
Change to rental use 15
Days of personal use 18
Fair rental price 17
Passive activity rules 
exception 13
Personal use as dwelling 
unit 17
Utilities 3, 8
V
Vacant rental property 4
Vacation homes:
Dwelling unit 17
Fair rental price 17
Personal use of 17
Valuation:
Fair market value 15
Publication 527 (2013) Page 25